3THE WATCHT0WEK
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street «	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Butherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Latah 54;I3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal la published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilt It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittancee should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Omcia
Brttiah ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ..........-.....40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 6, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear (it several lanpuapes.j
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Biaiklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 18T9.
“EHUD’S SWORD” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This midwinter period of special activity will run through the entire month of February. The title thereof calls attention to the zeal, energy and fearlessness with which Ehud used his dagger against King Eglon, and which qualities all publishers of The Theocracy will exercise likewise during this Period. February opens up this year’s three-month Watchtower campaign, and hence all publishers will specialize on securing subscriptions for The Watchtower and offering as a premium the book Religion and the new booklet Satisfied, all on a contribution of $1.00. Arrange now for this Testimony, and, if possible, attend the local company service meetings where this campaign is being discussed and organized. Write this office if you need references. To contribute toward making up the general report of the work and results thereof, please turn in your personal report of what you accomplish.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 2: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 3), fl 1-26 inclusive, The Watchtower January 1, 1941.
Week of February 9: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 3), fl 27-47 inclusive, The Watchtower January 1, 1941.
FOREIGN-LANGUAGE SUBSCRIPTIONS
When writing the Society regarding a Watchtower or Consolation subscription in a language other than English, the foreign language should be clearly indicated (as, Greek, Spanish, or Polish, etc.). This is especially necessary when sending in changes of address and subscription renewals, using other than the regular renewal slips. Renewal slips with no foreign language indicated are always beheved to be English, and in most cases this causes considerable unnecessary trouble and much delay in forwarding the magazines. Be sure to indicate the language plainly in all correspondence and on all renewal slips. It will greatly facilitate the work in the office if you use the renewal slips that are sent with your magazine. Your correspondence with the Society’s office at Brooklyn will be given quicker attention if you write in the English language whenever possible.
1941 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
In the face of an almost impossible year the publication of the 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses represents an accomplishment made possible only by Jehovah’s power. Confirmation of this you will find when you read the comprehensive report, as written by the Society’s president, covering the world-wide activities of (Continued on page 15)
ffie'VWCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	January 1, 1941	No. 1
DRAMA OF VENGEANCE
PART S
"And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them?
1 tell you that he will avenge them speedily."—Luke 18:7,8.
TEHOVAH’S Chief Officer spoke the words of the I foregoing text. They are prophetic words, which J are now about to have fulfillment in completeness. Jesus spoke with full authority, and all his followers thus have full assurance that the foregoing prophecy is certain to be fulfilled to their good and their deliverance. During the past few years preparation for the great battle that will vindicate the name of Jehovah God and avenge his faithful servants has been in progress. That crucial hour must now be very near, and with full faith and confidence the people of God should take courage and now greatly rejoice in their hearts. They should look forward with certainty to their early deliverance. It is no time now to be discouraged, regardless of what persecution may come upon those who are Jehovah’s servants. The evidence that daily comes to pass shows fulfillment of Jehovah’s prophecies foretelling these things, and which fulfillment thrills the heart of everyone who is fully devoted to The Theocratic Government. The Lord’s “other sheep” begin to be represented in the prophetic drama at this point, corroborative proof of which is found in other scriptures, showing that the “great multitude” must be gathered before the battle of Armageddon begins. The “remnant” and some of their “companions” are now together, but it must be that more will appear shortly, as the prophecy indicates. The “remnant” and the “other sheep” now suffer together and shall be avenged together, as the Lord has promised. We proceed with the examination of the prophetic drama: “Now Heber the Kenite had separated himself from the Kenites, even from the children of Hobab the brother-in-law of Moses, and had pitched his tent as far as the oak in Zaanannim, which is by Kedesh.” —Judg. 4:11, A.R.V.
2 It is well that we here give some attention to the Kenites, as bearing upon the matter under consideration. Heber the Kenite was not an Israelite, but was a companion of the Israelites. His name means “Company ; associated community”, that is, “a body of companions.” Here is another evidence that the name
which God records in his Word as applying to a certain man has a peculiar significance.
' A prophecy concerning the Kenites is set forth in the Scriptures and says: “And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said, Strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock. Nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted, until Asshur shall carry thee away captive. And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall live when God doeth this!”—Num. 24: 21-23.
* Accordingly the Kenites that associated with the Amalekites, the avowed enemies of God and his people, did not fare well; but those Kenites that hung to and associated with the Israelites, God’s chosen people, were accordingly favored. Some persons of goodwill endure for a time and then they fall away to the enemy of the Lord. But those who remain with the Lord’s faithful people fare much better.
° Heber was a descendant of Hobab, who was a son of the father-in-law of Moses, and hence Hobab was the brother-in-law of Moses and acted for his father, who was the father-in-law of Moses. Moses married Hobab’s sister. (Ex. 2:16-22) When Moses was leading the Israelites and starting on their long trek to Canaan he invited Hobab to go with him: “And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses’ father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the Lord said, I will give it you; come thou with us, and we will do thee good ; for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel.” (Num. 10:29) From that time on the Kenites had relationship with Jehovah’s prophets and his people, which afforded them a much more favorable opportunity to receive the blessings of the Lord.
6	The American Revised Version of verse eleven of the prophecy correctly renders the text according to other supporting facts, to wit: “Now Heber the Kenite had separated himself from the Kenites, even from the children of Hobab the brother-in-law of Moses, and had pitched his tent as far as the oak in Zaanannim, which is by Kedesh.”
4
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
T Heber did not leave the land of Israel. He merely moved from the southern boundaries of Judah, where the main body of the Hobab Kenites were located, and pitched his camp or tent in the northern part of the land of Israel. The Kenites were a people that dwelt in tents. “And the children of the Kenite, Moses’ father in law, went up out of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went and dwelt among the people.”—Judg. 1:16.
8	Because of their close association with the tribe of Judah these Kenites were even tacked on at the bottom of the list of genealogies of the tribe of Judah; as it is recorded: “And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.”—1 Chron. 2: 55.
8	This Rechab named was the father of Jonadab; and the Jonadab descendants of Rechab took refuge in Jerusalem and received God’s promise of life. (2 Ki. 10:15-23; Jer. 35: 2, 6,18,19) These Kenites that remained with the Israelites foreshadowed the “great multitude”.—Rev. 7: 9-17.
10	While Deborah was dwelling under the palm tree Heber the Kenite was dwelling in his tent near “the oak in Zaanannim, which is by Kedesh”. The word Zaanannim means “removals”, suggesting the loading up of one’s goods on his beast of burden and moving on to another place and there pitching his tent. No permanent dwelling place and no fine mansions in which to dwell, thus indicating that the men of good-will from the time of Abel till now, those who will inherit the earth, have been a people who found no lasting abiding-place under the Devil’s organization, but all have been looking for and waiting for the kingdom of God under Christ. Now the great Theocracy is near full establishment, and these waiters rejoice, and doubtless the faithful men of old will soon be back and join with those who will form the “great multitude”, and some of the remnant, in performing the duties that the Lord will graciously assign to them. Doubtless Jehovah directed the last movement of Heber the Kenite from the south to the north part of Palestine, because shortly thereafter his tent served as a trap for Sisera, the enemy of Israel leading in the fight against God’s chosen and covenant people. Since the Kenites were a roving people, Heber did not move into Kedesh, the city of refuge, but came close by it and hence was acquainted with and close by Barak. Heber was near the oak tree, which is a symbol of strength, deep-rooted. The strength of God’s people is in the Lord; and the deeper rooted in the Lord, the stronger they are. Then information of the situation, and of Barak’s gathering all his army, got to Captain Sisera and
his forces: “And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor.”— Judg. 4:12.
11	Even though there was no hostility, but apparent peace, between Heber and the house of Jabin, it does not appear, nor does it follow, that Heber informed Sisera about the movement of the Israelites under the command of Barak. Note that the record does not say “he”, but “they showed Sisera” that Barak was moving. Doubtless the “they” there means some of the spying Canaanites who served Jabin by nosing around about Barak’s affairs, spying out what was going on and then reporting to Sisera the moving of Barak and Deborah. The Devil’s agents are always seeing what they can do to entrap the servants of God.
12	Jehovah first covered up the assembling of Barak’s troops at Kedesh, to shield them from interference by the enemy, but now the time had arrived and God permitted the enemy to learn about Barak’s organization being moved to Mount Tabor. God permitted this, of course, as that was a part of preparation for the battle. Thereby Jehovah maneuvered the enemy to the place of destruction, men, iron chariots, and all. That was exactly what Jehovah said that he would do when he sent Barak a message by Deborah’s messenger, as stated in verse seven above. This proves that Barak and Deborah did not recognize King Jabin and Sisera his captain as the “higher powers”, but that they trusted entirely in the Almighty God, whom they served and whom they recognized as the “Higher Powers”. The present position of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions is in exact harmony with that at this day. At first the religionists did not recognize the purpose of Jehovah’s witnesses as representing The Theocracy, declaring that kingdom. The religionists first dubbed Jehovah’s witnesses as a “cult” or “religious sect” that is very small and not worthy of consideration or even notice, calling them the “smallest kind of sect”. But the time came for the religionists to get a little more information as to the purpose of Jehovah’s witnesses and to learn that they are wholly for The Theocracy, the kingdom of Almighty God, and that they refuse to compromise in any manner whatsoever. Although they are small in number the religionists are learning that the Lord uses them, and that frightens and angers the religionists. Therefore the clergy or religious leaders proceed in due time to stir up the political and the law-enforcing bodies and other agents and hoodlums and mobs to hate and persecute Jehovah’s witnesses, and to malign those witnesses as a “cult that hates the government and hates everything”. In keeping with their father, the Devil, they cannot tell the truth. In order to create even a greater prejudice against Jehovah’s witnesses the enemy religious leaders induce the great worldly publications
January 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
5
to print many false statements concerning Jehovah’s witnesses, denouncing them as “people that thrive on hate”. The enemy would not tell the truth even if they could.
13	Instead of Jehovah’s witnesses’ hating everything, it is exactly the contrary. It is written concerning the Lord Jesus, the beloved Son of the Almighty God: “Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness; therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.”— Ps. 45:7.
14	Likewise the faithful followers of Christ Jesus now on earth love righteousness and hate wickedness and delight to be in the company of Christ Jesus, the Beloved One. If they loved the wicked things of this world they could not be the faithful servants of God and Christ. Mark well it is written: “God is love,” and Christ Jesus is “the express image” of God.—1 John 4:16; Heb. 1: 3.
13	Jehovah has made his faithful followers of Christ Jesus his own witnesses because they love Jehovah and love his King and love serving The Theocracy. Therefore the Lord gives commandment to his faithful servants in these words: “Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.”—1 John 2:15.
16	The Devil has at all times reproached the name of Jehovah God, and those reproaches fell upon Christ Jesus and have fallen upon the faithful servants of God who now serve The Theocracy. (Ps. 69: 9; Rom. 15: 3) Jehovah’s witnesses therefore delight to be reproached for the name of God and Christ and to thus fill up some of the sufferings that were left behind of Christ for the sake of his body members. (Col. 1:24) For this reason the religionists and their allies hate Jehovah’s witnesses and continuously reproach them and lie about them. This is a further reason for Jehovah’s witnesses to rejoice that they are counted worthy to be in the class with Christ Jesus and his apostles that have long gone before and are now with the Lord. These facts further comfort and strengthen God’s people in this day of distress. “And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.”—Judg. 4:13.
17	No doubt Jabin the king of the Canaanites felt himself entirely secure in his situation, but when he was informed that the Israelites were marching to Mount Tabor he sent his field marshal forth to gather his own army. Corresponding to the situation created back in those days of Palestine note now the development of events in the world since 1918. The World War ended, the League of Nations was formed and fully endorsed by organized religion, with the Roman
Catholic Hierarchy in the lead of the religious organizations. Such religious organizations, and particularly their leaders, then believed themselves to be entirely secure. But when Jehovah’s faithful servants were gathered by the Greater Barak, organized, anointed and started on the march to Mount Zion, singing the praises of Jehovah and his government and exposing the duplicity of religious organizations, the Devil and Gog sent the Roman Catholic Hierarchy on the run to fortify and prepare for the conflict. “Catholic Action” was systematically organized and began to work throughout the land. Like their prototype Jabin and his representative, they learned of the movement of the Lord’s organization and they prepared for battle. The marginal reading of this part of the text is: “And Sisera gathered by cry, or, proclamation,” his forces. Likewise the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, in the lead of religious systems, sent out their call to all anti-Theocratic pow’ers and forces of the earth, raising the cry that Communism was about to overrun the earth, and therefore the burning need for “more religion” to preserve “Christendom’s civilization”. Of course, they knew that Communism was not threatening, but some kind of slogan must be had in order to frighten the people. That cry of Communism was accompanied also by a cry of “Social Justice”, also the product of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Together religious organizations have continued to cry out, “We must have community of nations and more religion,” instead of God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus. At the same time their cry was accompanied by the political-religious cry of “a goodneighbor policy” of all religions and all political organizations. The Hierarchy immediately took the lead in this movement, claiming that the Vatican and the associates thereof constitute the strongest bulwark against atheistic Communism. The whole movement has been deceptive, claiming to operate in the name of Christianity, but in fact against Christianity because against The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus.
18	Mark this also, proving that the movement of “Catholic Action” is of the Devil: While the Vatican and allies raise the hue and cry against Communism, at the same time the Vatican and allies fully supported and still support Fascism and Nazism, both of which are distinctly anti-God and anti-Christ and necessarily against The Theocratic Government. In America the cry has been and is against Communism, while in Europe the Hierarchy officially says to the Communists: ‘We are holding out our hand to have you join us in our universal Catholic Action.” In truth and in fact Nazism, Fascism and the Papacy are all one and the same thing, because all have one common purpose, and that is to rule the world contrary to the will of Almighty God. That
6
SEe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
unholy combine artfully deceive and fraudulently induce the common people to believe that Christianity and religion are one and the same thing; hence they deceive many unsuspecting or gullible ones with the cry: “We must have more religion, else civilization will perish.” The real purpose of the conspirators is to crush Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions because these witnesses advertise The Theocracy, which truth exposes the duplicity of religious organizations and discloses to the people that such organizations are demonized, hence of the Devil.
*’ Sisera called into action “all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron”. He used steam-roller methods against the Israelites, the typical people of God, just as the Nazi iron tanks have rolled over the weaker nations of Europe, and which has been done by the full endorsement of the Papacy. The Fascists, under the leadership of Mussolini, destroyed Ethiopia; the Fascists destroyed Spain; and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy praised and blessed all of this bloody work. Now as Armageddon nears, the Hierarchy, led by the head thereof, comes into the open and endorses Fascism, Nazism and dictators, and encourages them to destroy the liberties of other people. No regard is given for Catholics or small Catholic countries; if these stand in the way of carrying out the ambitious desire of conspirators, the pope advises to go ahead and clean them up. This is done that the religious-political allies may rule the earth in the place and stead of Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ Jesus.
20	The religionists today trust in their war equipment to bring them victory, even as Sisera trusted in his chariots of iron to gain easily the victory for Jabin’s army. It was not so, however, with Barak and Deborah, who were even as prophecy has said: “Some trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. They are brought down and fallen; but we are risen, and stand upright.”—Ps. 20: 7, 8.
21	Barak did not go down to Egypt for war equipment and other help. Likewise the servants of The Theocracy today do not go to the religious world for help, because such would be contrary to God’s will. “Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord!”—Isa. 31:1.
22	The people of God today on the earth well know that they can receive no help from the religious, political combine, and they seek none. Barak and Deborah trusted wholly in the Lord, and even so now the people of God on earth say: “I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills [higher place, or the capital organization of Jehovah under Christ], from whence cometh
my help. My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; he that keepeth thee will not slumber. Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy keeper; the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.”—Ps. 121:1-5.
28	Sisera called up “all the people that were with him” to join in the war against the typical people of Jehovah, the Israelites. Even so likewise today the Roman Catholic Hierarchy call to action all of the Catholic population that they can control, and also they call the Protestants and Jews, who call themselves “good neighbors”, and these together with all the fearful and intimidated people, to join in the war against The Theocracy ; consequently the politicians and commercial traffickers who want to hold on to their gain, and also the law-making and law-enforcing officers who want to maintain their positions for selfish reasons, to join the unholy combine. The newspapers and periodicals throw in with the same crowd. The military men, whom the Hierarchy have in tow to do their bidding and to enforce their commands to prevent the proclamation of the Lord’s message, also join the combine. All of these are against the message announcing the great Theocratic Government, which shall rule the world in righteousness and bless those who love righteousness. It is the Devil’s organization, pitted against God’s kingdom.
24	Sisera rounded up everybody that was possible, “from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon,” to drag them into the war against the Israelites. That meant the anti-God people near Mount Carmel and up to the head waters by Jezreel and Esdraelon, and all about that community. Assembling all of these forces, Sisera now with his 900 chariots of iron expected to sweep down past Megiddo on towards Endor. Sisera had no faith that God would fight for the Israelites, because he did not believe God and was against Barak. He might have been more cautious had he believed that God smote the Egyptians and destroyed them in the waters of the Red sea when Pharaoh and his six hundred chariots, and all his chariots and equipment, and all of the army of Egypt, fell into the waters of the sea and were destroyed, at the time Moses led them. (Ex. 14: 7, 23, 28) Likewise today, if the religionists and their allies had any real faith in God and if they believed His Word they would pursue a different course from what they are now pursuing.
25	The movement of Sisera and his army was exactly according to the maneuvering of Jehovah, who was bringing them to the point for their destruction. It appears that that is what God is doing at the present time, when he now gives command through his prophet Joel, to wit: “Proclaim ye this among
January 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
7
the Gentiles; Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up; beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruning-hooks into spears; let the weak say, I am strong. Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about; thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, 0 Lord. Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. Put ye in the sickle; for the harvest is ripe; come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision ; for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.”—Joel 3:9-14.
26	Now we see the prophetic drama of vengeance and the prophecy of Joel in actual course of fulfillment, and all this to the joy of the people who are devoted to The Theocracy. The result is certain and can be but one way, because it must be in harmony with the expressed will of Almighty God.
27	Sisera and his allies, with all their equipment, moved forward to join battle with Barak, who commanded the little army of ten thousand. During the twenty years of oppressive rule by Jabin the Israelites would have no means of supplying themselves with sufficient war equipment that would in any wise compare with the strength of the enemy. Sisera being well armed and equipped and the Israelites being exactly in an opposite condition, it would appear to Sisera that he had an easy going and that he would quickly crush the Israelites. And so now the little company of Jehovah’s witnesses are looked upon by the religionists as an insignificant company of people, “the very smallest sect or cult,” as the religionists call them, who can do nothing, and their early defeat looks easy to the religionists. Their chief desire to defeat and destroy Jehovah’s witnesses is to prevent anything from being said that would expose the crookedness of the religious systems. Sisera did not take into consideration that God might fight the battle for his people. The religionists today do not fear God nor believe that Jehovah God will avenge his own elect. The Lord had told Deborah that he would deliver the enemy into the hand of Barak, and both Deborah and Barak believed this. The Lord today has told his people that he will fight their battle, and the faithful ones believe implicitly what God has said, and therefore they wait with confidence upon him. Back in the time of the drama Deborah and Barak were ready to act at the proper and appointed time, which the Lord would indicate to them. The time had now come. “And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the Lord hath delivered Sisera into thine hand; is not the Lord gone out before thee? So Barak
went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.”—Judg. 4:14.
28	As to the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama, have this in mind while considering the same: That the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, which in fact means the body of Christian people wholly devoted to Jehovah God and his kingdom service now on earth, is acting orderly under the direction of the Lord Jesus Christ, and that such organization is the visible part of God’s organization. The commands or orders to that organization come from the Lord, and not from any man, although men are used to have part in transmitting those commands or instructions to others of the organization. The Lord directs the minutest details of and concerning his people because they trust him, and his promise is that he will guide those that fully trust him. He directs the selection of the yeartext as used by his people. Long ago he made these promises and he caused them to be written down in his Word for the special benefit of those who are now on the earth and who fully trust and obey him. Among these promises are the following: “In all thy ways acknowledge him [Jehovah], and he shall direct thy paths.” (Prov. 3:6) “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. What man is he that feareth the Lord! him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.”—Ps. 25: 9,12.
29	Only those who believe the Lord and who are wholly devoted to The Theocracy claim these promises and rely upon them. If anyone does not have such faith he is not of the Lord; because without such faith it is impossible now to please God. In line with the scriptures above quoted the yeartext for 1937 was this: “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.” (Obadiah 1) In keeping with that yeartext and under the direction of the Lord the following articles appeared in The Watchtower bearing upon the yeartext, to wit: “Adversaries,” in the issue of June 1, 1937; “Opposing God,” June 15 and July 1; “Racketeers,” July 15 and August 1. These were followed by the series of articles on Jeremiah’s prophecy under the title, “His Work’ and His ‘Act’.” At the convention of God’s people in September of that year the book Enemies was put into the hands of God’s servants for use, and the “special pioneer” work was organized and conducted. Companies of Jehovah’s witnesses became more active under the Theocratic organization; therefore the earthly part of the organization of the Lord arose and went into action, and, without doubt, were under the leadership of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his invisible army moved into greater activity at the same time against the enemy. The Lord now permits his people to see these things that they may have stronger faith and greater hope.
8
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
” Deborah, picturing God’s organization, said to Barak: “This is the day in which the Lord hath delivered Sisera into thine hand.” This is further evidence that the Lord guides his people; and as he guided them back in that time, so he guides them in the present time, when the prophetic drama is being fulfilled; and as further evidence of this, note the following use of The Watchtower by the Lord. The Watchtower June 15,1938, published the article “Organization”, and under the subheading thereof, “His Due Time,” attention was called to the fact that twenty years had now passed since the Lord Jesus came to the temple of Jehovah God (Mal. 3:1-3); which twenty years corresponded with the twenty years that King Solomon employed in building the temple of God at Jerusalem and also his own palace and porch of the throne of judgment, and the house of the forest of Lebanon. At the close of that period of twenty years Solomon expanded his building operations beyond the capital city; and now twenty years from and after 1918 correspond to the abovementioned, which latter period having come to a close it was then due time for Jehovah’s witnesses on the earth under the direct command of the Greater Solomon, Christ Jesus, to intensify and enlarge their activities by a wider witness work and to do so under the Theocratic organization, which Jehovah had provided. From 1938 on, then, the facts conclusively show that there was such an intensifying and enlargement of the witness work throughout the earth.
81	It is the Lord who in his own due time and good way caused the publication of these great truths, which truths are his, and not man’s. Immediately following the above revelation and publication thereof The Watchtower published the four-part serial article on “His War”, the same being an explanation of 2 Chronicles the 20th chapter concerning the allied enemy assault upon Israel, and the complete defeat of that enemy. As there explained, the armies of Moab, Ammon and Mount Seir conspired together to destroy the Israelites and marched on Jerusalem, and the Lord destroyed them; thus emphasizing the fact that when God takes a hand the battle is not man’s, but is the Lord’s. The revelation of the meaning and the publication of that prophecy were next followed by the publication in The Watchtower of the series of articles on “Lovers of Righteousness”, dealing with David’s victory over the giant Goliath, and also the defeat of the enemies of David at Mount Gilboa and the battles at Perazim and Gibeon. All those battles and defeats, without any question of doubt, pictured the battle and complete destruction at Armageddon that shall befall the totalitarian monstrosity and its religion or demon conspirators. All this revelation from the Lord was recorded by him and now made known to his people to give them
comfort and hope, and this comfort and hope comes exactly in time when they are in the greatest need of it.
” Coincident with the publication of the revelation from the Lord, as stated above, mark this further evidence of his loving-kindness, to wit: A great convention was held at Sydney, Australia, and there the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other religionists bitterly opposed the people of Jehovah, but in that the enemy met a complete defeat. At that convention the chief addresses were on the subjects, to wit, “Lovers of Righteousness” and “Warning”, the latter being for the public, 25,000 of whom had assembled notwithstanding the bitter opposition of the religionists. That great convention was followed shortly with another convention at Seattle, Washington, and there the Roman Catholic Hierarchy bitterly fought against God’s people; at which time the chief address was on the subject “Violence”, which was broadcast throughout the nations to the great discomfort and chagrin of the religionists and to the great joy of Jehovah’s faithful servants.
” Then following shortly, to wit, in September, 1938, a convention of God’s people was held at London, England, where the slogan was raised for the first time: “Religion Is a Snare and a Racket,” “Serve God and Christ the King.” On that occasion banners containing that slogan were widely displayed throughout England to the great dismay of the religionists, and which slogan maddened the religionists. At the Royal Albert Hall, London, during that convention was delivered the public address on “Face the Facts”, and which address was radiocast throughout the British Isles, Canada and the United States, and transmitted by private land wires to forty-nine other assemblies held in different parts of the earth. The visible audience of that convention was more than 150,000 people, and the invisible audience was no doubt far greater, because 118 radio stations in the United States alone were employed in broadcasting the message.
“ Quickly that convention was followed by an assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses and the public at Mecca Temple, New York, where, on October 2,1938, a public address was delivered on “Fascism or Freedom”, at which time the Hierarchy’s alliance with Fascism, Nazism and Communism was exposed and it was shown that the purpose of their conspiracy is to destroy the liberties of the people and to gain control and rule the world by dictators contrary to the will of God and hence against The Theocratic Government. The Hierarchy exerted its greatest power to prevent assemblies of that convention held in different parts of the country, but failed completely. Thus the enemy met defeat! Attention is called to these facts here that God’s faithful people may see
January 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
9
and appreciate the Lord’s guidance of his own people and that his people are used by him in the fulfillment of his prophecies long ago recorded in his Word for their comfort and hope. True to his promise, Jehovah has led and continues to lead those who love and serve him.
BATTLE BEGINS
80 The work of preparation was completed. The contending armies were in position of battle array and it was therefore time for the battle to begin. As an aid to the careful study and visualizing of this prophecy the position and movement of the contending armies is illustrated by a rough map of the territory and location of the mountains and cities where the drama was enacted, and which is here inserted.
80 Sisera had his army drawn up along the river Kishon some distance to the north of the town of Megiddo. Barak, with his army, was up on the heights of Mount Tabor, where the Lord had commanded him to assemble his troops. Sisera had to pull his iron chariots with horses, and these could not ascend and fight on the rugged mountainside. Mark now how the Lord chose the scene of battle, which is further evidence of his fighting for his own people. Looking down from the heights of Mount Tabor at the mighty and fully equipped army of Sisera, Barak might hesitate to move into the valley and there engage the enemy in battle without first receiving some definite instruction from Jehovah. The prophecy shows what instruction he received. Deborah, uttering that prophecy, said to Barak: “Is not the Lord gone out before thee ?” That was the signal for Barak to move into action. That meant that the invisible forces of Jehovah’s organization were now in action against the enemy, which enemy thought himself, with his host and iron chariots, to be invincible. Sisera had not reckoned on the superhuman power being used against him; therefore it would appear to him that the battle, which was about to take place, would be easily won by him because of his far superior equip
ment. Even before the battle began Sisera thought he had it won. That part of the prophetic drama pictures the “strange act” of Almighty God, which was then beginning. Those forces that went ahead of Barak in the miniature fulfillment of the prophecy above stated were led by Jehovah’s executive officer; and likewise the forces of righteousness at Armageddon are led by the only begotten and beloved Son of God, him who is “the Bright and Morning Star”, and the great Executioner of God’s wrath against the enemy. Together with him is an army of other spirit stars, all moving in their appointed courses and fighting against the enemy. (Judg. 5: 20) At the beginning of that battle Jehovah called into action superhuman forces and his Field Marshal employed them, and with these a great and terrific barrage was put down before Barak and his forces, which shielded and protected Barak and his army from view and aided in the assault they were about to make upon the enemy. Such was the “act of God”, and this act of God was manifested when a tremendous storm of wind, lightning and rain came, which flooded the country. The river was raised entirely out of its banks, and the waters rushing down over the mountainsides and over the valley swept everything before them. Sisera and his unnumbered infantry and his 900 chariots could not well fight against that terrific storm. As this storm raged in advance of Barak he moved his army down the mountain and into action.
8	T “So Barak went down from mount Tabor.” He went down to engage the enemy in battle. His army went with him, and they followed along behind the great storm, and thus he followed after the Lord to assault the demon forces of Sisera, then in the “valley of concision [or slaughter]”. The ten thousand soldiers under the command of Barak pictured all the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses, together with their companions, the “other sheep” of the Lord, which shall compose the “great multitude”. As it is written: 'These are they that follow after the Lamb [the Greater Barak] whithersoever he goeth.’—Rev. 14:4.
38	In this part of the prophetic drama Barak, whose name means “lightning”, pictured Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s mighty Avenger, and the picture shows that he will employ lightning or other superhuman weapons against the enemy host when the battle of Armageddon is fought. Even now the Lord Jesus is using lightnings of truth, which he shoots out against the enemy, which confounds the enemy and blinds them as to what is their proper course. Without any doubt, the Lord is now maneuvering the enemy and confounding them, and this confusion of the enemy will greatly increase. At the same time now the Greater Barak uses those faithful men and women whom the Most High designates as Jehovah’s witnesses to herald these truths of light, which also confuse, con
10
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
found and greatly incense those who are the enemies of The Theocracy.
” Returning now to the prophetic drama: Up to this point Barak’s men did no fighting and killing, because the Lord God had gone out before them, confounding the enemy and driving them before the great storm, upsetting their iron chariots and sweeping them away. Doubtless the host under Sisera began to flee to the hills, or wherever they could go to escape the storm. Barak and his army quickly followed them up, and this they did at God’s command. At this particular point, with his army of ten thousand Israelites, is pictured the present-day movements of the faithful witnesses of Jehovah, the spiritual Israelites, advancing steadfastly and with unbroken ranks, pressing the battle to the gate against demonism or religion. They go on regardless of the apparent overwhelming opposition against them. The enemies have fortified themselves behind a “refuge of lies”, religion or demonism being the enemy’s principal means of deception, and it is against that refuge of lies that Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions now press the battle by heralding the message of Jehovah’s kingdom against the fortifications of the enemy. This immediately precedes the victorious assault by the Greater Barak, which shall result in the complete destruction of the enemy forces at Armageddon. All the physical facts now indicate the battle of Armageddon is quite near, when the real fighting takes place and the enemy will be destroyed.
40	Jehovah has given his word that he will fight for his people at Armageddon and that he will deliver his faithful servants. His word of promise is a full and complete guarantee that he will do exactly as he has said: “So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth; it shall not return unto me void; but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.”—Isa. 55:11.
41	For the comfort and hope of his faithful servants now on the earth God long ago made those prophetic pictures showing how he will fight for his people against the enemy. Several hundred years after the battle fought under the visible leadership of Barak Jehovah fought for David against his enemies. David had assembled his army at the mulberry grove, there to fight against the forces of the Philistines, and God said to David: “And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself; for then shall the Lord go out before thee, to smite the host of the Philistines.”—2 Sam. 5: 24.
42	Previous to that Jehovah had fought the battle for the Israelites under the leadership of Joshua at Jericho (Josh. 6:1-24); also the battles of Ai (Josh. 8:1-25) and at Gibeon. (Josh. 10:9-14) All of such events were brought about by the Lord God, and the
record thereof made in his Word, and the meaning thereof is now revealed to his people for their comfort and hope.—Rom. 15:4.
48	But how many people today on earth believe the truth as stated in the Word of God, and particularly in the Scriptures foregoing? Jehovah’s witnesses at this present time are being oppressed and persecuted by religionists as never before. This persecution, of course, is a real test to the faith of those who have made a covenant to follow in the footsteps of Jesus. Their faith must be tested, and, as the Lord has said, “according to your faith be it unto you.” In fact his people could not now be put to the severe test unless God permitted them to be persecuted by the religionists, the demonized human creatures under the command of the chief of demons. The wickedness of the religionists continues to grow in severity against Jehovah’s witnesses. Does such persecution discourage them? No, it does not discourage those who are really devoted to God and to his King. They see that these times of stress and the persecution of them are but a fulfillment of prophecy, the carrying out of God’s will concerning them, to the end that they might prove their integrity under adverse conditions.
44	Many persons of the world see the great amount of injustice now heaped upon Jehovah’s witnesses and express themselves freely in protest against such injustice, but they fail to show real faith in God. An instance of this is here cited. The editor of the Michigan Christian Advocate has recently published an article calling attention to the injustices done to Jehovah’s witnesses, and emphasizing the fact that their liberties have been denied and that, although they are small in number and although he does not agree with them, they should have full religious liberty. He fails utterly to see the real point. He does not see that The Theocracy, for which Jesus taught all his true followers to pray, is the only hope of humankind. He does not see that those who are really devoted to The Theocracy must suffer persecution. Only those who are really devoted to God and his kingdom can see and appreciate what these persecutions heaped upon them really mean.
45	No amount of persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses could now be inflicted upon them except by the permission of the Most High. They are his witnesses and his anointed people, and his hand is over them. The fact that he does permit them to suffer shows that one of the chief reasons is to test the faith and integrity of his people. Well did the apostle say: ‘Through much tribulation shall we enter the Kingdom.’ The Lord Jesus, looking down to the present time of persecution of his faithful followers, propounds this question, and then answers it: “And will not God avenge the wrongs of His own people . . . ? Yes, He will soon avenge their wrongs. Yet, when the Son of
January 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
11
Man comes, will He find [such] faith on earth?”— Luke 18: 7, 8, W eymouth.
46	According to the facts there is but a small number of people on earth who have and exercise full faith and confidence in the Lord, and who now believe that God will fully avenge his own people in his own due time. To have such faith one must now see that The Theocratic Government of Jehovah God under Christ Jesus, the great Redeemer and Executive Officer of the Most High, is the only bulwark against religion and associated wickedness and that The Theocracy is the only hope of deliverance of the people to life. And then such must recognize that God is now permitting the Devil and his agents on earth, particularly the leaders in religion, to have full opportunity to show their enmity against The Theocracy and its supporters, and that the wicked persecution of Jehovah’s servants is to permit them to prove their own integrity. Seeing this, the faithful ones are not at all discouraged, but are rather encouraged. They see the evidence corroborating scriptures that Armageddon is very near, when God will avenge the wrongs of his people. The true and faithful ones have no doubt that the outrages recently perpetrated in many parts of the earth against Jehovah’s witnesses will have due attention from the Lord in the near future when he literally cuts the enemy to pieces at the battle of
Armageddon. All persons who now have real faith in God and in Christ will stand firm against all manner of opposition and persecution and will permit nothing to drive them away from a faithful service of the Most High. They will confidently rely upon the Lord for deliverance and salvation and will wait upon him, well knowing that in his own due time and good way he will fully and completely avenge the wrongs of all those who love and serve him. They can see now and appreciate the fact that the Devil is bringing all the woes upon the peoples of earth, and that the Devil’s time is very short; that the Devil is attempting to destroy particularly the servants of God and his King, and that soon God through Christ Jesus will fight against the enemy as he did in times of old, and will completely cut to pieces the enemy, and deliver all those who remain faithful and true to The Theocracy.
4T	The prophetic drama of Barak and Deborah now in course of fulfillment is another proof that Jehovah will shortly avenge his own. Mark well now the battle that was fought at the river of Kishon, and after studying that battle record let all who have real faith in God confidently believe and know that the record of that battle, the meaning of which is now made known, is for the aid and comfort and the increasing hope of God’s faithful people on the earth.
(To be continued)
THE HIGHER POWERS THEOCRATIC
POLITICAL powers of the earth today are, variously, democratic, autocratic, totalitarian, Nazi, Communistic, Fascistic, and Hierarchic, and all of them against The Theocracy.
Theocracy is not the invention of Jehovah’s witnesses. As a term the word was first used by the Jewish historian Josephus, bom at Jerusalem A.D. 37. Writing in Greek on the “antiquity of the Jews”, and in his second book Against Apion, section 17, Josephus says: “Some legislators have permitted their governments to be under monarchies, others put them under oligarchies, and others under a republican form, but our legislator [Moses] had no regard to any of these forms, but he ordained our government to be what, by a strained expression, may be termed a Theocracy [Theokratia], by ascribing the authority and the power to God.” The nation of Israel, when faithful, was but a typical theocracy.
The Creator of heaven and earth, Jehovah God, is the great Theocrat. His power is supreme. From him proceeds all rightful authority. There is no limitation to his power, and there is no qualification to the statement that Jehovah God is supreme. “I am the Almighty God,” he says. (Gen. 17:1; 35:11) He is “the Most High”, and none can be above him. (Ps. 91:1; Eph. 4:10) “There is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God.” (Rom. 13:1) Otherwise stated, all power that is rightfully exercised is that which is delegated by Jehovah to the creature
to be exercised. It follows, then, that there is no creature or creatures that could rightfully make and execute laws or rules of action that are contrary to God’s law. When the apostle says, in his letter to the Christians at Rome, “Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers,” the words “every soul” include first the church and later all men of good-will who come into harmony with God.
Many comments have been written on Romans, chapter thirteen, to the effect that the governments of this world, including “Christendom”, are the “powers that be” and that such governments derive their powers from Jehovah God. At once it is seen that the foundation is laid for the doctrine of the “divine right of kings”, for the reason that the religious argument is that whatever power a nation has and exercises, that power is ordained of God, and that therefore the child of God must be obedient to that power. For many centuries the rulers and the nations called “Christian” nations have insisted that God has delegated to them the power to rule, and have used this to cause the people to pay them great respect and homage. Let this argument be followed to its logical conclusion, and where do we find ourselves ?
The fundamental law of the United States declares that a man may exercise his religion in any manner he may choose. Contrary to this fundamental law, some of the states enact a law that the gospel of the kingdom of God or The Theocracy can not be preached in certain places or under
12
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
certain conditions, and they arrest and punish those who attempt thus to preach it. In Nazi Germany, in Communist Russia, and in Fascist Italy the law is that one can not preach the good news of The Theocratic Government at all without a permit from the government. God’s commandment to his sons, which commandment is given through his King Christ Jesus, is that this gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the nations as a witness. (Matt. 24:14) Shall the child of God be obedient to the law of the United States or of Germany or Russia or Italy, or to the law of God ? Is it possible that God has delegated to those various nations the right and authority to make and enforce laws that are inconsistent with God’s own expressed will and in derogation thereof?
Is it not therefore clear that there has been a decidedly improper application of the apostle Paul’s words when applied to the governments of this world? When he says, “The powers that be are ordained of God,” is it not more reasonable that he directs his words exclusively to the powers possessed and exercised in God’s organization, and not those that are exercised in Satan’s?
The organization of Jehovah is of far greater importance than any other organization. It is to his organization that Romans, chapter thirteen, is addressed. Everything in God’s organization must be orderly; because he is the God of order, and not of confusion. This rule applies to His church: “For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of the saints.”—1 Cor. 14: 33.
Aside from Jehovah himself his organization consists of Jesus Christ, his holy angels, cherubim, also the resurrected members of the “body of Christ”, including the twelve apostles, and also those on earth who have been brought into the church and anointed of God’s spirit and who are diligently serving as the witnesses of Jehovah. With these last there is now associating itself a “great multitude” of “companions”, persons of good-will toward Jehovah and his Theocratic Government under Christ. At the Jordan river, at the time of his consecration to God, Jesus was anointed to the high office of “priest for ever after the order of Mel-chizedek”. He was then and there clothed with certain powers as the man Christ Jesus on earth. Speaking to his disciples Jesus said that “the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins”. (Mark 2:10) After Jesus had been raised from the dead he said: “All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.” (Matt. 28: 18) That power he received from Jehovah.
The word “power” is translated from the Greek word exousia. At Romans, chapter thirteen, the apostle Paul’s argument shows that the power there mentioned has reference to the authority that is possessed and exercised in God’s organization. It is the institution which Jehovah himself employs to carry out his purposes. The above-quoted scriptures are in point, as well as those that follow: Colos-sians 1:16: “For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him.” John 17: 2: “Thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.” John 5:22, 27: “The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son; and hath given
him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.” These scriptures prove that Christ Jesus is the “higher power” and that Jehovah is the highest or supreme power. The expression “the higher powers” may therefore be applied to both Jehovah and Jesus, because Christ Jesus always carries out the order of his Father.
“Jesus Christ ... is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him.” (1 Pet. 3: 21, 22) Manifestly this does not include the worldly nations, powers and authorities of the earth, for the reason that at the time of Jesus’ ascension to heaven and appearing in the presence of God it was not Jehovah’s due time to make the enemy organization the footstool of the Lord Jesus, as declared at Psalm 110:1. The apostle Paul’s words must therefore mean that “every soul” in God’s organization must "be subject” to Christ Jesus, the Prince, Ruler, or Head over God’s organization. In support of this conclusion Jesus stated that the power of judgment had been committed unto him, together with the authority to execute that judgment Such judgment has particular reference to the organization of Jehovah; as it is written: “For we [the apostle Paul and fellow Christians] must all appear before the judgment scat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.” (2 Cor. 5:10) “For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?” (1 Pet. 4:17) These scriptures show that Jesus Christ is the higher power, and his power is always exercised in harmony with Jehovah, the Supreme One.
A man is subject to the laws of the nation of which he is a citizen. He is therefore the subject of that nation. A citizen of the United States is subject to the laws of the United States. If that citizen of the United States is in Italy he is still subject to the laws of the United States, the land of his citizenship. Since Romans, chapter thirteen, is addressed to the anointed sons of God, the inquiry is pertinent: Where is the citizenship of the son of God? The apostle Paul answers that question and plainly declares that the members of the church or “body of Christ” on earth have their citizenship in heaven. “For our citizenship is in heaven; whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ.” (Phil. 3:20, Rev. Ver.) It appearing that Paul is, at Romans 13:1, addressing his words to the church, the “new creation”, and the citizenship of such being in heaven, then, by all known processes of proper reasoning, Paul’s words must mean that these members of the new creation are subjects of God and must be obedient to the laws of God
The apostle could not mean that the “higher powers” are the worldly powers on earth of Satan’s organization It is not possible that these are higher than God’s arrangement of his own people and have control over it. The apostle says: “The powers that be are ordained of God,” or, “have been arranged under God.” (Emphatic Diaglott translation) Can this be properly applied to the worldly powers on earth and not applied to the church ? The words of the apostle, at 1 Corinthians 12:18, 28, are in answer to that question, to wit: “But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him. And God hath set some in the church; first, apostles; secondarily,
January 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
13
prophets; thirdly, teachers; after that, miracles; then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.”
Those who have insisted that the apostle referred exclusively to the worldly powers on earth when he said, “The powers that be are ordained of God,” cite in support the words of Peter, to wit: “Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man [(Rother ham’s translation) Submit yourselves unto every human creation] for the Lord’s sake; whether it be to the king, as supreme ; or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.” A careful examination of this text (1 Pet. 2:13,14) shows that it does not apply to the powers exercised by the worldly governments of this earth, but to the church. The phrase “ordinance of man” in 1 Peter 2:13 means “human creation”. How, then, could it be said that any ordinance of the church is of human creation? When the man Christ Jesus appointed the apostles and sent them forth as leaders and governors in the church, were they not all of human creation, within the meaning of 1 Peter 2:13 ? It was the man Jesus that did it, and it was men that were sent forth; and this is none the less true even though it was done in obedience to God’s command.
When the apostles announced a rule or rules relating to the church, were not these of human creation? In support of this conclusion, note Hebrews 13: 7,17: “Remember them which have the rule over you [{Emphatic Diaglott) Remember your leaders] . . . Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls as they that must give account; that they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you.” Therefore Peter’s words, at 1 Peter 2:13,14, addressed to the church, seem clearly to mean this: Where the church on earth acts under the authority of the Scriptures and creates an arrangement for its government or course of action, each member of Jehovah’s organization should submit to such arrangement and not try to overthrow it. If that which is of “human creation”, such as regulations, rules or leaders, becomes useless or the servants become unfaithful, the Lord’s organization through his duly constituted ones may take action to judge or rule or put out the unfaithful ones. No individual, however, has authority to take such action. The chief point is that it is the Lord’s organization or arrangement and he has designated the manner in which it shall be governed and judged.
What, then, did Peter mean when he said (1 Pet. 2:13) : “Submit yourselves . . . whether it be to the king, as supreme”? Undoubtedly he referred to Jesus, because Jesus is the King or Lord to the church, and is supreme over the church because he always acts in exact harmony with Jehovah, the great Theocrat and Supreme One. But how could it be said that Jesus the King is of “human creation”, as those words appear in the text? The apostle did not say that Jesus is an “ordinance of man”. When Jesus was on earth he laid down certain rules which must be followed by the church; and these rules, being promulgated by the man Christ Jesus, were of human creation. But even that is not what is here meant by Peter’s argument. Paraphrased, his words are these: ‘For the Lord’s sake submit yourselves to every ordinance of man in the church, for that ordinance relates to the King, the Christ, the Head of the church. To be sure, you will submit to that, because he is the Head of
the church; or whether it relates to the governors of the church, who are sent by the Lord Jesus Christ.’ According to 1 Corinthians 12:28, the apostles were appointed as governors in the church. They laid down rules relating to the church. Whether those rules were directly inspired and directed from Jehovah or the Lord Jesus, or were made by the apostles, the members of the church may not have known; but they were admonished to be submissive thereto for the Lord’s sake and to let the Lord determine whether or not the rules were right. Not always did the apostles speak by commandment. On one occasion Paul said (1 Cor. 7:6): “I speak this by permission, and not of commandment.”
The argument of Peter, at 1 Peter 2:13, 14, was for the unity and harmony in the church. In support of this, note his further words: “Be respectful to all; love the brotherhood; fear God; honor the King.” (Verse 17, Emphatic Diaglott) It is manifest here, when he commands the church to be respectful to all, to love their brethren and to fear God, and then speaks of the King, that he does not mean the kings of earth over which Satan is the god. To determine to whom he speaks, it is but necessary to notice the opening words of the epistle, which he addresses to the church, the “new creation”.
As further proof that Peter’s words have reference to the government in Jehovah’s Theocratic organization, and that when he speaks with reference to the King he has reference to Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy, 1 Peter 2:14 says: “Or to governors, as sent by him for the punishment of evil-doers, and the praise of well-doers.” {Diaglott) Can it be said that God has sent the governors of the various nations, including the totalitarian states, to punish the evil-doers in the church and to praise the welldoers therein? Whoever heard of the governor or ruler of any worldly nation, including “Christendom”, giving praise to those because of their full and absolute obedience and faithfulness unto the Lord God and to the Lord Jesus Christ? The Lord Jesus Christ did send the apostles as governors in the church; and the apostles as governors in the church did punish evil-doers. Consult the record at Acts 5:1-10 concerning Ananias and Sapphira; also 1 Corinthians 5:1-5. The apostles also gave praise to those who did well in the church. See Philippians 1: 3; 2 Corinthians 9:1,2; Colossians 4:9,12,14. There is therefore no support in the argument that 1 Peter 2:13-17 has any reference whatsoever to the laws or governments of the worldly powers on earth. Jehovah conferred all power upon Christ Jesus, and in turn Jesus Christ delegated to his apostles certain powers in the church. Note John 17: 2; 20: 22, 23; 2 Corinthians 10:8; 13:10; Ephesians 3 : 7-10.
There are no successors to the apostles. There has long been in the world an organization called “organized Christian religion”. Because men in that organization have assumed to be successors to the apostles and individually to direct the affairs of the religious organization and of the other parts of the world, there has been much confusion of mind of those who have studied the Word of God. The apostle’s words have been woefully misconstrued. It should always be kept in mind that Christ Jesus is the Head of the church and that the apostles held special positions therein and no men since the apostles’ day have filled their places.
14
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
(2 Cor. 11:13-15) The apostles exercised certain governing powers in the church. The Lord Jesus, and the apostles, under his direction, laid down certain rules for the governing of the church; and the Lord’s arrangement is not a democratic form of organization, but is under the control and command of the Lord Jesus Christ, Jehovah’s King, and therefore is a Theocratic government. Hence every individual member of the church should be subject to that arrangement.—Eph. 2:18-21.
Seeing, then, that the visible part of Jehovah’s organization, the Society, is made up or composed of God’s anointed witnesses yet on earth, and that this body or company of Christians is diligently endeavoring to carry out
the Lord’s commandments, and knowing that the Lord Jesus is the Head thereof, even every member of the church and their earthly “companions” should diligently seek to be m harmony with the policy, course of action and work of such Society. If any are of the opinion that the Society is not pursuing the proper course, then commit the matter to the great Theocrat, Jehovah, and wait upon him to do the judging and to determine what is the proper course to be taken. Every member of Jehovah’s Theocratic organization Zion is in the covenant to do the will of the Lord, and every one must be in harmony with the great Theocrat and his King. That being true, every one must be subject to “The Higher Powers”.
"NO MORE SEA”
THE gateway to the Mediterranean is the straits of Gibraltar, and the seventh successive world power foretold in sacred prophecy, to wit, Britain, forcibly took possession of this and holds it to dominate the sea.— Revelation 17: 9,10.
The thirteenth chapter of The Revelation, or Apocalypse, pictures the apostle John, the aged servant of God, standing “upon the sand of the sea”. This fitly represents today God’s servant class on earth, his anointed witnesses, standing in a place of security and gaining a Scriptural view of Satan and his works. The sands mark the impassable bounds of the sea, and hence a place of safety for one to stand. As stated at Jeremiah 5:22: “Fear ye not me ? saith Jehovah: will ye not tremble at my presence, who have placed the sand for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it 1 and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) Thus is disclosed the fact that those who stand safely in the Lord would be the first ones to discern and to make known the hideous organization of man’s enemy, Satan the Devil, and to warn the people of good-will to flee therefrom.
To man’s original invisible overlord, to wit, to Lucifer, “the anointed cherub,” was committed divine power, because God commissioned him to do certain things with respect to man To Lucifer it was said: “Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned.” (Ezek. 28:14-16) Lucifer devised a scheme to break away from God’s universal organization and have an opposing one of his own; as described at Isaiah 14:12-14 : “How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High [Jehovah].” Rebellious Lucifer got control of the first woman on earth. The first man, because of his own selfishness, followed Satan into wickedness. The offspring of that once
perfect human pair were born imperfect and as sinners, and have been easy marks for the enemy. Lucifer’s name was changed to Satan the Devil. He induced some angels of heaven to follow him in wickedness and proceeded to form an organization that has ever opposed God, slandered and reproached his great name, and deceived many, and he has attempted to devour every one that has taken his place on the side of Jehovah God and righteousness, and thus his course has been indicated by his four names, to wit, Satan and Devil and Serpent and Dragon.
While in exile on the isle of Patmos in the JEgean sea, the apostle John at his vantage point saw a vision and says: “And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.” (Rev. 13:1) It was a “wild beast”. (Emphatic Diaglott and Rotherham translations) Indeed all the facts of history show that it is symbolically a “wild beast”.
It is of much importance to determine what in Bible symbolisms is pictured by the sea. The symbolic meaning of “sea”, and which is abundantly supported by the Scriptures, is: The peoples of earth that are alienated from God and therefore ungodly, and that mother, nourish, bear up and support the visible part of Satan’s organization. The commerce of the earth is done chiefly on the waters and the commercial element exercises great influence and power over the people. The politicians of the world organize and harness up the “sea”, or the people, and control them, except in time of storm or great trouble. The religious element, and particularly the clergy class, chiefly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, complacently sit upon and arrogantly ride upon the “sea”, or people. All three of these governing elements, politics, commerce and religion, draw their sustenance from the “sea”, or people. When God’s kingdom is in full sway there will be “no more sea”; for the reason that the peoples of earth will then be taught righteousness and brought into full harmony with God, and Satan's power will be gone.—Rev. 21:1.
In the creation of this earth by the Almighty God the waters appeared first and the dry land afterwards. Then the spirit of God moved upon the waters and there came forth living creatures. Satan the Devil became a mimic god and has attempted to copy the great Creator’s work. How! The people were first alienated from God, then Satan exploited them. His power moved upon the ungodly peoples
January 1, 1941
WATCHTOWER,
13
of earth, that is to say, upon the “sea”, and symbolically the “sea” was fecundated and brought forth the beastly creature that John saw in vision, the instrument of Satan which he has used for the purpose of ruling the peoples of earth. Then the “dry land” appeared, that is to say, the visible organization of Satan. (Hag. 2:6) In the waters of the literal sea there are monsters which play in the waters and devour the smaller creatures. Among the peoples of earth there are monster organizations, cruel and heartless, that devour the smaller and weaker ones. The wicked ones in the “sea” cause the trouble and oppression. The wicked ones catch the people like fish of the sea, says the prophet Habakkuk (1:13-15). “The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.”— Isa. 57: 20, 21.
The Scriptures show that the “sea” represents selfish commercial activity, and this is true with the religionists foreshadowed by commercial Tyre and who exploit their fellow creatures; concerning which Isaiah 23:11 says: “He [Jehovah] stretched out his hand over the sea; he shook the kingdoms; the Lord hath given a commandment against the merchant city, to destroy the strong holds thereof.” (See also Ezekiel 27:9; 28:2; Zechariah 9:3,4.) Satan is the great power that has organized the commerce of the world which provides sustenance for his officers and representatives on the earth. (Ezek. 28: 16) Egypt was Satan’s first great world power and had a monopoly once on the food supply of the earth, and the traffic of Egypt was carried on upon the waters of the rivers and the sea. Wherefore Ezekiel 32: 2 says: “Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations, and thou art as a whale [ (margin) as a dragon (devil) ] in the seas; and thou earnest forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their rivers.” This prophecy symbolically describes how Satan has exploited the peoples of the world.
Concerning Tyras, that ancient city which pictured the political, commercial Roman Catholic Hierarchy in particular, it is further written: “When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise. In the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths of the waters, thy merchandise, and all thy company in the midst of thee, shall fall.” (Ezek. 27:33, 34) “And Tyras did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets. Behold, the Lord will cast her out, and he
(Continued from page 2)
Jehovah’s witnesses, under continuous enemy fire, during the past service year. Besides this amazing report the Yearbook also offers the president’s comment on the 1941 yeartext and a text with a Watchtower comment thereon for each day of the new year. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thus enhancing the costs involved; hence a contribution of 50c per copy is stipulated therefor. Organized companies should combine the orders of all individuals therefor and send such through the company servant.
“SATISFIED”
In these days of increasing dissatisfaction with everything of the world, the title of this new booklet, “Satisfied,” strikes the reader with a strong appeal. The contents of this 32-page booklet show how and by whom the heart’s desire of all men of good-will
will smite her power in the sea; and she shall be devoured with fire.” (Zech. 9:3,4) Thus the Lord foretold symbolically how the Devil would exploit the people and use a small class to enrich themselves and how Satan’s organization shall perish.
As the sea is wide and covers much of the earth, so also does wickedness under the wicked ruler Satan cover the earth and rule it. (Note Psalm 104:25 ; Lamentations 2:13) Jehovah made the leviathan to play in the sea, whereas Satan made his monstrous organization of commerce together with its ally, religion, to play with the people and exploit them. (Ps. 104:26) The sea is the abode of the dragon; that is to say, Satan and his organization use the people for his own purposes. Jehovah shall “slay the dragon that is in the sea”.—Isa. 27 :1.
In the Scriptures Jehovah’s organization is symbolized by a good and pure “woman”. Satan’s organization is pictured or symbolized by a bad or wicked “woman”. The chief part of Satan’s organization, being composed of the demons of which Satan is the prince, is invisible to man, but the power and influence thereof is exercised upon the peoples of earth and has long used them for Satan’s wicked purposes. The Lord does not leave us in doubt as to what the waters of the sea symbolize. After describing to John Satan’s “woman”, “the great whore that sitteth upon many waters,” the Lord said: “The waters which thou sawest. where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.” (Rev. 17:15) The hope of the peoples of earth is to be entirely rid of Satan’s organization and to return fully into the favor of God. This great truth Jehovah God first shows to his servants in Christ who are devoted to Him. Now the time has come for all persons of good-will toward Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ to receive the knowledge of the truth which is so much needed by them. They must know that Satan’s organization is their great and destructive enemy and that Jehovah God and his organization are the true friends of the people.
Further, John says: “And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.” (Rev. 21 • 1 i “No more sea” means that under Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ ungodly human creatures from which Satan developed his “beast” will no longer exist. Then God will reconcile to Himself the people that live. Those who refuse to be reconciled shall be destroyed, and there will be a clean heaven and earth, making a “new heaven and a new earth”.
shall early be satisfied. The front-cover picture visualizes the setting of the story as related by the author, Judge Rutherford. Satisfied is now being mailed to all contributing 5c per copy.
1941 CALENDAR
The 1941 Calendar is exceptionally beautiful and expressive. Under the yeartext, to wit, “Salvation unto our God . . . and unto the Lamb” (Rev. 7:10, A.R.V.), the artist portrays with Scriptural symbolisms and modern details Jehovah’s “strange work” of judgment now fast reaching its climax among all nations. The Calendar date pads mark the special testimony periods for 1941, and also give field service suggestions for the intervening months. A contribution of 25c per copy is asked therefor, or $1.00 for five copies mailed to one address. Companies do well to send in combination orders through the local company servant
FIELD EXPERIENCES
REFUGEE FINDS REAL REFUGE
•'I called at a house in N.W. London and was met by an Austrian who had escaped from Nazi Germany. She took Salvation and a Watchtower. I arranged for a back-call. In a fortnight I was back with the succeeding issue of The Watchtower. She cordially invited me to ‘come in’. Said she: ‘I have enjoyed the book Salvation, and have determined to become a subscriber for The Watchtower.’ I invited her to come to a Salvation study I was conducting near by. Unfortunately she fell ill and could not attend. I was a little discouraged over this and felt further despondent when I called with the next copy of The Watchtower, to find she was out. I pushed the Watchtower through the letter-box with one of my private cards containing my ’phone number. Within half an hour of my reaching home, guess how surprised I was when, in answering the telephone, I listened to a refugee pouring out her joy to me at having found The Theocracy. I arranged to see her, and thereafter she came to the Salvation study. Later the study of Salvation was carried on in her house, as she had several who were attending. Suddenly she was arrested as an alien and interned in Holloway gaol. There in the prison she carried on a marvelous witness work among other internees, placing much literature. She used a copy of the Yearbook pro-hfically, pushing it under the cell doors for others to obtain a knowledge of the world-wide work. Eventually she was transferred to the Isle of Man, and there remains at present, still carrying on the witness work in a bold, determined way. She has joined the local company of witnesses on the Isle and many other refugees have gone with her and the company itself has received new life, for the ‘refugees’ have indeed come a long way to find the truth.”
SOME RECOVERING FROM MOB INSANITY
“(November) The only territory left to be done here in Portland, Maine, happened to be the least desirable of all, one reason being it is 100-percent Irish Catholic. Every time I have worked in it there has been mob action. The last Catholic Action was when Catholic Legionnaire ‘Ginger’ L----attacked a witness from the rear, during the booklet work at night, and split his head open. The witness defended himself and gave his assailant a beating. The witness was arrested and found guilty; his appeal is pending. ‘Ginger,’ I understand, has been the cock of the walk in his parish. Pioneer Frances and I got the part of the territory where the trouble occurred and where ‘Ginger’ hangs out. Later I saw Frances playing the phonograph on the doorstep of an apartment. To her left was a store window. Watching her through the window were ‘Ginger’ and a crowd of men. When they saw me they looked pretty black. I waited for Frances. When finished, she related an experience she had around the corner with a policeman who tried to make her stop a doorstep setup and intimidate her from further work on his street. As she was telling me, the policeman came by. Walking over to us, he started: ‘Next time an officer of the law tells you to get off a porch, you go!’ I said: ‘Just a minute—what is your name !’ He gave me his name, but started talking so sweetly you could almost see the honey dripping while I wrote his name in my little book. ‘Ginger’ walks by, crosses to the other comer and
watches us work. Everyone in the section was watching from store windows and homes. From then on we went, each one every other house. At one I approached a fellow came running toward me from a store: ‘Get that Jehovah stuff outa here!’ ‘What have you got against Jehovah’s witnesses!’ ‘Oh, nothing, except you are making too much trouble, and I have my religion.’ He warned me to leave the neighborhood at once because ‘this is election day and some of the fellows are drinking and no telling what you might get'.’ I then said: ‘So you admit that you are the troublemakers. Well, get this, Jehovah’s witnesses are not letting anybody use them for doormats, and if anyone is looking for trouble, he’ll get it on the other hand. We come to you for a peaceful purpose.’
“Around the corner I entered a barber shop. Who is there but ‘Ginger’ himself and two other Catholics. The Italian barber told me I could get out. Turning, I addressed ‘Ginger’ and the others: ‘Would you gentlemen like to hear this lecture!’ To my surprise ‘Ginger’ says: ‘Go ahead, play it, I’ll listen.’ I answered: ‘I shan’t play it unless you really want to hear it.’ At that he insisted and asked the barber, who gave permission. Frances passes and enters a store next door where a crowd was gathered. When the record was almost finished, someone came excitedly calling ‘Ginger’ to go to the store next door where Frances was. He bowed to me and excused himself. Frances reports that the Catholic woman who owned the store did not want the lecture run, but that the crowd insisted, so her objections were overcome. One woman tried to interrupt the lecture, crying ‘Oh, Jehovah!’ The crowd hollered, ‘Oh, shut up!’ and ‘Ginger’ said, ‘Yes, shut up! how can I hear the lecture with all that noise ?’ Almost everyone in the store took literature except the women who tried to prevail upon the men not to read it, but without success. One Catholic man said he received a Kingdom News in the mail but had torn it up, but ‘I’m going to read this’.
“When Frances came out, Verle and I were waiting ‘Ginger5 comes out and runs to Verle and addresses her: ‘Are you Miss Garfein!’ and further, ‘I’m awful sorry for the trouble I was mixed up in with you people, and I’m awful sorry I hit Mr. Cox. I want to go down to see him at the jail, and I’m going to.’ We talked a little. I asked if he had ever read any of our literature. His answer was ‘No’. I asked if he would like to read Conspiracy Against Democracy. He answered: ‘No, no, you see I don’t have any money.’ ‘Would you read it if I gave it to you!’ ‘Yes, I sure would.’ Receiving the booklet, he says, very courteously, ‘Thank you.’ A woman hollered, ‘Ginger, what’s the matter with you! You’re a Catholic. Let that stuff alone. That old Jehovah stuff, leave it alone; you don’t want that.’ He answered, ‘Yes, I do, and I’m going to read it.’ We departed. Different publishers saw him at different times during the afternoon and each time he spoke courteously. One of those men in that store at the time was called on at his home by another pioneer that afternoon, and he invited her in and had his whole family to listen. This is the first sign we have seen of anything breaking into the Catholic population here. It is quite thrilling. We had more setups and placed more literature in that territory than in any of the others lately.”
io
35e WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street »	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Ambuboh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.** - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ In glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreion, $1.50: Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
Booth African ________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“EHUD’S SWORD” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This midwinter period of special activity will run through the entire month of February. The title thereof calls attention to the zeal, energy and fearlessness with which Ehud used his dagger against Kung Eglon, and which qualities all publishers of The Theocracy will exercise likewise during this Period. February opens up this year’s three-month Watchtower campaign, and hence all publishers will specialize on securing subscriptions for The Watchtower and offering as a premium the book Religion and the new booklet Satisfied, all on a contribution of $1.00. Arrange now for this Testimony, and, if possible, attend the local company service meetings where this campaign is being discussed and organized. Write this office if you need references. To contribute toward making up the general report of the work and results thereof, please turn in your personal report of what you accomplish.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 16: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 4), fl 1-17 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1941.
Week of February 23: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 4), fl 18-34 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1941.
“SATISFIED”
In these days of increasing dissatisfaction with everything ot the world, the title of this new booklet, “Satisfied,” strikes the reader with a strong appeal. The contents of this 32-page booklet show how and by whom the heart’s desire of all men of good-will shall early be satisfied. The front-cover picture visualizes the setting of the story as related by the author, Judge Rutherford. Satisfied is now being mailed to all contributing 5c per copy.
1941 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
In the face of an almost impossible year the publication of the 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses represents an accomplishment made possible only by Jehovah’s power. Confirmation of this you will find when you read the comprehensive report, as written by the Society’s president, covering the world-wide activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, under continuous enemy fire, during the past service year. Besides this amazing report the Yearbook also offers the president’s comment on the 1941 yeartext and a text with a Watchtower comment thereon for each day of the new year. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thus enhancing the costs
(Continued on page 31)
fcVWCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	January 15, 1941	No. 2
DRAMA OF VENGEANCE
PART 4
"When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever"—Ps. 92:7.
TEHOVAH will vindicate his name by destroying I all those who work against his government under J Christ Jesus. It is Satan, that wicked one, operating his religious-totalitarian conspiracy against The Theocracy that is now desperately fighting against Jehovah’s kingdom. There is no compromise and no possibility of peace between God and the wicked. Today the Vatican officials, together with the Fascist, Nazi and Communist dictators, are moving with all their power to destroy everything in the earth that will not submit to their devilish rule. All this is in defiance of Almighty God and a reproach upon his name. Jehovah’s name must be vindicated. It shall be vindicated 1 The only possible way to bring about the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the complete destruction of the wicked, which means the complete destruction of every part of Satan’s organization. Satan and his demon army must now confine themselves to the earth, and, doing so, Satan has put into action the religious, official organization, and the political organization, and all others supporting Satan’s side, all of which are wicked because they are against The Theocracy. At the battle of that great day of God Almighty, he declares, all the wicked shall be destroyed.
2	But when will the battle be fought that results in the destruction of the wicked? No man could fix the day, but the circumstantial evidence in fulfillment of prophecy can approximate the date. The text first above quoted, at the head of this article, answers the question. The rendering of this text by Rotherham throws more light upon the subject: “When the lawless bud like herbage, and all the workers of iniquity have blossomed, it leadeth to their being destroyed for ever. But thou art on high to the ages, 0 Jehovah! for lo! thine enemies, Jehovah, for lo! thine enemies shall perish.”—Psalms.
3	Never in all time have the nations of the earth been so completely under the domination of that wicked one as now. More subtle is the work of the wicked ones now than in the days of Noah. Without a question of doubt dictators are the instruments of
the Devil, that supreme wicked one. The Nazi-Fascist axis has but one objective, and that is the destruction of everything that will not submit to their arbitrary rule. In their wicked course they are fully backed and supported by the Vatican, the astute head of which advises, aids and consorts with the other conspirators. While this is being written the newspapers of Berlin, with blaring headlines, announce that the dictator Hitler has declared that he has received from God the commission to destroy England, all of the men, women and children. He does not say from what god he received that information; and everyone who believes Almighty God knows that the god of Hitler is “the god of this world”, to wit, the Devil, that old wicked one. (1 John 5:19; 2 Cor. 4: 4) The Vatican and other members of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy fully support Hitler and commend him for the destruction committed in Belgium, Holland, France and other places. It is now, therefore, that the wicked have sprung up as grass, when they have budded like the herbage of the fields, and when all the workers of iniquity or lawlessness have blossomed ; and the Lord declares that when this appears and is manifest in the earth “it leadeth to their being destroyed for ever”. It therefore appears to be certain that Armageddon, that great battle of God Almighty, is near at hand. All nations are against The Theocracy; therefore God’s faithful and devoted people, members of his organization, are designated as God’s “holy nation”.—1 Pet. 2: 9,10.
* During the World War the visible rulers of earth induced the masses of the people of the nations to believe that democracy, that is, a rule by the people and for the people, would flourish and abide forever. That was clearly a deception. Every action has been taken by the great religious leaders, and the rulers of Europe in particular, to destroy democracy, and that is about accomplished. Those who devote themselves to Jehovah God and his King, and who familiarize themselves with the Word of God, as written in the Bible, know therefrom that democracy has not long to continue, and therefore they boldly de
20
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
clare the same. But their report was not believed by the religious and political rulers and their supporters. Most of the worldly governments relied upon the League of Nations to establish peace and to prevent war. The religious leaders, at the time of the formation of the League of Nations, issued the statement that “the League of Nations is the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth” and that therefore now peace had come to stay. Their prophecy was far short of the facts. The servants of Jehovah, being witnesses to his name, plainly informed the religious organizations that, according to the Word of God, the League advocates were wrong in their conclusion and that, instead of peace, the worst tribulation ever known must soon come upon the earth. (Matt. 24: 21,22) Because Jehovah’s servants proclaimed these and other like truths the religious and political elements of the nation regarded such servants of Jehovah as plain “nuts”, fairly well “cracked”, and frequently so published in their press. Jehovah’s witnesses continued to call attention to the prophecies of Revelation, and other parts of the Scriptures, that God’s prophecies were now due to be fulfilled and would be fulfilled.
5	Germany had been defeated in that war, and therefore one of the heads of “the beast” described in Revelation received a deadly wound. The Scriptures declared, and Jehovah’s witnesses so called attention thereto, that the vanquished side or ‘wounded head’ would come back, with the head healed, and that all the nations would be astounded. (Rev. 13:1-8) {Light, Book One, page 269) Germany was for many years the chief support of Rome, and the dominant people in the “Holy Roman Empire”. Mark the title that was given to that religious organization, as set forth in history: “Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation.”
WICKED FLOURISH
6	One of the names given Satan is that of serpent, meaning “deceiver”. He employed fraud and deceit to accomplish his purpose from the beginning, and even today continues it. The chief instrument for deception has been and is religion. The Roman Catholic “Hierarchy of Authority”, operating from Rome, is admittedly in the lead of all religious organizations on the earth and carries forward what it calls “Catholic Action”, operating always for a wicked purpose. The present pope is undoubtedly the most astute politician that has occupied the papal office in many centuries. He was secretary of state during the administration of his immediate predecessor. The purpose of the Vatican in its movement called “Catholic Action” is to gain control and rule the world, and, to do that, it demands the re-establishment of the old “Holy Roman Empire”. The dicta
tors accede to his demand and proceed in the establishment of Rome on its old basis. To deceive the people the pope claims to be the servant of God, but, in fact, he is the chief visible enemy of Jehovah God and his kingdom. “Catholic Action” began in Germany to bring about the healing of that German head described in Revelation thirteen. The nations and the people thereof are now advised of the result. Hitler, the dictator, was put in power by the connivance and allied action of the religious politicians of various nations of the earth, many of whom were members of the League of Nations; and all of this movement is a conspiracy against Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. The religious, political, commercial elements furnished the brains and the money to put Hitler into office, but the whole scheme originated with and was directed by Satan himself. It has been suggested that Hitler is Gog, Satan’s chief marshal, appearing in the flesh. Whether that is true or not, Hitler is an instrument completely in the employ and use of the Devil. Much of the support to put Hitler in power came from the United States. Now the work of reestablishing the old “Holy Roman Empire” is well under way. Many who are induced secretly to support this re-establishment of the old “Holy Roman Empire” are certain to rue their action and come to great grief.
’Do the wicked flourish now? They do, most emphatically. Since the end of the World War the wicked have sprung up like grass, as in favorable weather seasons. The workers of iniquity have blossomed and produced their fruit. Those workers of lawlessness have not the least sense of righteousness, but are entirely wicked. They are against everything that is righteous because they are depraved beyond recovery and are fully wicked. “Catholic Action” pushed forward openly by dictators has now destroyed the freedom of Europe. The wicked rule continental Europe, and the common people mourn and are in great distress, exactly as declared would be the case. (Prov. 29: 2) Now wickedness flourishes “like a green bay tree”. (Ps. 37:35) Like that species of tree, the wicked spread out over the ground and grow in crooked and distorted form. Now the dictators, backed up by the Vatican, the chief hatchery of dictators, spread out over the earth and are grabbing everything on the earth. The head of that beast that received the deadly wound is healed, and the Papacy is riding on the back of that beast. So completely does the Vatican control that beast, aligned with the politicians and the commercial leaders, that the newspapers and other publications of the world, even in the lands yet called “democracies”, refuse to speak out and tell the people that the real enemy that is destroying liberty and all freedom of thought and
January 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
21
action is that religious organization operating from Vatican City in Italy.
8	Today the British people, with their backs to the wall, are fighting for an existence. Dictators, urged on by the Vatican crowd, carry on the wickedest slaughter ever known to human creatures. The weak, the lame, the sick, the poor, the defenseless children, are all alike victims of the bloodthirsty religious, dictatorial conspirators. Children fleeing from the wicked slaughter in the land are sent by ships to America, and on the way the dictators murder them by dynamiting the ships. The wicked have grown very strong, and all the workers of iniquity and injustice flourish.
9	Who is willing to proclaim the truth now in this hour of the world’s great distress? Only those who have full faith and confidence in Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. Every person on earth who truly loves righteousness and hates wickedness now deeply sympathizes with the people of the British Isles. The people of that nation, more than any other nation now on earth, have believed the Bible to be God’s Word of truth, and they have endeavored to teach their children the Scriptures. They have for centuries steadfastly resisted the Papacy and its wicked practices. Stealthily and gradually the Vatican, with its Jesuit agencies operating subtly amongst the people, have put fear into the public press and into the politicians, and even now in England’s hour of dire distress the public press remains silent concerning the fact that the religious organizations, led by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, demand that Britain shall suffer for her opposition to the Papacy manifested during the centuries past. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has a strangle hold on the public press, and by the practice of fraud and deceit the people are kept in ignorance of their real foe.
10	Amidst the most murderous assault ever committed upon a freedom-loving people the faithful Christians of the British Isles raise high the banner of The Theocracy and boldly and fearlessly point to that government under Christ Jesus as the only hope of humankind. Recently Jehovah’s witnesses assembled in conventions in that land, which were attended by thousands of Christian and God-fearing people, and for three days carried on their program of Bible study while the bombs of the dictators continued to crash around them. At Manchester four thousand assembled in Free Trade Hall to worship Almighty God and, while engaged in worship, for hours the Vatican-German bombs fell about them, destroying buildings within three hundred feet of that hall. That crowd of four thousand people, having faith in God, remained at their post and went forward with their program of Bible study and worship regardless of the murderous assaults by the enemy. Did the Lord
protect those assemblies of Christians? We think he did, and we praise his name for his loving-kindness. Shortly thereafter, in Edinburgh, Scotland, another large assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses carried forward their program for several days in meetings as well as in their field work, while the enemy bombed the city and vicinity. All who love righteousness must sympathize with and admire the steadfast resistance by the British people against a murderous assault carried on by the great religious organization and the dictators of the continent.
11	Other portions of the British Empire, including many island possessions and also Canada, which is a part of the Empire, have yielded to the wicked influence of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and have arbitrarily and without any reason or cause stopped the public witness work of the servants of Jehovah God. Thus far in England, Scotland and Wales Jehovah’s witnesses have been permitted to go forward with the Kingdom work in advising the distressed population that God foretold these dreadful days and that his kingdom now at hand is their hope and relief. Of course, no man can authoritatively state what God will do, but it may be that, because of the righteousness-loving people of the British Isles who boldly declare the name and kingdom of Jehovah God, and because of the great number of people residing there who are of good-will towards God’s kingdom, and because of the bold stand the British people are making against the Papal dictators, the Lord God may show some special favor to that land and not permit the wicked to destroy that country. If the public officials of England and the public press of that land would have and exercise faith in God and in Christ, and boldly take their stand against the subtle Roman Catholic enemy, and for God and His King, there is no doubt that the Lord would spare that people. It is a time of great testing, and all who will seek the Lord’s way will be shown the right way.
12	The Watchtower rejoices with the faithful servants of God, Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions, who are showing their determination to continue to faithfully serve Jehovah God and Christ his King and to proclaim The Theocracy amidst the greatest opposition. These faithful Christians have no fight with earthly governments, but their fight is for righteousness to aid the people to see the only hope of salvation. The faith and confidence of those of the faithful servants of the Most High will be rewarded by Jehovah God, and The Theocracy is their refuge and strength: “Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.”—Ps. 2:12.
18	Because the wicked have in recent years sprung up like the grass and such do now flourish in the
22
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
earth, this is clearly seen to be further and corroborative evidence that God’s due time is at hand when the wicked shall be destroyed for ever. Let all lovers of God and his King fully and completely put their trust in Jehovah and his Theocracy. In the language of the Lord Jesus, let them look up and lift up their heads and rejoice because of the full assurance that the day of deliverance and salvation is at hand: “But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”—Ps. 13: 5.
14	Returning now to the consideration of the prophetic drama of vengeance, and seeing from other scriptures that the time for the fulfillment of that prophecy is here, we will continue its study with the keenest interest and thankfulness to the Lord. From previous issues of The Watchtower calling attention to this prophecy, and in our study thereof, it appears that the enemy of God’s faithful people, the Israelites, was in the valley of the river Kishon, there drawn up in battle array and moving forward against the Israelites. Probably almost all that army had crossed the dry bed of that river. Barak, with his army of ten thousand, was on the opposite side of the valley and on the slope of Mount Tabor where he had been directed by Jehovah to assemble his army. At this point the Lord God was putting down a great barrage of rain, lightning and wind before the army of the Israelites and against the army of the enemy; and Barak, taking advantage of this, had begun to move his army forward and behind that storm. Jehovah was fighting the battle for his chosen, typical people. “And the Lord discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his host, with the edge of the sword, before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet.”— Judg. 4:15.
1S	Up to this point Barak had not struck a blow against the enemy. Before his army of ten thousand got into actual fighting with the enemy the Lord God began to fight against the Canaanites by exercising His superhuman power. Thus he gave unmistakable proof that the battle was God’s, and not man’s, and thus he pictured that the battle of Armageddon will be God’s, and not man’s. Sisera and his host and iron chariots were unable to withstand the onslaught of the superhuman powers. No human power, and no other power, for that matter, can successfully fight against Jehovah and his hosts. The manner of the assault by Jehovah Deborah describes in the victory song in these words: “By the waters of Megiddo . . . They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses [manifestly spirit hosts of heaven gathering to war under the command of the Lord] fought against Sisera. The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon.” (Judg. 5:19-21) Those who love righteousness and hate wickedness
will take great courage from this because they know it foreshadows what will take place at Armageddon.
w It was in the dry season of the year that the battle at Kishon was fought, and therefore the river bed was dry. Sisera appears to have marched his army across that dry bed of the river and was in the bottom land or flat lands or plains, and going up to the attack of Barak’s forces. Megiddo was in his rear, and evidently floods of waters came from that direction. The Lord caused the sudden and terrific cloudburst in the mountains and hills round about, both in the rear of Sisera’s army and in his front. A great wall of water swept down from Megiddo, as well as from the mountains and hills on the east side of the river. Human power could not withstand such a terrific assault. The waters from heaven swept the iron chariots away, and the horses mired down in the mud and gravel, and broke their hoofs. (Judg. 5: 22) The bed of the river could not carry away the torrential waters, and soon out of its banks the waters swept along the plain with a great and irresistible force. The infantry of Sisera’s army would be caught in that torrential flood and find their horses and chariots useless. Many would try to escape on foot, while others would loosen the horses from chariots and try to escape on them, but all to no effect. The army was completely disorganized, although some of the men escaped. The power of Almighty God was being used against them and doubtless he permitted some of them to escape for a time to carry out the completeness of the picture. The waters, rushing down from the high land of Megiddo, would force the hosts of Sisera to flee to the higher lands on the opposite side and that would lead them right into the trap which the Lord had set for them with the ten-thousand-Israelite-soldier army with swords. With these ready instruments Barak’s army could pick off the terrified and fleeing Canaanites and smite them. The fleeing ones were punished by the little army under command of Barak.
1T	Among the escaping ones was Sisera, the commander of the army. He did not stick with and go down with his soldiers, but he “lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet”. Sisera’s chariot stuck in the mud, and, his horses floundering helplessly in the flood, Sisera had to take to the water and get away the best he could. He clambered out of the water and mud and had only his feet to carry him away. Doubtless the Lord let him escape for a time, as shown by what came to pass shortly thereafter, and this for the purpose of completing the picture foreshadowing Armageddon. It appears that not one of the bodyguard or military staff of Captain Sisera was permitted to escape and flee with him. Sisera, the great captain, had to hit out for the hills on foot and alone. The religious leaders will find themselves
January 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
23
in the same predicament. Some of his army got out of the flood and fled as far as Endor and perished there, which is a symbol of those who flee to demons or demon representatives and who shall come to an untimely end.—Ps. 83: 9,10.
18	The minute description of the battle as given in Judges chapters four and five is, without doubt, for the purpose of giving courage, comfort and hope to the faithful servants of God now on earth, and who are feeling the oppressive assaults of the wicked and iniquitous ones. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other religious, demonized supporters are marching rapidly to accomplish the destruction of the servants of Jehovah God. They are under the command of the Devil and the immediate leadership of Gog, the chief marshal of the Devil’s forces. On the earth the Nazi-Fascist-Papal-combine dictators are commanding the forces of wickedness, all of which now prosper and flourish. To that wicked and boastful, arrogant, disdainful crowd the war seems easy and a light job, and they are for a time feeling confident that they will destroy every supporter of The Theocracy. In advance they begin to mark out what they will do after they win. In that they will have to change their tune. They now think themselves certain of victory and boast of the fact that when the battle of that great day of God Almighty comes they will be entirely safe and at rest. But what will the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other demonized allies do then? When they see the Lord taking a hand and fighting for His people they will take to their heels as Sisera did, but, says the Lord’s Word, ‘’they shall in no wise escape.” (1 Thess. 5: 3, A.R.V.) The prophetic drama covers this, and the emphatic statement of the inspired apostle corroborates the prophecy. Thus by at least two witnesses the matter is made sure, and everyone who is fully devoted to Jehovah God and his Theocracy has no reason whatsoever to doubt what will be the final result. It is necessary for all such, however, to keep in mind God’s sure promises, that having promised to do he will certainly perform. When Jehovah causes to be recorded in his Word a prayer, which he puts into the mouth of his servants, and to be uttered before him, it is certain that such prayer is an expression of Jehovah’s will and purpose to be performed by him in his own due time. The eighty-third Psalm discloses the formation of a conspiracy by religionists against God’s typical people, which foreshadows a conspiracy by the religionists and other allied elements against the kingdom of God under Christ Jesus. According to that prophecy of the Lord the purpose of such conspiracy is to destroy the servants of Jehovah and to prevent The Theocratic Government from operating. Therefore the wicked workers of iniquity are determined to rule the earth contrary
to the will of Almighty God. (See Psalm 83:2-8.) Then follows the prayer of God’s oppressed people addressed to the Most High in these words, asking the Lord to fight their battles for them and to utterly destroy the enemy. That prayer is: “Do unto them ... as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kison; which perished at Endor; they became as dung for the earth.” (Ps. 83: 9,10) Jehovah is certain to hear and to answer that prayer, and to do exactly the things stated in the prayer, because he has made known that such is his will and his purpose. Let all who have this faith and trust in the Lord God implicitly, and in his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, rejoice in his salvation that is certain to come to those who remain steadfast and faithful. “But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles; and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.” —Judg. 4:16.
18	Here is further proof that none of the workers of iniquity shall escape. God permitted the faithful soldiers under Barak to have a part in the battle defeating the enemy. True to his name “Lightning”, with lightning speed Barak pursued the fleeing and discouraged army of Sisera. With his smaller army of only ten thousand men Barak did a good cleaning up of the job. He cleared the enemy out completely, and there was ‘not one man left’. His soldiers picked off every fleeing one and put them to the edge of the sword. Only Sisera himself escaped the sword of Barak’s army, but Jehovah doubtless permitted this to make another important picture.
20	At this point in the prophetic drama Barak played the part picturing Christ Jesus and his invisible army of heaven made up of the angelic host that follow after the victorious Christ Jesus. (Rev. 19:11-21) This picture shows that the invisible host actually in the battle of Armageddon literally complete the wrecking of that “abomination that maketh desolate”, namely, the religious-dictatorial crowd that is determined to rule the world in defiance of God and that stands in the place of God’s Theocratic government, even as Daniel in his prophecy quoted by the Lord Jesus shows. (Dan. 11: 31; 12:11; Matt. 24:15) In that complete cleanup, which the Lord will accomplish, all the allies of the Hierarchy, all the workers of iniquity, and all who are enemies of Jehovah God and enemies of his Theocratic Government shall perish. All such the Lord designates as “goats”, whose end is “everlasting [destruction] prepared for the devil and his angels” or supporters. (Matt. 25:31-41) Further scriptures corroborative of the complete destruction of the enemy at Armageddon are the following: “And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his
24
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
saints, to execute judgment upon all; and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.” (Jude 14,15) The Almighty God is the shield and protector of his people, and he will fight for them: “And ye shall flee by the valley of my mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azel; yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah; and Jehovah my God shall come, and all the holy ones with thee.”—Zech. 14: 5, A.R.V.
21	In these days of wickedness and wicked deeds committed by the Hierarchy and allies against harmless people because those people proclaim the name and kingdom of Jehovah God, when those workers of iniquity falsely charge Jehovah’s witnesses with the crime of sedition, cause their arrest and imprisonment, and refuse to bring them to trial and give them an opportunity to prove their innocence; when the wicked Hierarchy and agents commit the dastardly crime of castrating a man because he is a witness of Jehovah; when the houses, automobiles, clothing and other property of innocent people are destroyed by the same workers of iniquity, merely because such men and women tell of The Theocratic Government of Almighty God; when Jehovah’s witnesses are kidnaped and driven like wild beasts from one place to another, and the officials of the government take no action against the confessed criminals; all these things are evidences that this is the time when the wicked have grown up like grass, and the workers of iniquity blossom and flourish. All these things cause honest people to become righteously indignant.
22	Order-loving people, who believe in fairness, are caused to open their eyes to the situation and to see that none except the Devil could organize and carry forward in overt acts such a wicked conspiracy against harmless people. Many ask, Will there be no squaring of accounts? Will these wicked ones not be punished? The Lord Jehovah says to his faithful servants: ‘I will avenge mine elect; wait upon me till I rise up to the prey; I will fight the battles and see that none of these wicked ones escape.’ “Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.”—Zeph. 3:8.
28	In view of these innumerable crimes committed by the religionists and allies, and in view of the prophecies bearing squarely upon the point, and God’s promise to avenge his elect, let Jehovah’s faithful servants now wait upon the Lord and fully
trust him. As soon as he has promised he will destroy the wicked for ever. (Ps. 92: 7) The lovers of righteousness can afford to wait for the Lord to act. They cannot afford to take any other course. The faithful servants of Jehovah will wait upon him because they know he will act in his own due time and will completely wipe out the enemy.
24	In the prophetic drama it is written that Barak made a lightning pursuit of the enemy, to wit: ‘He pursued after the enemy unto Harosheth of the Gentiles, and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword.’ True to the prophetic picture, Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak, with lightning speed, together with his heavenly army, will pursue the enemy at Armageddon; and, beginning with religion, and particularly the Papacy, which is now urging on the dictators to acts of supreme wickedness, the Lord Jesus Christ will literally and completely destroy the enemy. The totalitarian, religious monstrosity shall not rule the earth, because Jehovah has decreed that such wickedness shall come to a complete end. The Lord has made this part of the prophetic drama to give further assurance to God’s people that he will fight their battles to a complete victory.
25	The sword is a symbol of the destructive weapon of the Lord, which he will use against the enemy at Armageddon: “The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.” (Ps. 110: 5, 6) That wickedness shall then cease and the workers of iniquity end for ever the Lord further declares: “Thus saith the Lord, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters; which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power; They shall lie down together, they shall not rise; they are extinct, they are quenched as tow.” (Isa. 43:16,17) “Come, behold the works of the Lord; what desolations he hath made in the earth. He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in the fire.” (Ps. 46:8,9) “At thy rebuke, 0 God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep. Thou, even thou, art to be feared; and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still, when God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.”—Ps. 76: 6-9.
28	“Lightning” (Barak) with his ten thousand acted the part of executioner for and in the name of Jehovah God. Thus “Lightning” foreshadowed Christ Jesus as the Executioner at Armageddon, and when Christ Jesus will be supported by all of his heavenly host. This is in exact harmony with the record which God made with Jehu, who executed the demon prac
January 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
25
titioners of religion in his day. He caused the religionists to don the vestments of their religion and to thus identify themselves as being demonized or worshipers of demons. Likewise today the Lord is causing the people to take their stand on one side or the other. All will thus fix their own destiny by placing themselves on the side of death or on the side of life. The religionists and allied workers of iniquity will identify themselves as enemies or “goats”, which is a symbol of that which will be destroyed. When King Jehu had caused the religionists to identify themselves, then what followed? The Scripture account reads: “And when they [the religionists] went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings, Jehu appointed fourscore men without, and said, If any of the men whom I have brought into your hands escape, he that letteth him go, his life shall be for the life of him. And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains, Go in, and slay them; let none come forth. And they smote them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the captains cast them out, and went to the city of the house of Baal. And they brought forth the images out of the house of Baal, and burned them.”—2 Ki. 10: 24-26.
27	That corresponds exactly with what Christ Jesus will do to the “goats”. (Matt. 25:41,46) Not one of the “goats” will escape. “And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground. And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.”—Jer. 25: 33, 35.
28	“Howbeit, Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite; for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.” (Judg. 4:17) Sisera was looking out for himself. Instead of acting like a brave soldier and sticking by his army, he tried to get back to his base of operations at Harosheth and let his army do the best they could. He fled across the country toward Hazor, the chief residence of his king Jabin, and, for fear of being cut off in his flight, Sisera took a roundabout course, evidently thinking that no one would look for him where he was going. He sought the tent of a married woman. At least he was risking being detected there contrary to the custom amongst the people. He was scared, and he thought to put himself under the protection of a woman. Likewise the Roman Catholic Hierarchy attempt to make themselves secure amongst women and induce women to go about and carry forward their schemes and to exercise their influence over men, and by that means gain control of men. When those of the Hierarchy priests are found out, as they
are now discovered, they, as the Scriptures declare, become as women and refuse to fight in the open, and hide behind the skirts of others. (Jer. 51:30) This suggests that the Hierarchy and Jesuit priests will find themselves in a position similar to that pictured by Captain Sisera. That day must be near, because the Hierarchy’s agents are flourishing.
29	Sisera sought refuge in the tent of Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite. Her name means “wild goat” or “mountain goat”, that is, as one being a climber or ascender, going higher up. David once took refuge amidst the wild goats. (1 Sam. 24: 2) “The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks for the conies.” (Ps. 104:18) Heber, the husband of Jael, resided in a tent near the royal residence of King Jabin, and it appears that he was at peace with Jabin. This does not at all mean that Heber was allied with Jabin. He was a peaceable man. No doubt God had caused Heber to pitch his tent near Jabin for an express purpose. Heber’s peaceful relationship with Jabin proved to be a trap for Captain Sisera. Those who will compose the “great multitude” have apparently been on good terms with the religionists. At least there have been no open hostilities between religionists and those who will compose the “great multitude”, until such time as those persons of goodwill toward God and his government take their firm and unequivocal stand on the side of The Theocracy. When Barak and Deborah moved out to take action according to the command of Jehovah against the oppressors of Israel the time had arrived when the house of Heber must take a stand on one side or the other. There is nothing in the record showing that Heber took his stand on the side of The Theocracy, but mark the choice that his wife made. This strongly indicates, as the picture shows, that one member of a household will take the side of the Lord and his government of righteousness, while another member of the same household may remain on the side of those against The Theocracy. This takes place, and is taking place, when the Lord separates the “goats” from “his sheep”. “And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not: and when he had turned in unto her into the tent she covered him with a mantle.”—Judg. 4:18.
30	Sisera was eagerly seeking seclusion where he could get some rest and hide out from those who were pursuing him. In this he pictured the religious leaders who have since 1922, when the flood of truth pursued them, eagerly hunted a place of rest where they might be protected and where their religious susceptibilities would not be shocked. As Jehovah’s witnesses become more active, and necessarily more efficient, in their work and in advancing and in proclaiming the Kingdom message, the clergy become more fatigued and more fearful, therefore desperate.
26
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
81 The appearance of Sisera alone and afoot would be proof that he had met a sore defeat and was fleeing for his life. That would be apparent to everyone who was watching his flight. No doubt observers of the battle in the valley, and who had seen the mighty flood of waters sweep away the invaders, had by grapevine methods transmitted that information to others and Jael would be informed of the defeat of Sisera’s army and his deplorable condition. She saw him approaching her tent, and so she went out to meet him. That apparently was a friendly act on her part. The time had come when she must make a decisive move, and no doubt the Lord was maneuvering her that she might perform her part in the great prophetic drama that was then being made. The time had come when she must either yield to the oppressive iron rule and continue under Jabin and Sisera, and suffer with the Israelites, or take her stand firmly on the side of Israel, God’s chosen people. The question was raised in her mind, Should she aid Sisera to get back to Jabin and continue to fight against God’s typical people and also put fear in the mind of all persons friendly to the Israelites, or should she do her part in an opposite direction ? That was a crucial hour and a crucial test for her, and doubtless the Lord had steered Sisera to her tent that she might be put to this test and thus make her part of the picture. “Known unto God are all his works from the beginning.” (Acts 15:18) Foreknowing that he would have the Greater Barak, Christ Jesus, to gather unto himself another flock of “sheep” aside from the spiritual class, God was at this point of the drama making a picture of that very thing. The facts show that Jael acted with discretion and exercised wisdom.
32	When Sisera approached she “said unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me”. That was a further evidence of friendliness manifested by her. Jael was a mere woman and there alone at her tent. She knew that she could not attack a mighty warrior such as Sisera on equal terms. He was a seasoned soldier, and now because of his defeat he was greatly embittered. The gravity of the occasion would overshadow the custom of married women not to invite a lone man into their tent. Jael did take advantage of the situation by notifying the fleeing general to turn in to her tent, which would be an indication that Heber’s house was still friendly to the Canaanites. What plans she had in mind is not disclosed at this point,
nor is that particularly material. She was being maneuvered by the Lord to play her part and she acted on the side of the Lord and for his chosen people.
33	After 1918 the time had arrived when the separation of the “goats” from the “sheep” of the Lord must take place. Many of the people who had for some time been friendly with the religionists saw that they must take a decided stand either for or against the Lord. They saw Jehovah’s witnesses actively engaging in the proclamation of the kingdom of God as the only means of peace and safety for life, and that the religionists were against them. They heard the message from God’s Word, spoken by Jehovah’s witnesses, warning of the approaching destruction of the enemy at Armageddon and Jehovah’s victory through Christ Jesus at that battle. They saw also that the message from the Lord publicly declared by Jehovah’s witnesses had put the religionists to flight doctrinally and that the religious leaders had no means of combating their message, at least they showed none. Repeatedly Jehovah’s witnesses have asked the religious leaders to come into the open and defend themselves and to explain why they teach false doctrines to the people, but the religionists have refused to do so. Many persons of good-will have seen that Jehovah’s witnesses were telling the people things that are constructive and for their good, while the religionists and their associates have nothing to offer for the good, well-being and blessing of the people. Like Jael, such people of good-will have sought the occasion to take some positive action.
34	Jael assured Sisera that he need have no fear of entering her tent and hiding himself there. No one needs to fear persons of good-will who will form God’s “other sheep”. Had Sisera shown any disposition whatsoever to recant from his wicked persecution of the Israelites, no doubt Jael would have continued to favor him. She saw his vicious determination against the people of Jehovah God and his desire to escape and get back and reorganize another army and fight against them. Captain Sisera entered the tent and lay down and she kindly furnished a mantle with which to cover him. Mark how well the action of Jael on this occasion pictures another part of this marvelous drama, which the Lord has now made known and revealed the meaning thereof to his people.
(To be continued)
0 Jehovah God of hosts, who is a mighty one, like unto thee, 0 Jehovah! and thy faithfulness is round about thee. The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: the world and the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them. Thou hast a mighty arm; strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. Righteousness and justice are the foundation of thy throne: lovingkindness and truth go before thy face.—Psalm 89:8,11,13,14, A.R.V.
"MEET THE LORD”
MEET Him where? and in what manner? Mark this important fact, to wit, that the Scriptures say much about the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ as King and Judge but say very little about the going to heaven on the part of the anointed Christians begotten of God’s spirit and who make up the spiritual temple wherein God dwells by his spirit or holy invisible power.—1 Cor. 3:16,17.
The apostles of Jesus Christ stressed the coming of the Lord as a fact of great moment. At the time of his ascension into heaven, forty days after his resurrection from the dead, angels from heaven stood by as men in white apparel and said to the disciples: “This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner [not, in like body] as ye have seen him go into heaven.’’ (Acts 1:11) Thereafter the apostles earnestly and with anxiety looked forward to the coming of Christ and admonished their Christian brethren so to do.
Jesus had declared what would be the visible evidence, sign or proof on earth of his coming to reign as rightful Ruler of the world and as Vindicator of Jehovah’s name and as Jehovah’s Judge of the Christians and the nations. (Matthew chapters 24 and 25) Therefore the believers “turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true God; and to wait for his Son from heaven”. (1 Thess. 1: 9,10) The Christians were “waiting for the coming [or, revelation] of our Lord Jesus Christ”. (1 Cor. 1:7) The apostle expressed to the Christians his prayer, “to the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.” (1 Thess. 3:13) “And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your [the church’s] whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Thess. 5:23) It is true that the Scriptures assure the Christians anointed with God’s spirit that for them there is in heaven an inheritance incorruptible that awaits them, but such texts do not say that such faithful Christians are going to heaven to “meet the Lord”.—See 1 Peter 1:3-11.
By the inspired apostle it is written, at 1 Thessalonians 4:16,17 : “For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain [the anointed remnant on earth], shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.” Does not this mean that the remnant go to meet the Lord? It does not; but, on the contrary, it says that those who “remain”, manifestly meaning “the remnant”, “meet the Lord in the air.” What, then, is the meaning of the words “in the air”?
In some scriptural texts the words “air” and “wind” are used to convey the same meaning. In the dictionaries the lexicographers give the best definition of words that they can, but when the Scriptures give the definition, that settles the question beyond controversy. The words of the Lord Jesus show the true symbolic meaning of the words “air” and “wind”. In addressing the Jewish ruler Nicodemus Jesus said: “That which is bom of the flesh is flesh; and that which is bora of the spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The wind bloweth
where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the spirit.” (John 3: 6-8) How does this explain “the air”?
The wind or air is invisible to human eyes, yet it is powerful and discernible. Likewise that which is bom of the spirit, and which hence is in the spiritual realm, is invisible to human vision and yet is discernible by creatures on earth who are in close relationship to the Lord. As stated at 1 Corinthians 2:14: “The natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” The evidence is abundant that the Lord Jesus came to the spiritual temple in A.D. 1918 and that God’s anointed remnant of witnesses on earth are now gathered to the temple of the Lord and are in the temple condition. How do these know they are there ? Because they have the ‘witness of the spirit’, and the Scriptures and the facts in support thereof. (Rom. 8:16,17) The fact that they are gathered to the temple and are there “taught of God”, as John 6:45 and Isaiah 54:13 declare, is proof conclusive that they are with the Lord “in the air”, that is to say, in the condition where it is impossible for the natural eye to see that which is present. If they are at the temple with the Lord, then, without a question of doubt, they are with the Lord, although he is invisible to their natural eyes. Therefore the words “caught up ... to meet the Lord in the air” fully and completely describe the condition.
Zion is God’s capital organization. Psalm 102:16 prophesies: “When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory." The order of the resurrection of the faithful saints that slept in death awaiting the Lord’s coming to the temple, and the building up of Zion, is this, as shown by the apostle’s words, to wit: (1) The awakening of the faithful dead, and (2) the assembling of the living remnant at Zion. This takes place when the Lord appears at the temple of Jehovah. Says the apostle, at 1 Thessalonians 4:14-17: “For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent [precede] them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall ascend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.”
For years this text has caused much confusion among some; and, of course, it could not be understood until God’s due time. The Emphatic Diaglott translation reads: “Because the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a shout, with an archangel’s voice, and with God’s trumpet, and the dead in Christ will be raised first; then we, the living, who are left over, shall, at the same time with them, be caught away in clouds, for a meeting of the Lord in the air; and so we shall be always with the Lord.” (1 Thess. 4:16,17) The difficulty arose because of the words appearing in the Diaglott, to wit, “at the same time with them,”
28
5He WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the contention being that the resurrection of those dead in the grave and the change of the living on earth from human to spirit must take place at the same instant, and hence, because there appeared to be some faithful anointed Christians still on earth, that proved that the faithful dead had not been resurrected. That, however, is not what the Dia-glott says. The words “at the same time with them” mean ‘within a specified time’, and not a twenty-four-hour day or even the same year, and certainly not the same instant. When understood it will be seen that the “same time with them” is a period of time which began in A.D. 1914, the beginning of “the day of Jehovah” and the enthronement of Christ Jesus as King, and continues until the anointed remnant finish their course on earth. It is within that time that the faithful dead are resurrected and the faithful remnant changed.
The above text (1 Thessalonians 4:16,17) of necessity must be in exact harmony with the apostle’s language at 1 Corinthians 15:51,52 (Diaglott), to wit: “Behold! a secret I disclose to you; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for it will sound, and the dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.” Note that the text last above quoted and that also of 1 Thessalonians 4:16,17 use the words “God’s trumpet” and “the last trumpet”, and also use the words “shout” and “an archangel’s voice”. These words must be considered together. A “trumpet” signifies that the execution or carrying out of divine authority is taking place, and that the King has begun his reign; and with Christ Jesus that reign began in 1914, when Jehovah sent him forth to rule. (On such significance of the “trumpet” note 2 Kings 11:1-14; Psalms 47: 5; 98:6; 110:2.) The trumpet sounding also denotes a time of joy, because the King has come; and in this instance it is the great Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, the vindication of which name is the joy of the Lord Jesus Christ, and into that joy he invites his faithful followers. (Lev. 23: 24; 2 Chron. 15:12-14; Matt. 25:21) The sounding of the trumpet also signifies war, battle and victory, and with the coming of the Lord as King it means war against Satan and his organization, and a great battle and complete victory for Christ. (Num. 31:1-6; 2 Chron. 13:12-16; Joel 2:1; Rev. 19:11-20) It is the trumpet of Jehovah God, because it sounds by the authority of Jehovah.
Why, then, should it be called “the last trumpet”! It is the last trumpet because it announces the beginning of the reign of Christ Jesus, earth’s rightful King, him “whose right it is” to rule and who shall rule thereafter, and never again will there be a king installed in office, and hence no occasion for the sounding of another trumpet. Never again will there be a necessity for vindicating Jehovah’s name, and never will there be another war and victory, because it is declared that this shall be the last and righteousness will continue for ever under God and under Christ. The trumpet of God, which is the last trumpet, began to sound when Jesus went forth to begin his reign, in 1914, and must continue to sound until the organization of Satan is destroyed, the name of Jehovah is vindicated, and complete victory is given to Christ Jesus at the battle of the great day of God Almighty. It is within this period of time, hence “at the same time”, that the resurrection of the faithful dead
saints and the gathering of the faithful living remnant to the temple at Zion take place.
If, as it has been contended by some, both the sleeping faithful saints and the faithful ones on earth are changed in the same instant, then the resurrection of the dead could not precede the change of the living; but when we understand that the words “at the same time with them” really mean within “the day of Jehovah”, which began in 1914 and continues until the close of the battle of Armageddon, the matter is entirely clear and these texts are completely in harmony, as indeed they must be.
The text (1 Thessalonians 4:16) reads that ‘Christ shall descend from heaven with the voice of an archangel’; which means the cjiief angel or chief messenger of Jehovah, which office Christ Jesus fills. He comes “with a shout”, which means an authoritative command. Being sent forth as earth’s rightful ruler, to whom is committed all power in heaven and earth, Christ Jesus is in command and his commandments are given with absolute authority. The shout and the sounding of the trumpet of God take place simultaneously. The trumpet of God mentioned in the above text is not the same as the “seven trumpets” mentioned in Revelation 8:6. The seven angels that had the seven trumpets are the angels of the Lord Jesus Christ at the temple who are sent out by him with a definite message, and this is done while the trumpet of Jehovah is sounding. Mark that the Scriptures make a clear distinction between the trumpet of God, which begins to sound at the coming of the King, and the seven trumpets which the King himself caused to be sounded by his angels that are sent out from the temple.
The facts and the Scriptures show that Christ Jesus appeared at the temple to build up Zion in 1918, and at that time the trumpet of Jehovah was sounding. According to the Scriptures the order of the building up of Zion is this : (1) “The dead in Christ . . . rise first” and are made part of Zion, which is Jehovah’s capital organization, their resurrection being unseen to human eyes because “it is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body”. (1 Cor. 15: 44) (2) Then, during that period of time, that is, “in the day of Jehovah,” “the living, who are left over, shall at the same time [that is, within that same time] with them be caught away [be completely separated from the enemy organization and gathered into Zion] in clouds [that is, in the presence of Christ Jesus, clouds being a symbol of the Lord’s presence unseen], for a meeting of the Lord in the air [that is to say, in his presence which is invisible to the natural eyes]; and so we shall be always with the Lord.” (Diaglott) Compare Revelation 11:11,12. In that order Zion the capital organization of Jehovah is builded and the Lord appears in his glory and the remnant on earth appear before him in the temple in righteousness, and they are satisfied with the display of his glory and are always with the Lord. Says Psalm 17:15, Septuagint Version: “Let me be satisfied with the display of thy glory.” The change of the faithful anointed remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses from human to spirit organism takes place after they are gathered to the temple and have proved themselves “faithful unto death”; and that change is “in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye”. (Rev. 2:10; 1 Cor. 15: 51, 52) If, however, they continue faithful they are for ever with
January 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
29
the Lord from the time of being gathered into the temple.
It is the meeting with the Lord that is emphasized by the apostle when he wrote (2 Tim. 4:8): “Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.” Manifestly it is at the time of the gathering of his own anointed followers to the temple that the Lord assigns to such the crown here mentioned by the apostle. This is assigned before they go to heaven, because Jesus said to the same faithful ones: ‘Hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown." (Rev. 3:11) It is those anointed Christians who love the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ to whom crowns are assigned, says the apostle. These show their love by joyfully obeying the Lord, and they unselfishly devote themselves to his service. If then they continue faithful unto death they receive the great reward of immortality, “the crown of life,” as stated to the “church in Smyrna” at Revelation 2: 8-11.—See Light, Book One, page 21.
It is the faithful anointed Christians (represented by the “church in Smyrna”) that receive the great reward of immortality, and this they receive after they “meet the Lord in the air”, that is to say, after they meet him in the temple and after they prove faithful in the performance
of the duties on earth assigned to them by the Lord, in fulfillment of Matthew 24:14. Without a question of doubt the apostle refers to the faithful remnant on earth when he writes: “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him"; which gathering is to the temple, where the Lord purges them that “they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness". (See 2 Thessalonians 2:1 and Malachi 3:1-4.) Being thus gathered, they “meet the Lord in the air”, that is to say, in the condition which is not discernible by natural sight. If gathered to the temple, then certainly they are “with the Lord” and have been awakened from spiritual inactivity and drowsiness and know of his presence with them at the temple, and therefore these faithful ones have a spiritual vision of his likeness, his “face” or “similitude”. Then they are “satisfied”, and to them is fulfilled the prophecy of Psalm 17:15: “I in righteousness shall behold thy face, shall be satisfied when awakened by a vision of thee." (Rotherham') “As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with beholding thy form.”—Am. Rev. Ver.
Likewise the “great multitude" now forming of the earthly “companions” of the anointed remnant are discerning the presence and glory of the Lord at the temple, and they also are “satisfied".—Revelation 7 :16,17.
SEVEN-HEADED
C^T)EAST,” within the meaning of the Scriptures, f"> briefly defined, symbolizes a rule by violence; that is, (1) a violent coercion of the conscience of the governed, the people; and (2) a rule over or control of the person by the exercise of force in a violent manner.
Many centuries ago the aged apostle John had a vision of a wild beast arising from the sea. Now those in the same class with John as witnesses of the Lord have discerned the meaning of “beast” or “wild beast” as a symbol of a rule or government or power exercised in a harsh, cruel and oppressive manner. John wrote, saying: “And I saw, out of the sea a wild-beast coming up; having ten horns, and seven heads, and upon his horns ten diadems, and upon his head names of blasphemy. And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard; and his feet as of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion." (Rev. 13:1, .Rotherham's translation) The “wild beast", which John saw arise out of the sea, is shown by his description thereof to be not only wild, but unclean, cruel and vicious.
Long prior to John’s vision Daniel the prophet was given a vision, and he wrote: “I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea. And four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from another." (Dan. 7:2, 3) Here the “four winds of the heaven” represent the invisible power of Satan, who, according to Ephesians 2:2, is “the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience”. The description given by the prophet Daniel shows that the beasts were wild and extremely cruel.
In his law God specified what are unclean beasts, unclean for eating and for sacrifice, and the beasts described
ORGANIZATION
by John and Daniel show that they were unclean according to the law, because they did not chew the cud nor divide the hoof. (See Leviticus 11:1-12.) This is proof that that which came out of the sea in the vision is a product of the Devil. It is a beast symbolic of the ravenous kind, which will not be-permitted to be on the “highway” leading to God’s organization nor be permitted to live in God’s kingdom. (Note Isaiah 35: 9; Ezekiel 34:25.) The “wild beast" therefore symbolizes Satan’s visible organization that rules the peoples of the earth and that is made up of religion, commerce and politics.
The <cbeast” John saw in vision had seven heads. The head refers to the ruling part. It is the mind that rules or controls. (Note Judges 11:9,11; Ecclesiastes 2:14; Ezekiel 10:11.) The head, therefore, is the responsible part of the body and upon it is usually visited blood in punishment for wrongdoing.—1 Ki. 2:44; Obad. 15; 1 Chron. 29:11; Ps. 18:43.
The head is the one that directs the course of action taken by the body. As for the “seven heads” of the beast, “seven” is a symbolic number representing completeness as to things spiritual or invisible. Satan is the head of his organization, and therefore the symbol “seven” stands for the entire organization, and particularly refers to the invisible parts of Satan’s organization, Satan himself being an invisible spirit creature. The term “beast” symbolically represents Satan’s visible organization, whether it appears in the form of one or in the form of many beasts.
To Daniel there appeared in vision four beasts, but these did not represent or picture four separate devilish organizations, but they did picture Satan’s organization appearing and exhibiting certain or particular characteristics.
30	THE WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N. Y.
Daniel’s vision of the four beasts began to be fulfilled from A mountain in Scripture symbolizes a kingdom, with a
the time of the third world power, Babylon, whose last king, Belshazzar, was then on the throne. (Dan. 7:1) Then, after seeing in symbol the Medo-Persian empire and the Grecian empire, Daniel says of the fourth beast: “After this I saw in the night visions, and, behold, a fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it: and it was diverse from all the beasts that were before it; and it had ten horns.” (Dan. 7:7) The thirteenth chapter of Revelation describes the wild beast that came up out of the sea and that had seven heads. That is not the fourth beast here described by Daniel, but this fourth beast of Daniel's prophecy is one of the heads, in fact the sixth head, of that ‘sea beast’ of Revelation.
Of course, each succeeding world power would take over all that was left of its predecessor. This beastly world power, fourth from Babylon, is the Roman Empire. Reckoning from the first world power, which was Egypt, Rome became the sixth world power, and therefore that is the world power described by the vision of Daniel. His prophecy (chapter 7, verses 7 and 19) states that the beast had teeth of iron and nails of brass, which shows that its clawing power was far greater than that of the second beast, the bear, and that with these this fourth beast “brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it". In fulfillment, Rome took over all the wicked methods of destruction that had been learned and practiced by its predecessors. Rome was different from the other beasts or world powers that were before it, in this particular, that it adopted first the pagan religion and later took on another form of Devil religion and labeled it “Christianity” and claimed the name thereof. All of Rome’s predecessors were outwardly pagan, but Rome afterwards changed to the so-called “Christian religion" because that suited Satan’s purpose better. “Organized Christianity,” so called, had its beginning with Rome, and for this reason the empire has been dubbed by religionists the “Holy Roman Empire". It is further described by the prophet Daniel as having ten horns, concerning which he says (verse 24): “And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that shall arise: and another shall rise after them; and he shall be diverse from the first [(Rev. Ver.) diverse from the former], and he shall subdue three kings." Thus the ten horns are described by the prophet himself as ten kings and evidently refer to all the nations growing out of the Roman Empire. Thus is established the harmony between the four beasts of Daniel’s vision and the seven-headed wild beast of Revelation thirteen.
We may lay it down as a rule without exception that the term “wild beasts” always stands for that part of Satan’s organization which is on the earth. The number "seven” seems to refer also to seven different world powers, each one of which at a time certain holds the place of preeminence in the world, and all under Satan as the invisible lord.
Concerning a like seven-headed beast, upon which “the great whore" rides, it is written, at Revelation 17:9,10: “The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth. And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is [the Roman, in John’s day], and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a short space."
ruling head. The history of the world shows that there have been seven separate and distinct world powers which have in their respective order held a place of supremacy on the earth. These world powers are, to wit, Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, Rome and Britain. The “god” of each one of these has been and is Satan the Devil, because he is “the god of this world”. (See 2 Corinthians 4:3,4; John 12:31; 14:30.) All these world powers are properly classed in the symbolic term “wild beast" and they all form the “wild beast” when referred to collectively, whereas one at a time has held the place of pre-eminence in the world.
Revelation 13:1 states that the "name of blasphemy" appeared upon each head: "and upon his heads names of blasphemy." (Am. Rev. Ver.) Concerning the second world power, Assyria, it was said to Jehovah’s people: “Thus saith the Lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning him: . . . Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed 1 and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high! even against the Holy-One of Israel." (2 Ki. 19:6, 21, 22) Here the Hebrew root word from which the word “blasphemed" is translated means “to hack and reproach". Every one of the world powers has blasphemed, hacked and reproached the name of Jehovah God; and Satan has seen to it that such was done. They have acted as his mouthpieces to speak against God and to turn the people from him. The Scriptures also indicate that all such are doomed to violent destruction —Num. 15:30; Ps. 74:10.
The apostle John writes that the “wild beast” had ten horns: “and upon his horns ten crowns.” Symbolically this means that Satan's organization on earth, and each world power taking the lead or pre-eminence therein in the order named, has had and exercised full secular power to crowd and push the peoples of earth. In Scripture “horn” represents that which pushes or crowds. For example, note Deuteronomy 33:17: "His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh." Also the account at 1 Kings 22:11: “And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron: and he said, Thus saith the Lord, With these shalt thou push the Syrians, until thou have consumed them." It is a well-known fact that these beastly governments of earth, which are Satan's organization, have homed and pushed the people about as a wild bull shoves aside the herd.
By their horns or power cruelly exercised these nations have pushed and oppressed the people; but they have particularly shoved about and persecuted God’s people, as witness the persecution of Jehovah's witnesses in Germany particularly since A.D. 1933, and also the notable outburst of persecution against Jehovah's witnesses in the United States in the year 1940. Jehovah has chiefly in consideration his people, and he caused the Bible to be written for their benefit. Hence God would not wink at or lightly pass by the world powers that have oppressed his people and bias-
January 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
31
phemed and brought reproach upon his name. In ancient times Israel was God's chosen people, whom he used to foreshadow spiritual Israel under Christ Jesus, his consecrated, anointed people on earth today who serve as his witnesses. God has taken notice of these world powers that particularly have oppressed his people. At the time the prophecy of Zechariah was written four of the world powers, to wit, Egypt, Assyria, Babylon and Medo-Persia, had been engaged in ‘homing’ God’s people. Concerning this the prophet says: “Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, four horns. And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these! And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. . . . But these [servants of God] are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.” (Zech. 1:18-21) Therefore the children of God in Christ are here pictured by Judah, Israel and Jerusalem.
Revelation 13 :1 (Am. Rev. Ver.) further says concerning the “wild beast”: “And on his horns ten diadems.” The crowns or diadems were upon the boms, thus symbolizing that these world powers have used cruel force and violence to rule the people and to carry on a conquest for wealth and territory and they have always claimed that they did so by divine authority. They have made force or might what they call right. All wars of conquest and butchery they have justified because they claim it to be right and within the scope of their authority.
Then John further describes the “beast" (vs. 2): “And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority.” This description of the “wild beast” shows that it would not be limited to any one world power, but that it is the complex or composite of the “seven” or entire number of world powers that go to make up the Devil’s earthly organization.
It was like a leopard, that is to say, it was spotted; which indicates that it is deceptive and cunning and crooked and dishonest. It cannot change its spots, as Jeremiah 13:23 says. This is especially characteristic of the Devil. It is always on the watch for spoil. (Hos. 13:7) The leopard is speedy and was used by "Nimrod the mighty hunter”, whom Satan put “before” Jehovah (Gen. 10:8-10) ; and Nimrod used the leopard to track and take other animals. So the Devil Satan's beastly organization is speedy, and hunts and catches others by his snares.
Further, as to the “wild beast”, "bis feet were as the feet of a bear." The bear is noted for its power to crush, and is said to be five times as strong as a lion. The Kodiak bear is the world’s largest carnivorous animal. Some reach
a height of twelve feet and weigh more than a ton. In olden time David, by the Lord’s grace, slew a bear that had caught one of his father’s sheep. (1 Sam. 17: 34-37) The antitypical David, to wit, Christ the great executive officer of Jehovah, will slay the organization of Satan that has attacked his Father Jehovah's "sheep”. The bear lies in wait for his prey. Proverbs 28:15 declares that the wicked ruler or wicked power is like a ranging bear. This is another plain characteristic of Satan’s visible organization.
"And his mouth as the mouth of a lion,” that is to say. with powerful teeth to bite and crush and devour. (Joel 1:6; Hos. 13:8) Satan’s organization, like a lion, is boldfaced and greedy, and makes a terrifying noise. All these symbols exactly fit Satan’s brazen-faced, greedy, sly, cunning, cruel and violent organization. This description shows also that the “wild beast" is not a bear or a leopard or a lion, but is a monstrosity, which symbolizes Satan’s cruel and wicked organization. God never made a beast that looked like this one. Only the Devil would have such a thing. The symbolic description given by John exactly fits every world power that has ever existed on the earth.
Concerning the father of this monstrosity, or “wild beast”, we are not left in doubt, for it is written: “And the dragon [which is Satan the Devil] gave him his power, and his seat [his throne (A.B.F.)], and great authority.” This shows that Satan brought the beastly thing into existence and gave or supplied it with the power that it has and exercises; hence it is his child and his instrument. He is the father. Being the product of the Devil it would be specifically excluded from God’s organization. The “wild beast” therefore represents all that is anti-Jehovah and anti-Christ and against The Theocratic Government and against the work of that kingdom of God and against those who are Jehovah God’s servants and witnesses.
Satan offered to give the kingdom of the world and the authority thereof to Christ Jesus, but Jesus refused to yield to his blandishments. (Luke 4:5-8) Jehovah had established a miniature or typical theocracy in the nation of Israel. When God withdrew rulership from his typical people Israel in 606 B.C., then Satan became “the god of this [entire] world” and could have given it away even though he knew his offer would be declined by Christ Jesus (See Ezekiel 21:25-27 and 2 Corinthians 4:3,4.) The prophetic description and the physical facts in fulfillment thereof prove beyond all doubt that the “wild beast” with seven heads that John saw in vision is Satan’s organization of the earth which came into existence long centuries ago, and was manifest in the first world power, Egypt, and is now manifest in all the powers and nations of the earth over which the dictatorial, religio-totalitarian monstrosity is now wickedly trying to establish itself as supreme.
(Continued from page 18)
involved; hence a contribution of 50c per copy is stipulated therefor. Organized companies should combine the orders of all individuals therefor and send such through the company servant.
1941 CALENDAR
The 1941 Calendar is exceptionally beautiful and expressive. Under the yeartext, to wit, “Salvation unto our God . . . and unto
the Lamb” (Rev. 7:10, A.B.F.), the artist portrays with Scriptural symbolisms and modern details Jehovah's “strange work” of judgment now fast reaching its climax among all nations. The Calendar date pads mark the special testimony periods for 1941, and also give field service suggestions for the intervening months. A contribution of 25c per copy is asked therefor, or $1.00 for five copies mailed to one address. Companies do well to send in combination orders through the local company servant.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
HITCHHIKING VETERAN ROUTS MOBSTERS
“When I gave Conspiracy Against Democracy to the hitchhiker who rode with us near Tombstone, Ariz., he told us that in the latter part of August he came through Litchfield, Ill., the place where a demon-controlled mob wrecked several cars and violently assaulted Jehovah’s witnesses. To this hitchhiker, an old man in Litchfield said: ‘I helped to beat up those people. Why, they wouldn’t even salute the flag! We almost beat one guy to death—to make him kiss the flag!’ The hitchhiker replied: T don’t believe anyone should be forced to salute the flag. I believe that should be a free-will, voluntary act.’ Meanwhile eight men gathered around. One of these suspiciously barked out to him: ‘Who the hell are you, some foreign agent?’ To his inquisitor the hitchhiker, with equal force, replied in a similar tone: ‘Who the hell are you, some foreign agent? I’ll bet you’ve never been overseas!’ Then the hitchhiker produced credentials showing he was a Veteran of Foreign Wars, had spent 26 months on the front; had spent two years in a hospital on this side of the water because he was gassed during the World War; bears three wound stripes on his body; and that he wore the purple heart. Speaking of the attack on Jehovah’s witnesses, he said to the mobsters: ‘You super-patriots claim to be religious; but would Jesus do a thing like that? Here you are doing just the opposite of what Jesus taught—and you claim to be religious! When you force a person to salute the flag, you breed the very opposite of love for the flag.’ The mobsters then thinned out and walked away. Rather puzzled, the old man said: ‘I wonder why those Legion boys walked off.’ The VFW hitchhiker replied; ‘Well,,pop, those boys probably had nice jobs on this side of the water, wore good clothes, had good food, and saw no hardships during the war. A veteran is one who has seen active service on the front and borne the hardships and sufferings of the war. Those fellows aren’t veterans; they’re just Boy Scouts!’ Before we left our hitchhiker he told us he went to hear Judge Rutherford last February in his home town, Long Beach, only to find the Municipal Auditorium packed out. However, he was able to hear the speech over the sound horns. He gets Consolation and The Watchtower regularly from the publishers on the street corners.”
SOBERING UP FROM THE HIERARCHY’S WINE OF VIOLENCE
“Lamont, Okla., is where they burned the cross behind my trailer and left a note ordering us out of town within 48 hours. This happened the last time I served this company, which was the last week of May. I notice McCall’s magazine for November, under heading ‘Fifth Column Jitters’, mentioned this incident, but did not mention the name of the town; which I regret. It was easily recognized by Lamont residents, however, and, I understand, was the topic of conversation for several days. On this visit (October) there was no sign of opposition whatever. The night police, Mr. Fuller, who called on me around 10 p.m. with Mr. ----,
who was drunk and representing the American Legion in the capacity of ‘Chairman of Americanism’, called on witness Johnston and apologized to him. Another on whom we called in the door-to-door work, and who ordered us off the place, apologized for his action. Mr. Ellis Eddy, the county prosecuting attorney, who called me so many nice names
and said he would put me in a dungeon if I ever so much as put my foot in the county again, lost out in the first election primary and will not be the county attorney there now. Mr. Taylor, the county treasurer, who was abusive toward us, also lost out in the first primary. ‘Reverend’ Trout, who accompanied Mr. Eddy, has lost his job.”
DURING “CHALLENGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD (ARKANSAS)
“This company has been badly frightened due to the arrest of the company servant in July and his conviction of breaking an ordinance prohibiting knocking on doors without having been invited to do so. This decision was appealed and should come up in December. Since that time it was practically impossible to get the workers to witness within the corporation limits. Friday night a service meeting was held and arrangements were made for a group to work in the city Sunday morning. We had been working a little better than an hour when the police car came out and picked up four of the witnesses, including the company servant. The police were particularly anxious to get him, passing up several workers and saying, ‘There is Blankenship now!’ They stopped him and asked if he wanted to go to jail again. He said, ‘No, but I am determined to preach the gospel of the Kingdom.’ They then threatened him with arrest if he knocked at another door, which he proceeded to do and was taken to the jail. Before locking them up the chief called the police judge, who told him to return the publishers to their territory, as he would not prosecute Later, when questioned by another person as to why he would not prosecute, the judge stated, ‘These people have just as much right to their religion as I have to mine.’ A Baptist preacher present stated, ‘I go to call on the people. Jehovah’s witnesses should have the same opportunity.’ ”
DOORSTEP SETUP IN BRISTOL, ENGLAND
“After a very brief word introducing the phonograph I quickly set if going. When it had finished, I produced Religion, but found the lady not interested ‘No, I do not want the book.’ It was just then that her husband, who al) the time that the record ‘Snare and Racket’ had been playing had been out of sight indoors, suddenly sprang forward. ‘Here, just a minute, I’ll have that book,’ he exclaimed, ‘here is a shilling.’ Very gladly and eagerly he took the book, literally delighted at being able to have it, and at the same time saying, ‘It’s the truth—every word on that record was the truth! I’ve maintained for years that religion is a racket, and furthermore, even my wife’s brother says the same thing, that religion is a racket, and he’s a vicar ’ After some time I left him, making a note to call on him again, and passed on to the next house. No one at home' Coming out, I heard a shout, and, looking round, saw the man who had obtained the book. ‘Here,’ he said, ‘I want you.’ I went back to him. Said he: ‘I don’t suppose you could sell me one of those records; I should like one. How much are they?’ I told him and promised to take one out the next evening. This I did, very much to his delight, also taking with me the lecture ‘Government and Peace’ for him to hear. Looking up at the Service calendar, I see the words for this month, September-. ‘They shall climb up upon the houses; they shall enter in at the windows like a thief.’ (Joel 2: 9) How very true are these prophetic words!”
32
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W, E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall he taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
“EHUD’S SWORD” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This midwinter period of special activity will rim through the entire month of February. The title thereof calls attention to the zeal, energy and fearlessness with which Ehud used his dagger against King Eglon, and which qualities all publishers of The Theocracy will exercise likewise during this Period. February opens up this year’s three-month Watchtower campaign, and hence all publishers will specialize on securing subscriptions for The Watchtower and offering as a premium the book Religion and the new booklet Satisfied, all on a contribution of $1.00. Arrange now for this Testimony, and, if possible, attend the local company service meetings where this campaign is being discussed and organized. Write this office if you need references. To contribute toward making up the general report of the work and results thereof, please turn in your personal report of what you accomplish.
MEMORIAL
The Scripturally assigned date for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah’s name and the sacrifice of His provided Lamb, Christ Jesus, is Friday, April 11,1941, after six p.m. Each Christian company should therefore assemble after six p.m. of April 11, and the anointed ones celebrate the Memorial, and their companions, the Jonadabe, be present as observers. If there is no compe-
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, >1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, >150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British _________-........... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7	Beresford Road, Strath&eld, N. S. W., Australia
South African __________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address-the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.	'
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. F., under the Act of March S, 1ST9.
tent person present to deliver a brief discourse just before the partaking of the emblems, the short article “Memorial” os published in the Watchtower issue of March 15, 1939, should be read instead. Since the breaking of the bread and the drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine, to follou the example of Jesus and his apostles, who used real red wine m symbol of his blood. A report of the celebration should be promptly made to the Society, showing total attendance and number of partakers. In preparation for this 1941 celebration the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit
“THEOCRACY”
This new booklet by Judge Rutherford, in 64 pages, offers the clearest and best description yet of the world’s leading issue today, “The Theocracy.” The visible operations of its representatives on earth are plainly set forth, together with the vicious opposition which they are encountering world-wide. A specially fine cover dignifies Theocracy, picturing in full-color illustration the judgment of the nations and the dividing of the people on this supreme (Continued on page 47)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	February 1, 1941	No. 3
DRAMA OF VENGEANCE
PART 5
“What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the earth."—Ps. 25:12,13.
TEHOVAH does not arbitrarily compel any man I to take a specific course. God made man a free J creature with the privilege of choosing to obey the great Creator or to take an opposite course. That rule applied to Adam, the first man. It is the fixed rule of Jehovah, and he never changes. When Moses, the servant of Jehovah, addressed the Israelites on the plains of Moab, shortly before they were entering the land of promise, he delivered Jehovah’s message to them in these words: “I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: that thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him; for he is thy life, and the length of thy days; that thou mayest dwell in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.” (Deut. 30:19, 20) Such is the statement of the divine rule, from which Jehovah never deviates, and everyone who believes God can rely upon that rule.
2 The very opposite is the rule of Satan and all those who become servants of Satan. Since the time of the beginning of the first organization of Babylon till now Satan has put forth religion as his chief means of deceiving and controlling the people. He once getting human creatures under religious control, then man’s free choice is gone. The religious leaders plant dread in the minds of their religious followers and then compel or coerce the followers to obey the religious rulers. It was so with Nimrod, and the same is true with the Papal rule of today. All the arbitrary dictators are religious, and all persons under the dictatorial rule are compelled to obey the whim of the dictator, whether right or wrong. The nearer the government approaches the totalitarian state or condition, the less freedom is enjoyed by the citizen; and when the dictator becomes the absolute ruler, then the freedom of choice is gone completely. Satan’s purpose is to get man under his control and then lead mankind straightway into destruction.
This would be carrying out his challenge to Jehovah God. To this end Satan uses selfish men as leaders in religion and allied organizations that rule and control the people.
’ Jehovah’s purpose is to give men a full and fair opportunity to gain life by choosing the same or to choose the very opposite of life, which is extinction. Knowledge is required to make the choice, and God affords every opportunity for man to gain such knowledge. Jehovah furnishes the opportunity to man to know which is the right way. Satan and his religious agents keep men in the dark as to the true way and subtly lead them in the wrong way. God led the Israelites out of Egypt by the hand of Moses, and in this he was giving them an experimental education that they might freely choose either the way of life or the way of death. With those choosing, God was making prophetic pictures by which he emphasized the divine rule that men are free to choose the way of life or to walk in the way of death. When a man makes an intelligent choice to enter into a covenant with Jehovah God, thereby agreeing to do the will of God, he then enters upon the way of life, and from that time onward he must meet the requirements of God’s law if he would receive the blessings of life everlasting.
‘ In his own due time Jehovah sent his beloved Son to the earth to declare the truth and to make known to man the only means of receiving life everlasting. No man, however, was then compelled to accept Jehovah’s appointed way, but the same was offered to him freely. Mark well the words of the Scripture relating to the coming and sacrifice of Christ Jesus and the purpose thereof: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.”—John 3:16,17.
5 In this text it is stated that man is given the choice of believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, if he would live and not perish. It follows, therefore, if he
35
36
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
does not believe he will perish. Man was already subject to death by reason of inheriting the result of Adam’s violation of God’s law, and now Jehovah was giving man an opportunity to choose to extricate himself from death by taking the side of the Lord Jesus Christ. If man does not choose to take that step, then what? That question is answered in the following scripture: “The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that be-lieveth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.” (John 3:35,36) This is in harmony with the statement of the divine rule announced by Moses, in which Jehovah set before the Israelites life or death and permitted them to choose their way.
8 During the three and one-half years of the earthly ministry of Jesus he began to gather to himself those Israelites who voluntarily came to him and chose to be on his side. Later he opened the way to those Gentiles who took a similar step, that they might voluntarily come to him and live. Thus Jehovah authoritatively speaks through Christ Jesus, but at no time compels anyone to follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus. On the contrary, Jesus says: “Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls.”—Matt. 11: 28, 29.
T To those who seek to know the right way Jesus gives this advice: “Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.” (Matt. 16:24,25) Here he emphasizes that man is a free moral agent, free to exercise his will in choosing the way he should go.
THE THEOCRACY
8 Jesus was born a human, a man, and came into the earth, by the grace of Jehovah God, for the express purpose of qualifying as and to become King of The Theocratic Government. When Pilate inquired of Jesus: “Art thou a king?” Jesus answered, “I am. ... To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” (John 18:37) Here Jesus emphatically declared that he is the King of Jehovah’s government; that Jehovah’s government stands for the truth which Jesus declared; and that all persons who are of the truth choose to put themselves under The Theocratic Government, that is, the kingdom of God under Christ Jesus, and which kingdom will be a complete vindication of Jehovah’s name.
• Jesus first gathered unto himself those persons who voluntarily chose to fully devote themselves, their life, and their all, to God and to his kingdom. The faithful apostles were the first ones who voluntarily became the disciples or followers of Christ Jesus. Since their day others have chosen to follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. No one has been compelled to take that step. Those who have chosen to follow in the footsteps of Jesus, and who continue faithful therein to their covenant, have chosen life, and not the way of death, which life is received as a gracious gift from Jehovah God by and through Christ Jesus. Jesus stated to his disciples and to his followers: ‘1 am the way, and the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father but by me.” (John 14:6) “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.”—Rom. 6: 23.
10	The ones thus chosen are the ones to whom the promise is given that they shall be of the kingdom of heaven and will reign with Christ Jesus in the spirit. The number of such is small when compared with that of the others who may ultimately receive life as perfect human-creatures. To those who have chosen to follow and obey Christ Jesus from the time of the apostles till the second coming of the Lord, and who have continued and do continue faithful unto death, these specific and precious promises are given: “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” (Luke 12: 32) “Fear none of those things which thou ahalt suffer; behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days; be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.”—Rev. 2:10.
11	Those faithful ones, together with Christ Jesus, constitute Jehovah’s royal house. Their choice of the right way was prophetically foretold and pictured by Joshua, a type of Christ, who at God’s command spoke to the Israelites, calling upon them to either choose to serve demons and be religious and die, or choose to serve Almighty God and live: “And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.”—Josh. 24:15.
12	The faithful men from Abel to John the Baptist, mentioned at Hebrews the eleventh chapter, shall constitute the “princes in all the earth”, under The Theocracy. (Ps. 45:16) Each one of them made his choice to serve Jehovah and wait for The Theocracy to be set up; and concerning them it is written: “These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having 3een them afar off, and were
February 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
37
persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country. And truly if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned: but now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly [The Theocratic Government] ; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he hath prepared for them a city [a symbol of an organized government, that is, The Theocracy] —Heb. 11:13-16.
is The “little flock"’, of which the apostle Paul is one, receive the better or higher position than the faithful men named above in Hebrews the 11th chapter, because the “little flock” receive life as spirit creatures, whereas those faithful men mentioned are made princes and live on the earth for ever. “Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou may-est make princes in all the earth.” (Ps. 45:16) “Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.” (Isa. 32:1) Therefore the apostle Paul, under command of the Lord, wrote concerning those faithful men or princes who shall become visible governors the following: “And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets; who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions.”—Heb. 11: 32, 33.
14 Today those who compose the remnant of the “little flock” have been selected after making a choice voluntarily to serve God. The greater number of those who will compose the “little flock” are now in heaven with the Lord, while only a small remnant await their instantaneous change from human organism to a spirit organism, or spirit creatures. (1 Thess. 4:17) “And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Behold, I shew you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.” (1 Cor. 15: 49, 51, 52) All of these chose life, joyfully obeyed the Lord, and receive life everlasting. Their eternity is spent in the spirit with Christ Jesus.
“OTHER SHEEP”
18 But Jehovah God provided long ago that under the King of The Theocracy there should be others who would receive life as human creatures and continue to live for ever on the earth, and who shall fill the earth with a righteous race. Concerning that other flock, symbolized by “sheep” because obedient, Jesus said: “And other sheep I have, which are not
of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”—John 10:16.
18 The “other sheep” of the Lord are those who will compose the “great multitude” and serve before the throne continuously and for ever; as it is written: “After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude,"which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them."—Rev. 7: 9,15.
17 Those “other sheep” of the Lord, the “great multitude”, are the same sheep the Scriptures mention as “his sheep” at Matthew 25:32-46. Such persons are mentioned under the symbol of “sheep” because they love righteousness and hate iniquity, because they serve God and Christ, and receive the blessings of The Theocracy henceforth and forevermore.
18 The Lord Jesus, the great Judge, came to the temple of Jehpvah in 1918 and thereafter began the judgment of the nations. Since the beginning of that period of judgment, and until it ends, everyone who will be of the “great multitude” must choose to serve Jehovah God, the great Theocrat, and his King, Christ Jesus, and be faithful to The Theocracy and. doing so, shall receive life everlasting. Those who take the opposite course are designated as “goats”, or opponents of righteousness, and will be executed under the judgment written and go into destruction. (Matt. 25:45,46) The “great multitude” choose to serve Jehovah and his King of The Theocratic Government. In the great drama of vengeance, set out in the fourth chapter of Judges, and in which Barak played the part representing Christ Jesus the King and the members of “his body”, and in which Deborah played the part picturing Jehovah’s capital organization, the spiritual class is clearly designated, as heretofore seen. Is there a part in that prophetic drama picturing the choice made by the “great multitude”? Even so, as the facts show.
JAEL
18 In this part of the prophetic drama here considered special instruction is given by the Lord to guide those persons of good-will who shall form the “great multitude”. It will be seen that they must choose the way that they will go, even as the faithful spirit class must choose. The first essential is to fear the Lord Jehovah God; and the promise is that He will teach such “the way that he shall choose”, and, choosing right and doing right, “his soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth.”—Ps. 25:12,13.
38
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
20	Jael was the wife of Heber the Kenite, who at all times, as it appears, had been friendly to the Israelites, God’s chosen people. (Judg. 4:17) That branch of the Kenites had in fact been with the Israelites and at the same time had been kind to the Canaanites, so far as the record shows. They were people of good-will and desired to see righteousness done. Jael, the wife of Heber, here plays the part picturing those persons of good-will who will form the “great multitude”. Why is Jael, the woman, here brought into the play, and little or nothing said about her husband, Heber? The organization of righteousness in all prophetic pictures is represented by a woman, even as Deborah played the part picturing Jehovah’s organization, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. The part in this drama played by Jael pictured those persons who join themselves to Jehovah’s organization by voluntarily putting themselves under the organization of Christ, and who find refuge, protection and life in this way.
21	The point in this part of the drama emphasizes the necessity of making a voluntary choice. In the preceding part of the drama it is observed that Jael saw Sisera, the captain of the Canaanite army, approaching her tent. She went out to meet him and invited him to turn in and permitted him to lie down on the floor of her tent to rest there, and she covered him with a mantle or some covering, for his comfort. “And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink; for I am thirsty: and she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him.” —Judg. 4:19.
22	Sisera had seen the power of Jehovah God against him and his army, and he feared that Barak, God’s executioner, would find him and slay him. He was trying to escape and find a place of refuge until he could get back to his chief, who pictures the Devil himself. He had sought seclusion in the tent of a married woman, thinking the Israelites would not expect to find him there. He was like other cowards who do their wickedness and then flee and try to hide behind the skirts of a woman. He was looking after himself. His belly was his chief concern that he now sought. Self-preservation and self-comfort were uppermost in his mind. In this he pictured the religious leaders who claim to serve God, but who in fact serve the Devil, and concerning whom it is written, to wit: “Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.”—Phil. 3:19.
23	Today the clergy require of the people of goodwill, who are friendly to them, to give them relief and refreshment and support and to obey their commands. At the same time those religious oppressors oppose those who serve God and all persons who try to do good and all those who show favors to Jeho
vah’s witnesses. Sisera was of the same mind. He was arrogant, scornful and cruel. The ones he pictured are the same.
24	Jael responded to the command of the mighty captain Sisera and opened and brought to him a bottle of milk and served him. That had the effect of soothing his nerves and satisfying his stomach that he might sleep. But Sisera was not satisfied yet, but must demand something more of the woman of goodwill before he would go to sleep: “Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man doth come and inquire of thee, and say, Is there any man here? that thou shalt say, No.” —Judg. 4: 20.
25	After satisfying his appetite Sisera must go another step and demand a further guarantee for his safety. Sisera now played the part of those who do not hesitate to tell lies, but rather feed fat upon lying. In this he pictured leaders of religious organizations, particularly the Jesuits, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority, and concerning which God caused to be written in the Scriptures showing that they say: “We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.” —Isa. 28:15.
28	Sisera had hid himself the best he could, and he was lying to fortify his security. Likewise today the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, having hid behind a mountain of lies, continue to lie about everything, and particularly about Jehovah’s witnesses, with the further hope of making themselves secure. Sisera’s lie was this: that he demanded Jael to stand in the door and watch and tell a deliberate lie if she was accosted by anyone looking for Sisera. Today the clergy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy induce the so-called “American Legion” and other conscienceless Catholic dupes who love iniquity to commit wicked deeds for them and then lie about it.
27	How aptly that part of the drama fits modern times! Jehovah, by sending his message of truth amongst the people, has exposed the religionists, particularly the Hierarchy, to the gaze of honest people, making them appear in their proper light of wickedness. The announcement of Jehovah’s judgment against them, as written, greatly disturbs their religious equilibrium. The Hierarchy have no answer to the truth of God’s Word, and when the Scriptures are pointed out to them they are so confounded that they must resort to some other means of fighting back. When Jehovah’s witnesses proclaim amongst the people the Scriptures, which tell of God’s purpose to destroy all the wicked at Armageddon and all their works, and then point out the wickedness to which the Hierarchy have resorted and been guilty of, such see that they must resort to further lies. Greatly desiring to escape the scathing rebuke which
February 1, 1941
SEe WATCHTOWER
39
Jehovah is giving them, the members of the Hierarchy demand of the people who are of their congregations, and of others whom they can influence, that the people take the side of the Hierarchy and tell all manner of lies against those who bear witness to the truth of God’s kingdom under Christ. The Hierarchy members do this because they hope to escape exposure and to further continue their racket amongst the people, and to feed themselves fat and rule over the people in an arbitrary and harsh manner ; which they do. The Hierarchy demand that those people of good-will speak in favor of the Hierarchy, regardless of the facts. They therefore seek the cooperation of all persons to tell lies about the people that serve God in spirit and in truth. For a long while the people of good-will have shielded these religious leaders, while at the same time they have observed such religious leaders wickedly persecuting the faithful servants of God. The time comes, however, when all persons must make their choice, either for or against the wicked. God’s judgment by Christ Jesus, the great Judge, nowr in progress, requires every one to make such a choice.
JAEL’S CHOICE
28	The test had now come to Jael, because she was playing a part in this drama picturing what is being fulfilled at the present time. For years she had observed the conduct of the Canaanite king Jabin and his chief officer, Sisera, and others, and noted that it was brutal towards God’s chosen people, the Israelites. She had seen the great wickedness committed by those enemies and was unable to prevent the same. Heber and other Kenite families friendly with him had held aloof from such persecutions and had tried to avoid openly taking sides. Jael had no doubt witnessed the “act of God” in sending the mighty storm and flood against the army of Jabin, which had destroyed that army and caused Sisera the captain to flee and seek refuge in her tent. She knew that Almighty God had taken a hand in this fight and was fighting the battle for his chosen people, the Israelites. She must now make her choice and, by telling lies, thereby further shield the wicked Sisera, or take her positive stand against wickedness and on the side of God’s people. In this she pictured that class of persons who for some years have observed the Hierarchy and their allies oppressing Jehovah’s witnesses and resorting to all manner of lies to cover up their wicked deeds and to hide the Hierarchy from view. A similar condition exists today. The people of good-will see that the Hierarchy are supporting the dictators of Europe who oppress the peoples and commit cold-blooded murder of women, children and other helpless persons. In Europe the Hierarchy are howling for the “corporate state” or dictatorial gov
ernment. In America the Hierarchy take exactly an opposite course, for the purpose of deceiving the people; and while the members of the Hierarchy know that Jehovah’s witnesses and companions are the only people that are proclaiming God’s kingdom as the hope of mankind, the Hierarchy cause these faithful servants of God. to be arrested and persecuted and imprisoned under the charge of sedition, and the gravamen of the charge is that these Jehovah’s witnesses are advocating a government under Jehovah and therefore opposing the government of the United States.
22	Aptly Jael pictured what is now taking place as to choosing. She must choose. But what helped her to make a wise choice!
50	It was fear of Almighty God in her mind, fearing lest she should take her stand against the Almighty, the Righteous One, and the only One who gives life to those who do righteousness. Because she feared God, and not man, and because she put her trust in God, true to His promise he guided her to make the right choice: “What man is he that feareth the Lord V him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth.”—Ps. 25:12,13.
81	Here Jael pictured the “other sheep” of the Lord who will compose the “great multitude”, who fear God, but who have no fear of men, whether those men be of the Hierarchy, the American Legion, or other gangsters. All such persons of good-will have the unfailing promise of Jehovah that he will teach them the right way, that they may choose right. Jael having chosen to throw in her lot with the people of Almighty God and trust Jehovah, from that point on in the drama she must play the part consistently with the course she had taken in her choice. “Then Jael, Heber’s wife, took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground; for he wTas fast asleep, and weary: so he died.”—Judg. 4: 21.
82	The fact that Heber, Jael’s husband, had been friendly with Jabin and Captain Sisera did not at all deter Jael from doing her duty and making a wise choice. This may be presumed; but the real reason why she made a wise choice was that she was playing a part of the drama directed by Jehovah and it must be right in order to foretell the antitype. Jael chose to take her place on the side of Jehovah God, who gives victory to his people over his foes. She was, no doubt, convinced that Jehovah God had delivered the chief enemy of God’s people into her hand. Now to strike for God’s cause and freedom of his people, herself included, from the power of the oppressor, thus foreshadowing the quick and positive decision those of the “great multitude” must make
40
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
by striking against demon-worship! Jael must act quickly before the executioner would arrive, who pictures Christ Jesus, God’s Executioner at Armageddon. If the executioner Barak arrived and found her harboring the enemy of Israel she would be subject to destruction. No doubt the angel of the Lord put all of this into her mind, necessary for her to take the right course. She acted promptly, playing the part which Almighty God had chosen or assigned to her.
88 Before her lay Sisera sleeping soundly, which he now could do because he considered that his religious and military standing would compel Jael to carry out his orders to watch and lie about his presence. A hammer and tent nail or tent pin were lying near by. Such were the only visible weapons at hand. Doubtless the Lord’s angel now put into her mind a conclusion to use that instrument and completely execute Israel’s mortal enemy. She went softly or quietly to the pallet of Sisera, where he lay, with her instrument of execution in hand. She knew the vulnerable spot of his head, and she drove the point of the tent pin clear through his temples and fastened Sisera’s head to the ground. Sisera’s thoughts perished. That was as Ehud did when his dagger, used against King Eglon, was shoved clear into his inwards and ended that oppressor; which pictured the same thing as the perishing of Sisera. So Jael used her hammer and tent pin with effect. In this manner Deborah describes her act: “She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen’s hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera; she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.” (Judg. 5:26) According to Young’s translation of this text, “she hammered Sisera, she smote his head, yea, she smote, and it passed through his" temple.”
34	The hammer and tent nail picture God’s Word of truth, which instrument is used effectively against religion. Thus it is written in the prophecies: “Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces? Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that steal my words every one from his neighbour.” —Jer. 23: 29, 30.
85	Further speaking of the prophets or preachers who falsely claim to represent Jehovah God and who thereby deceive, mislead and oppress the people, God says: “Behold, I am againstthem that prophesy false dreams, saith the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not profit this people at all, saith the Lord.” —Jer. 23:32.
89	Members of the Hierarchy assume great authority and speak to the people; but the Lord says their
end is near. This is further proof that the act of Jael was prophetic and that she was playing a part in the prophetic drama, which must have fulfillment in God’s due time.
8T Lovers of righteousness equipped with the “hammer” of God’s Word, which people of good-will are able to understand, meet the chief minds of religious champions and successfully beat down and kill their religion. They successfully stand up against the doctrines and traditions of religion. Furthermore, they go forth with the hammer-like message of truth, declaring the truth abroad, and that activity is destructive of demonism and the power of demons or demon religion over others. Another and similar picture is made by David in smiting the giant Goliath in the forehead with a stone from his sling; the same as persons of good-will must do in resisting religion and in taking their stand on the side of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus.”
88	“For he was fast asleep, and weary.” That was Sisera’s condition. He fell asleep because he thought he had fixed things safely for himself and now he could enjoy “peace and safety” and take his ease. The fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama is now about to be enacted. The religious advocates, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, have so coached and trained many sincere and trustful people under them, and have so bound them with pledges and oaths against truth of and concerning Jehovah’s Theocracy, that the clergy have concluded that they have all such persons completely on their side and under their control, and that therefore they can proceed with their nefarious work; and they continue to do so in a scornful manner, scorning everything that is not submissive to them. Repeatedly in this day the evidence piles up that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, acting as the chief agent on earth of Satan, have concluded that everything is coming their way and that within a very short time they will be entirely safe and at peace, enjoying themselves to their heart’s content. In Europe the Hierarchy boldly champion the cause of dictators, while in America the same men, relying upon their ability and cunning and influence and control over the people, speak against dictators and claim to be for democracy. Not one of them, however, is heard to advocate God’s kingdom under Christ which is. the great Theocracy.
88	The demons now have such control over the minds of the religionists that such religionists stop at nothing to put Jehovah’s witnesses out. Prominent members of the Hierarchy praise the American Legion in their “summary action” and punishment of Jehovah’s witnesses, and encourage and urge public officers to do the same thing. Soon the religionists will apparently have complete control of the nation, and then, as it is written in the Scriptures, they will
February 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
41
say “Peace and safety !” That will be “the sign” which Jehovah will give, proving that his time has come to take drastic action against all blasphemers and all religious opponents of his Theocracy. In the prophetic drama here considered it is written, at this point, of Sisera, who pictured the religious leaders, that “so he died”. The fulfillment of that part of the prophetic drama is certain to be carried out on the opposers of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government.
JAEL'S RESPONSIBILITY
Concerning Jael’s act against Sisera it is written, in Judges 5:27: “At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down; at her feet he bowed, he fell; where he bowed there he fell down dead.” Was Jael guilty of the crime of murder? From the worldly viewpoint and the rules of war she was not. The chief enemy and oppressor of the people was in her hands, and she acted to protect herself and God’s chosen people. Religious commentators, however, look at her deed entirely from the human viewpoint and, themselves desiring to appear righteous and failing entirely to see the prophetic picture, vigorously accuse Jael of having committed a heinous-erime of cold-blooded, deliberate murder. In this they are entirely wrong.
41	Jael was playing a part in a divine drama. Without any doubt, Jael’s act was approved by Jehovah God; and this is shown by the prophecy of the Most High set out in Deborah’s song: “Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be; blessed shall she be above women in the tent.”—-Judg. 5: 24.
42	This could not be understood and appreciated by one who does not have a vision of God’s purposes. But it can be understood and appreciated when it is kept in mind by the lovers of righteousness that Jael was there playing a part of the prophetic drama foretelling God’s purpose to destroy the enemy in some future time. Acting under the command of the Lord, she could not be guilty of a crime. Her act was entirely prophetic and carried out the purpose of Jehovah. The act of Jael, however, did not at all foretell that in the fulfillment of that part of the prophetic drama Christians should kill any human creature. The issue back there was between demons, the Devil being chief thereof, and Jehovah; that is, between religion or demon-worship and the obedience and worship of Jehovah God. The killing of Sisera pictured the destruction of religion, or demonism. Religious commentators may be excused for their position of harsh criticism against Jael. They do not see and therefore cannot appreciate the drama and its meaning, because they are in Jhe dark. If they had seen that there is a deadly conflict between the worship of devils and the worship of Almighty God, and that religion is on the Devil’s side and against God,
the attitude of many of these commentators would doubtless have been different.
4S	Today religion (and the advocates thereof) has become dead and a dead factor to the people of goodwill toward God. That was the condition of Sisera when the tent nail went through his temple. Such persons, who love righteousness and hate wickedness, are dead against religion now because religion is the product of Satan and leads to death, whereas the worship of Almighty God and Christ Jesus leads to life. Those people of good-will must choose between the Devil and Jehovah, therefore they must abandon religion and turn fully and completely to Christianity, if they would live. They must slay religion by taking a bold and uncompromising stand against religion, and by declaring to others that religion is a deadly enemy. That part in the drama played by Jael shows that all persons of good-will toward God, and who would find refuge and life, must take their uncompromising stand against religion, and hence, figuratively speaking, must slay religion so that from their viewpoint religion becomes completely dead. As.to the punishment of religious practitioners, the individuals, the Lord will attend to that. Human creatures have nothing to do with that. It is no part of man’s work who has devoted himself to the Lord to punish others because of their belief or practicing of religion. Their duty is to tell the truth. The sole duty of those who take the side of The Theocracy is to be servants of Jehovah God and inform the people that religion is a snare that leads them to death; even as God declared to his typical people: “And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them; neither shalt thou serve their gods; /or that will be a snare unto thee." (Deut. 7:16) “And they served their idols; which were a snare unto them.”—Ps. 106: 36.
44	In the drama Jael had to immediately choose the Devil religion, represented by Sisera, or go along with Jehovah’s chosen people to whom Jehovah had given the victory in the battle just fought. So now at this day, those persons pictured by Jael, that is, the people of good-will toward Jehovah, must quickly choose to take their stand firmly on the side of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. The crucial hour is here! Therefore to all persons comes the message this day: “Choose you this day whom ye will serve”; choose Jehovah God and his government, or Satan and his wickedness. There is no middle ground.—Josh. 24:15.
45	The woman Jael fitly pictured the organization of persons who choose to serve Jehovah God and his King, which is formed into an organization of the “great multitude”. They are the “other sheep” of the Lord Jesus Christ, gathered unto him, and who, ac
42
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
cording to his own words, are made a part of his fold. (John 10:16) Such will compose the earthly part of the Lord’s organization who serve him before his throne. They are not of the capital organization, however, but under it. Christ Jesus is the Lord and hence the Head over all of God’s organization. Such people of good-will flee to the Lord and put themselves under his capital organization until the end of Armageddon. Thereafter the “great multitude”, together with the faithful prophets named at Hebrews eleven, become the earthly part of the Lord’s organization. Such will be an organized body that will carry out on earth the will and commandments of the Lord. Jael fitly pictured such.
46	The fact that Jael had the approval of Jehovah God in what she did should be sufficient to satisfy every sincere person that she was not a criminal, but that she was the servant of Almighty God, playing a part in the prophetic drama, the meaning of which is now being revealed for the aid, comfort and hope of those who are under the test of standing firmly for Jehovah and his Theocracy. It is written in the prophecy concerning her: “Blessed shall she be above women in the tent.” The “great multitude’’ and the “princes” will be an organization that is blessed above all people on the earth, and the “great multitude” alone will be more blessed than others who shall get life. They together with the faithful prophets and others will carry out the purposes of Jehovah. The “great multitude”, as the Scriptures show, will fulfill the divine mandate to “multiply and fill the earth”. (Gen. 1:28; 9:1) That will be the most blessed privilege, to be used by the Lord to carry out his purpose which he long ago announced.
47	Jehovah’s way is perfect. (Ps. 18: 30) “The Lord is righteous in all his ways.” (Ps. 145:17) “The meek will he teach his way.” (Ps. 25: 9) The man who worships God in spirit and in truth, God ‘shall teach him the way he shall choose’. “The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will shew them his covenant.” (Ps. 25:14) But none of the practitioners of religion, because they are wicked, shall understand. (Dan. 12:10) These scriptures make clear the reason why the practitioners of religion cannot see and understand the purpose of Jehovah. God reveals a vision of his purpose only to those who unconditionally devote themselves to him and who avoid his enemies. Mark, then, how he has led and instructed his “other sheep” during the past few years and how the Lord is now feeding them.
48	In August 1,1932, issue of The Watchtower, and in the Vindication books published that year, Jehovah revealed to his people that King Jehu, who killed the Baal religionists in Israel, pictured Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s Executioner at Armageddon, and also that Jonadab the Rechabite, whose heart was with Jehu
and against demon-worship or religion, there pictured the people of good-will who take their stand against demon or religious worship, and who will form the “great multitude”. Since the year 1936 the facts clearly show that great numbers of persons of good-will have forsaken religion and taken their stand on the side of God and Christ. It was in that year that God revealed to his people that all religion is a deceptive snare set by the Devil, in which many unsuspecting and credulous persons are caught. As the people of good-will have come to know the true description and purpose of religion, and that it is a deadly foe to Jehovah’s Theocracy under Christ, they have abandoned religion and put it to death, and have taken their stand unequivocally on the side of Jehovah and Christ. Thus it is seen that Jael played an important part in that prophetic drama, and which shows that every person today who would find refuge and safety and life must put himself on the side of Jehovah and his great Theocratic King, Christ Jesus. It is the kingdom for which Christ Jesus commanded all his servants to pray. (Matt. 6:10) Instead of praying for peace among the warring, religious nations today, as the president requests, all Christians should pray for the Kingdom as Christ Jesus instructed and that God’s will be done on earth as in heaven. Manifestly the universal prayers of all religionists offered for universal peace amongst the warring factions are not addressed to Jehovah, the Almighty God, but are addressed to the “god of this world”, that is, Satan, the Devil. At their prayers he laughs in scorn and goes on in his deeds of wickedness, and his blind dupes follow his lead.
48	“And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest. And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail was in his temples.” (Judg. 4:22) At this point Barak pictured Christ Jesus as Jehovah’s Executioner at Armageddon. The Jael class the Lord, the Executioner, finds marked in their foreheads, and these he spares at Armageddon. The opponents of The Theocracy, who have refused the mark of intelligence when offered, the Executioner slays. (See Ezekiel 9:1-6.) As Barak pursued Sisera, picturing the chief representative of the Devil on earth, so the Lord begins his destructive work with the religionists, and this is pictured by Barak pursuing Sisera.
50	“Jael came out to meet” Barak. That showed her faith in Jehovah’s servant, picturing the faith of the “other sheep” of the Lord when they go out to meet the Lord and take their stand on his side. These people of good-will go out with gladness and meet the Lord and manifest their faith in him and show that they are in favor of The Theocracy. They know that
February 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
43
Christ Jesus is out to pursue religion and to destroy it, and at heart they are right with him. To Barak Jael said: “Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest.” This is like the report of the man clothed with linen, with the writer’s inkhorn by his side, who went into the temple and reported to the Lord: “I have done as thou hast commanded me.” (Ezek. 9:11) These words of Jael were proof to Barak that Jael was fully on the side of the Israelites; and thus was pictured that those persons of good-will, the “other sheep” of the Lord, have taken their stand on the side with Christ Jesus, and that they are dead against religion and all forms of demon-worship.
51	Barak found Sisera dead in Jael’s tent. But he did not resent her action or claim the glory for himself. He was pleased with what Jael had done. In fulfillment of this part of the drama the Lord Jesus shows his pleasure and approval of those who take their stand on his side and who put to death religion so far as their hearts are concerned. The Lord Jesus begins the battle of Armageddon, and there religion meets its final end. He looks to see if the people of good-will are counted worthy to survive Armageddon ; and if they have fled from religion and killed it, so far as they are concerned, and have taken their firm stand on the side of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government, they may receive complete protection. Therefore religion has no power over those who will be of the “great multitude”.
52	“So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the children of Israel.” (Judg. 4: 23) Mark this: that the divine record gives all the glory and honor and praise to Jehovah for that deadly war in that battle where Barak and Deborah served. Likewise at the battle of Armageddon no follower of Christ Jesus on the earth will use physical force against any earthly government or organization and no Christian will have claim to or receive any honor and glory for the destruction of wicked rule. Christ Jesus, the Executioner of Jehovah’s purpose, together with his invisible army, will do the slaying, and therefore the Scriptures declare that God fights against all his enemies and that all his enemies “shall lick the dust”, that is, shall suffer destruction.
53	“And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed [(margin) going, went, and was hard] against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.” (Judg. 4:24) They were hard on Jabin, because they destroyed Jabin and his army. This shows that after the visible part of Satan’s organization is destroyed at Armageddon there will still be a work which the Lord will do in destroying the host of wicked demons, the commander of which is Gog, and then will follow the annihilation of the Devil himself. Those wicked
ones the Lord Jesus Christ will completely destroy. (Heb. 2:14) Thus will end wickedness on the earth for ever, and never again shall they spring up. (Nahum 1: 9) Jehovah’s righteous government shall prevail forever, and blessed will be those who have the favors of that government.
54	Why these perilous days ? Why is religion the chief instrument employed by the Devil to make war upon those who faithfully serve Jehovah God? Why are so many -wicked deeds committed by religionists today, against God’s servants? The Scriptures give plain answer. Long ago the Devil coveted the praise that creatures were giving to Jehovah God. (Jer. 51:13) The Devil set about to oppose Almighty God and to gain for himself that praise; and so it is recorded that the Devil said: “I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: . . . I will be like the Most High.” (Isa. 14:13,14) To accomplish that wicked and covetous purpose the Devil must gain support of creatures and receive their worship. That, being contrary to God’s will, was and is religion, because religion is doing anything contrary to God’s will. Satan induced many angels to follow him. Later he turned all the world, save only a few, into wickedness. Jehovah God, by the flood, wiped out those wicked ones on earth. Then the Devil organized religion with Nimrod as his visible representative, to receive worship and further religion. Since then religion has been constantly used by the Devil to deceive men, turn them away from God, turn them into wickedness, and cause them to worship anything except God and to commit divers wicked deeds. As further proof that worship is what the Devil desires he said to Jesus: ‘I will give thee all the kingdoms [nations] of the earth if thou wilt fall down and worship me.’ (Matt. 4: 8, 9) Jesus refused that offer, and in hatred the Devil brought about the death of the Lord Jesus, and that he accomplished by using religion and his religious agents.
” In these days of supposed enlightenment, why are Jehovah’s witnesses so cruelly persecuted by those who are leaders in religion ? The reason is obvious. All persons who are wholly devoted to Jehovah God and Christ worship God in truth and in spirit, and for that reason the Devil hates them. The Devil knowing that the day of final reckoning is here, he brings every possible woe upon those who expose his chief weapon, religion, *and religious practitioners. (Rev. 12:12,17) Satan and his legion of demons control the minds of religionists, and therefore wickedness grows up and spreads over the earth like grass and all the lawless ones flourish. These do deeds against God’s servants, wholly disregarding the law of God and the law of man. The Devil is the chief one of the conspirators who causes these wicked deeds to be committed.
44
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
’’Why does Jehovah God permit the Devil to so persecute his true servants now! The answer from the Scriptures is this: To afford an opportunity to Christians to prove their faithfulness and integrity toward God and Christ; and to bring about a separation of the nations, that is, the “goats”, or wicked ones, from the Lord’s “other sheep”, who love righteousness and desire to see God’s .will done on the earth.
” Knowing the end from the beginning, Jehovah God caused creatures long centuries ago to enact prophetic dramas foretelling the course the wicked would take and what would be their end, and how God would deal with them, and how he will avenge his people in the end. Chiefly, such prophetic dramas were recorded and are now made understandable by those who love God and his, kingdom that their faith might now be made strong, that they might receive comfort and increase their hope, and that they might remain immovable and on the side of God and prove that Satan’s challenge to Jehovah was false and extremely wicked. In this way the faithful have the opportunity of participating in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. They are thereby witnesses to declare the name and kingdom of Jehovah and by that means to enlighten the people of good-will that they may see and understand and choose the way to life.— Ps. 25:12,13.
88 The drama of vengeance is of great encouragement and comfort to the remnant and their companions now. Armageddon, the final settlement of accounts between God and the Devil, is about to tales
place. Will God avenge his faithful people then! Jesus answers: “I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.” (Luke 18:8) Only the remnant and the Lord’s “other sheep” will believe and have faith in these promises.
” When will Jehovah put an end to wickedness in the earth! The Scriptures answer that at the time ‘when the wicked spring up like grass and the lawless flourish’. That is now, because never was there so much wickedness on earth; and that means that Armageddon is very near. (Ps. 92: 7, 8) And what will Jehovah God do to square the account for the wicked deeds the religionists have committed against those who love him! He will render vengeance to his adversaries and will be merciful to his people and deliver them.—Deut. 32:43.
60 Today religionists are committing innumerable wicked deeds against Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions. Such they could not do without the permission of Jehovah. God permits such only for a season, and during that season such persons of goodwill, those who love righteousness and hate wickedness, seeing their way clear to escape from religion, are led by the Lord to see and choose the way of life. It is therefore a great privilege to suffer for righteousness’ sake. That suffering will be for only a short season. God will soon fight for his faithful people. His drama of vengeance is now about to be fulfilled in completeness. All of God’s true people will now remain calm and firmly stand for The Theocracy. Deliverance is near! Next the victory song!
OBEDIENCE TO
THE supreme power is Jehovah God, the great Theo-crat. The “higher powers” are Christ Jesus and Jehovah. The theocratic arrangement concerning the true church proceeds from Jehovah and by Christ. All in the church who are pleasing to Jehovah and to Christ Jesus must be willingly submissive or obedient to that divine and theocratic arrangement. There is no exception to this rule. “Let every person be submissive to the superior authorities.” (Rom. 13:1, Emphatic Diaglott) There is no conflict, of course, between the higher authority or power and the supreme power, because Christ and God are always exactly in harmony. (John 10:30) The twelve apostles of Christ may be embraced in the “superior authorities”, because they are superior to all others in the church, aside from Christ and Jehovah. The scripture at Romans 13:1 has long been applied by religionists to the worldly governments of this earth and to the powers thereof. It is manifest, however, that no such thought was in the apostle Paul’s mind when he wrote the words.
“Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.” (Rom. 13:1,2, Auth.
HIGHER POWERS
Ver.) Here “damnation” is translated from the Greek word krima and means “judgment”, and krima is so rendered in the Revised Version Bible; it is rendered “punishment” in the Emphatic Diaglott. In the foregoing text the arrangement or “ordinance” of God does not have reference to the ordinance or arrangement of worldly political powers of the nations. It is true that God has been neutral and not interfered with the nations of earth in their making of laws and enforcing them, but the responsibility for their so doing is not upon Jehovah. He has permitted it in that he has not prohibited it. Romans 13:2 speaks of God’s “ordinance”; therefore we must understand that only for such ordinance Jehovah assumes a responsibility.
In Paul’s day God was not judging the world, because Paul himself wrote that “God . . . hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness” (when unrighteous governments will not exist), and that such judgment would be by Christ Jesus. (Acts 17:31; Rev. 20:4) Hence “judgment” as referred to by Paul at Romans 13: 2 must apply to the church, and that judgment must be by the power which God has ordained shall judge the church. “For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what
February 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
45
shall the end be of them that obey nqt the gospel of God?” (1 Pet. 4:17) Note Paul’s words to the Christians at Galatia : “I have confidence m you through the Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded: but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment [Zcrtma], whosoever he be.”— Gal. 5: 10.
If the “judgment” mentioned at Romans 13:2 is to be rendered and enforced by the powers of the governments of this world, then such judgment must be rendered and enforced by some man as the judge; and that is contrary to the Word of God, regardless of who the man is. No man in the church or outside of the church is authorized to judge one who is in the church. “Therefore thou art inexcusable, 0 man, whosoever thou' art that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things. And thinkest thou this, 0 man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment [Zcnnia] of God?” (Rom. 2:1,3) Therefore we must conclude that, at Romans 13:2, the “judgment” is the judgment for which the Lord has arranged in his own theocratic organization and by the Head of that organization or by those whom the Lord has appointed to do so.
The substance of Paul’s statement at Romans 13:2 is this: That whosoever in the church resists the arrangement which God has made for the governing of his church is resisting God, and therefore shall receive punishment from God through Christ Jesus for so doing. Whether or not the worldly powers inflict punishment upon evil-doers often depends upon how much influence the one charged with the crime has with the one who does the judging. In God’s judgment there is no partiality. The text says, “Whosoever therefore resisteth,” and hence applies to every one, without any exception. This alone would confine the judgment to God’s theocratic organization by the authorities in God’s organization constituted to do judging.
Romans 13:3 continues: “For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same.” Who are the rulers here mentioned? The word “ruler” is translated from the Greek archoon, and is also translated “prince”. Satan is the chief ruler or the prince of this world. (John 12:31; 14:30) If the word “rulers” used by Paul at Romans 13 : 3 does not apply to the arrangement in the church, then the word must apply to Satan and his organization. Is Shtan, the prince of evil, or is any part of his organization a terror to evil workers m the church? Most assuredly not. If a man in the church does that which is evil and therefore against God’s organization, that is the very thing that Satan, the prince of this world, would have him do. Did not the rulers of the worldly Gentile powers induce members of the early church to do evil by joining alliance with the Devil’s organization? Instead of being punished by the Devil’s organization or worldly powers for so doing, they’were commended and exalted for so doing.
Furthermore, can it be said that the rulers of the present governments of earth “are not a terror to good works”? Fully consecrated witnesses of Jehovah God go about the country doing good by preaching the good news concerning God and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and
the rulers of the worldly powers arrest, fine and imprison them for so doing good. Do faithful full-time publishers or pioneers, and company publishers, who go from door to door and from house to house and who thus do good by carrying the message of the Kingdom to the people of the earth, receive “praise” from the princes or rulers of this world’ No one ever heard of their receiving praise for so doing.
Also, when Paul says, “Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power?” can it be said that he meant that Jehovah’s witnesses are to fear the princes of this world and the rulers in the Devil’s organization? If that be true, then every one would refrain from being a witness to the glory of God. That is exactly what the Devil would want them to do As an illustration: In the far-away country of Liberia, Africa, one of God’s children who is the Society’s representative began to preach the gospel by word of mouth and by placing in the hands of the people there the printed books containing the gospel. The government informed him that he must desist, that he must circulate no books or pamphlets or literature, or give any public addresses, until such time as the ruling powers should grant a permit therefor. He went on anyway and placed in the hands of the people a great number of books. Had he obeyed the worldly powers, he would not have preached the gospel. He obeyed the Lord and was protected. He did good, but he received no praise from the worldly governors.
It is therefore apparent that Paul’s words mean this ‘You who are anointed with the spirit and thus commissioned of God to preach should fear the power (Christ the Judge); the rulers (Christ and those who act under II is direction) are not terrors to good works, but to evil, and if you do that which is good you will receive praise of that power (Christ, and those of his organization clothed with authority to praise).' One may ask: Are we to expect praise of the powers in the church for doing good? In answer to that question, and in proof that the apostles had authority to praise the doers of good and did praise them, and that the doers of good shall have praise, note 1 Corinthians 4 : 5 “Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.” 2 Corinthians 8:18: “And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the gospel throughout all the churches.” 1 Corinthians 11:2: “Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances, as I delivered them to you."
When the members of the church come together for any purpose other than to do good, they do not receive praise; as the apostle stated: “Now in this that I declare unto you, I praise you not, that ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse.” (1 Cor. 11:17) It is therefore manifest from the scriptures above cited that the evil-doers receive judgment by God's arrangement, and that those who do good receive praise by the same arrangement.
Romans 13:4 continues: f‘For he [the power] is the minister of God [(Diaglott; Rotherham) he is God’s servant] to thee for good. But If thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he [the power] beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God [God’s servant], a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil.” This
46
THE WATCHTOWER
Beooklyn, N.Y.
text could have no reference to the power that the worldly powers execute. Surely God has not committed to Satan or anyone in Satan’s organization the power to act as God’s servant or minister for good in the church. Nor has he appointed any of that same wicked organization to act as avenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil in the church. What, then, do Paul’s words here mean?
The answer is, that the authority and order in the church is arranged by the Lord for good to those who are of the church, and for the judgment of those who do evil. (See 2 Corinthians 10:8; 13:10.) What is evil in the church is illustrated by the following scriptures: “But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; the lord of that servant . . . shall cut him asunder.” (Matt. 24: 4851) “Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil; the Lord reward him according to his works.” (2 Tim. 4:14) “For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: let him eschew evil, and do good, let him seek peace, and ensue it.”—1 Pet. 3:10,11.
The worldly powers use the sword to kill. If Romans 13: 4 is applied to them, then it means that such are clothed with power and authority over the Lord’s people to literally kill those who are in -the church, and that such are avengers of God. Jesus was charged with the evil of sedition, was unjustly judged and was killed. In so doing surely the Devil was not acting as God’s avenger there. Hence Paul’s words mean that the “sword” represents the power which God uses to punish those in the church who do evil, and who therefore do contrary to His law by which the church is governed. The creature (or creatures) whom God uses to exercise such power is the avenger to execute wrath upon the evil-doers. This does not mean that every individual in the church may punish at will one or many who he thinks may be doing evil. The Scriptures expressly prohibit a member of the church from so doing. (1 Thess. 4:6) The Lord did commit to others the power to judge and to execute judgment in certain cases. This power he committed to his apostles because they were his special representatives. Note 1 Corinthians 5:1-5; Acts 5:1-11 and 8:20-22. Christ Jesus and the apostles are the rulers in the church, and were already set at the time Paul wrote these words. None of these are a terror to good works; but that power which the Lord uses is a terror to evil works and bears not God’s punishing instrument (“sword”) in vain.
Romans 13:5 continues: “Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.” God has not called his people to set them aside to be victims of his wrath. He called them to be his faithful witnesses and to receive salvation through Christ Jesus. (1 Thess. 5:9) But God’s wrath is visited upon those who are disobedient and who do evil. (Eph. 5: 5, 6) Let no one for a moment believe that God has appointed so-called “spiritual policemen” to avenge evil-doers in the church. Any punishment that results from anger or personal resentment is entirely wrong.—See Colossians 3:8; Matthew 5: 22.
Paul’s statement is that if one in the church does evil he shall suffer, and he should refrain from evil for that
reason; but he should also for conscience’ sake refrain from evil or wrongdoing in the church. If he refrains from evil merely in order that he may escape punishment, his motive is not proper and unselfish. If he refrains from evil because he knows that it is right so to do, and pleasing to God for him to refrain from evil, then he does so because he loves God, and his motive is right and pure and he has a clear conscience. “Now the end of the commandment is love, from a pure heart, and a good conscience, and an undissembled faith.”—1 Tim. 1: 5, Diaglott.
Romans 13: 6 continues: “For this cause pay ye tribute also; for they are God’s ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.” The fact that the apostle speaks of paying taxes has been considered a strong argument and has been used to maintain that the entire chapter has reference to the worldly powers. That argument is unsound, and the conclusion is not warranted. For the purpose of comparison note the rendering of this text by different translators: “For because of this are ye paying tribute also.” (Rotherham) “For the same reason as you pay taxes.” (Moffatt) “Why, this is really the reason you pay taxes also.” (Weymouth) “For on this account also you pay taxes.”—Diaglott.
The apostle does not command the payment of taxes or customs to anybody in the church. The epistle was addressed to those Christians who had once been Jews. (See Romans 7:1.) They were familiar with the law of the Jews requiring the payment of a poll tax and other taxes imposed for the support of Israel’s government. (Ex. 30:11,13) They would understand and did understand that the payment of taxes was a proper thing to do. When Paul wrote to them those Christians were residing in Rome and were paying taxes to the Roman government because not wishing to incur the wrath of Rome, and also for the sake of their own conscience, knowing that they were doing right. ‘For this cause,’ says the apostle, ‘you pay taxes; and moved by the same good reason you should render your dues to Jehovah.’ The words of Romans 13: 6, ‘For this cause you pay taxes also,’ appear to be a parenthetical statement and put in merely to strengthen the force of the apostle’s argument. For what cause do you pay taxes? For conscience’ sake; for the reason that it is right to pay for what service you receive.
Then reverting back to the rulers in the church he says: “For they are God’s ministers [servants; not Satan’s servants, which they would be if the officials of earthly governments were meant].” Who, then, are God’s “ministers” (leitourgoi—Greek) ? The same Greek word is translated minister (ministers) at Hebrews 1:7; 8:1, 2, 6 ; 9: 21; 10:11; Acts 13:2; Romans 15:16; Philippians 2:17, 25; which texts prove beyond all doubt that they are God’s anointed ministers ministering in and for the church. Then adds the apostle: ‘These ministers of God are attending upon this very thing.’ Thereby he clearly means that the office of such ministers is to maintain order and authority in the church. His argument is, then, that there might be order and peace, and for conscience’ sake the laws of the land should be obeyed where they do not conflict with God’s law.
Remans 13:7 continues: “Render therefore to all [whether inside the church or outside thereof] their dues:
February 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
47
tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.” The words “tribute” and “custom” both refer to a commercial or financial obligation which the government may lay upon those who reside thereunder to meet the governmental expenses. Jesus and his disciples paid such tax. In reply to the question as to whether or not it was proper to pay taxes to the Roman government Jesus said: “Render therefore unto Cassar the things which are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s.”—Matt. 22:18-21.
But what does the apostle mean when he says, at Romans 13:7: “Fear to whom fear” is due? Does he mean that it is the will of God that the Christian is to stand in awe or fear of the appointed servants of the church? Religious clergy, “elective elders,” and others of congregations have used this scripture as an authority for demanding that reverence and fear be given to them by the congregation. Such application of the text is wrong. Whom, then, do the members of the church properly fear? Ephesians 5:21 answers: “Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.” 1 Peter 2:17,18: “Be respectful to all; love the brotherhood ; fear God; honor the King. Let household servants be subject with all fear to their masters; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the perverse.” (Diaglott) 1 Peter 3:14,15: “But even if you suffer on account of righteousness, you are blessed. And fear not with their fear, nor be alarmed; but sanctify the anointed Lord in your hearts, and be always prepared with a defense for every one demanding an account of the hope that is in you; but with meekness and fear.” (Diaglott) “Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.”—Isa. 8:13.
The Christian is not to fear man. “The fear of man bringeth a snare; but whoso putteth his trust in Jehovah shall be safe.” (Prov. 29: 25, A tn. Rev. Ver.) It is entirely Scriptural, and therefore right, for Christians to show respect for one another in the church, because the Lord has set the members there. Those who follow a selfish course and who “despise government" the Lord will punish. (2 Pet. 2:10; Jude 8) “All men should honour the Son [Christ], even as they honour the Father [the Supreme Power].”— John 5 : 22, 23.
The apostle continues (Rom. 13:9): “For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt
(Continued from page 34) issue and their ultimate destiny. Get your copy now, on a contribution of 5c, and study it preparatory to its general distribution shortly as elsewhere announced.
1*41 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
In the face of an almost impossible year the publication of the 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses represents an accomplishment made possible only by Jehovah’s power. Confirmation of this you will find when you read the comprehensive report, as written by the Society’s president, covering the world-wide activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, under continuous ehemy fire, during the past service year. Besides this amazing report the Yearbook also offers the president’s comment on the 1941 yeartext and a text with a Watchtower comment thereon for each day of the new year. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thus enhancing the costs involved; hence a contribution of 50c per copy is stipulated therefor. Organized companies should combine the orders of all individuals therefor and send such through the company servant.
not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shah not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is bnelly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” When the apostle says “For this", the question may properly be asked, For what cause? The answer is, Because of love, thou shalt not commit adultery, kill, steal, bear false witness or covet. The things here mentioned which the Christian is not to do are crimes against the law of God. It is true that in most of the Gentile nations these same things are denounced by the law as wrong. If, however, a Christian would refrain from committing the crimes here mentioned merely because the law of the land would punish and does punish those who commit such crimes, then the Christian’s motive is wrong.
What would induce any person to commit the crime of adultery, murder, theft or perjury? Selfishness, of course; and selfishness is the very opposite of love. If the person loves God and his fellow man he will not commit these wrongs. If he loves his neighbor he will do no injury to his neighbor. It is to satisfy some selfish or wrongful desire that leads men to do these wrongful acts. If a man loves his neighbor as himself he will be unselfish toward his neighbor and therefore will not willfully do any wrong against his neighbor. For this reason the Christian obeys every law of the land that is in harmony with God’s law. He does not obey merely because it is the ]aw of the land, but because to obey is right.
Continues verse 10: “Love worketh no ill to his neighbour; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.” In this verse the apostle could not have been referring to the laws of the Gentiles or so-called “Christian” nations, for the reason that not all of the laws of the nations could be fulfilled by one who is prompted wholly by love. If a nation commands that a man shall not hand to his neighbor, who is sick and suffering, a glass <of wine which would relieve him, love could not fulfill that law. But every law of God is fulfilled by love or complete unselfishness because all the laws of God are right. Every law of every nation of earth that is in harmony with God’s law should be gladly obeyed by the Christian whether he be a citizen of that nation or not. But where the law of the nation or government is contrary to God’s law, then there is no compromise by the Christian: he must obey the law of God. If he does obey the law of God he will do no wrong or injury.
1941 CALENDAR
The 1941 Calendar is exceptionally beautiful and expressive. Under the yeartext, to wit, “Salvation unto our God . . . and unto the Lamb” (Rev. 7:10, A.R.F.), the artist portrays with Scriptural symbolisms and modern details Jehovah’s “strange work” of judgment now fast reaching its climax among all nations The Calendar date pads mark the special testimony periods for 1941, and also give field service suggestions for the intervening months. A contribution of 25c per copy is asked therefor, or $1 00 for five copies mailed to one address. Companies do well to send in combination orders through the local company servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 2: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 5), fl 1-28 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1941.
Week of March 9: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 5), fl 29-60 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1941.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PRESERVATION OF FAITHFUL IN BRITAIN
“I live on the Thames estuary, where air raids and air fights are the order of the day and the night. It has been immeasurably worth while going through these experiences in order to know the inviolable safety Jehovah commissions his angels to wrap us round with when bombs and shells are dropping. ‘The angel of the Lord encampeth about them that fear him.’ ‘I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.’ These and others of his lovely promises he gives us and fulfills for us, and we know it and are steady in our place of safety. It is wonderful to always be in that— wherever we go, it goes. We find the people more ready to listen to the Kingdom message and take the literature. I think most of us go to bed as in normal times, knowing that if the Lord saw an urgent need for us at any time to do something different, the angels would move us to do it. When on the work we often forget a raid is on until the noise gets nearer and louder, and only when shells or worse are overhead do we take cover until it has passed over.”
BELFAST THEOCRATIC CONVENTION, OCT. 26, 27.
“Pavement witnessing was arranged for 2:30 p.m., Saturday, in which 36 publishers took part. This number was made up from Belfast publishers and the pioneers. A service meeting was held at Kingdom Hall at 7:30 p.m., by which time all the pioneers in Ireland were present, and there was a total attendance of 56. Following this the chairman gave extracts from The Messenger. At this riloment the ‘Alert!’ signal was suddenly sounded by the air-raid sirens. This was something new to the witnesses, for only once before had this signal been given in this city, and that was on the night previous. A little excitement was caused, but the conventioners settled down immediately when told not to worry over that, and the meeting went on without a break. Sunday morning the publishers assembled at Carlton Hall, at 9:30. Many of these were for immersion. This meeting was well conducted, and one person who did not come prepared to take this step decided to do so at the service. There were 16 Jonadabs immersed, 10 men and 6 women. Between 8,000 and 10,000 announcement folders had been reserved for actual convention distribution, and so it was necessary for the publishers to concentrate on the advertising work. The total report for the convention was as follows: 58 publishers, 2 books, 32 booklets, 164 hours, 40 magazines, 133 sound attendance. The following companies were represented: Belfast, Ballymena, Coleraine, Londonderry, Cookstown, Portadown, Lisburn and Dublin. At the afternoon meeting 115 brethren were in attendance. The greetings from Judge Rutherford were read to the convention and everyone present enthusiastically supported the suggestion that the following message be sent him: ‘Belfast Theocratic Conventioners send loving greetings. Jehovah directed safe arrival of [convention lecture] records. Most thrilling lecture ever heard. Wonderful reproduction. Public applaud many remarks. Irish brethren stand united with you for Theocratic victory.’ This was telegraphed to Brooklyn immediately following the public lecture. There was seating for 230 people at this lime, but this had to be increased to 250 before 3:30 p.m., and every seat was occupied. The number of strangers present was 133. The majority of these had come as a result of the special letter
to the people of good-will. It is hard to describe the effect that the lecture had upon the public. The favorable comments about England brought instant applause from the public. Reproduction was wonderful and every word came through clearly. The friends also paid close attention to the reading of Judge Rutherford’s lecture ‘The End’, giving serious attention to the important matter presented by him. There were many points that the pioneers wanted discussed, and so it was arranged to hold a pioneer meeting on Monday 28th at Kingdom Hall, at 10: 30 a.m. Every pioneer in Ireland attended this meeting.”
IN CORASAL, BRITISH HONDURAS
“A priest greeted us at the door and told us he came to visit the occupants of the home. Who were we? ‘Jehovah’s witnesses!’ Immediately his color changed, with a big ‘Hoo-oo!’ Then he spoke to my brother, but I proceeded to the inmates to offer the lecture ‘Purgatory’. While I was opening the phonograph the priest re-entered and said I could not go around and enlighten the people in this manner, and to come and speak with him. I replied I was not visiting him, but the home. The master of the home said to me then to come tomorrow and give him the lecture. I left and went to another home. There I was received with pleasure, but I expressed that if their home were ruled by the priest I would not play the lecture. A bolt reply came: ‘I am the master of my home.’ While we were playing, the priest came and made a signal calling the master and spoke to him in secret. The master spoke loudly then, saying that what we are hearing will not interfere with us, and to keep on playing that record. We played the other side of the record, on ‘Resurrection’, and left and went to another home, which the priest could not enter, and played two lectures. On our way home he began to trail us and saying to the people that we are Satan the Devil. We played him a hide-and-seek game, but he continued trailing us Then we went to the police station and reported his actions. We had our meeting staged for that night, but, on reaching home, were informed that the Roman Catholic Legion were prepared to lash US and drive us out of town. We notified the police. Our meeting was held without any disturbance. We had an overwhelming audience When we closed all the people of good-will crowded forward, giving us thanks, also telling us the captain of the Legion was there but was powerless to act, for his companions deceived him, fearing further trouble. The protection of the Lord was marvelous in our eyes, and next morning we found the people awaiting us with much joy and their homes open."
HEARING EARS IN “HOBO PARK” (NEBRASKA)
“When carrying the petition I went to ‘Hobo Park’. Very few refused to sign it. A good witness resulted. Later instructions said we were to make back-calls on all signers. The addresses given were all over the U. S., so back-calling did not sound easy. As the men in the park change rapidly I covered it three times with booklets. I received invitations to make speeches. I picked up my phonograph and played for four hours steady to sixty listeners, going from group to group. Sunday following I did this over again. One group of Indians were good listeners, and asked good questions. Very few in the park refused to listen.”
48
z??
Jr » 2j
■AV-’ *,AV ,

WATCHTOWER
/ Ji


M1
They shall know that I am Jehovah.”
- Ezekiel 35:15.


Vol. LXII Semimonthly
FEBRUARY 15, 1941
CONTENTS
Obedience
Duty of Parents Commandments One God ........
Religion and Christianity . .
Violation ...............
God Forgotten.........
Loyalty .................
Alternative .	..	.
Witnesses ...............
Resurrection .	.	.
Field Experiences .	.
No. 4
.51 52 53
.54 .55
. . . 56 . . 57 .... 60 ... 61
62 .62
... 64
“Ehud’s Sword” Testimony Period ... 50
“Theocracy” . .
"Model Study No. 3” Memorial .....
50
50
.50
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses 63
1941 Calendar “Watchtower” Studies .
63
63
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wiiL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreion, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British...................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian -.................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African _________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may hate The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Kotice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expnes.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N, Y., under the Act of March S, 1875.
“EHUD’S SWORD” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This midwinter period of special activity continues through the entire month of February. The title thereof calls attention to the zeal, energy and fearlessness with which Ehud used his dagger against King Eglon, and which qualities all publishers of The Theocracy must likewise exercise during this Period. February opens up this year’s three-month Watchtower campaign, and hence all publishers now specialize on securing subscriptions for The Watchtower and offering as a premium the book Religion and the new booklet Satisfied, all on a contribution of $1.00. Arrange now for this Testimony, and, if possible, attend the local company service meetings where this campaign is being discussed and organized. Write this office if you need references. To contribute toward making up the general report of the work and results thereof, please turn in your personal report of what you accomplish.
“THEOCRACY”
This new booklet by Judge Rutherford, in 64 pages, offers the clearest and best description yet of the world’s leading issue today, “The Theocracy.” The visible operations of its representatives on earth are plainly set forth, together with the vicious opposition which they are encountering world-wide. A specially fine cover dignifies Theocracy, picturing in full-color illustration the judg
ment of the nations and the dividing of the people on this supreme issue and their ultimate destiny. Get your copy now, on a contribution of 5c, and study it preparatory to its general distribution shortly as elsewhere announced.
“MODEL STUDY NO. 3”
This new booklet, of 32 pages and bound in a durable cover, brings up to date the series of Model Study booklets, as it presents the study outline covering the latest recorded speeches by Judge Rutherford, to wit, “Religion as a World Remedy,” and “The End”. This booklet is very valuable, even if you do not possess the phonograph recordings of the speeches named, and with it anyone should be able to conduct a model study of the Bible in the home or in public. Order several for use of others whom you hope to have study with you. Model Study No. 3 will be sent you postpaid at a contribution of 5c a copy. Company servants should make up combination orders for all in the company wanting copies.
MEMORIAL
The Scripturally assigned date for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah’s name and the sacrifice of His provided Lamb, Christ Jesus, is Friday, April 11, 1941, after six p.m. Each Chris-
(Continued on page 63)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	February 15, 1941	No. 4
OBEDIENCE
'My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee. Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple of thine eye."—Prov. 7:1,2.
JEHOVAH requires of his children full obedience as a condition precedent to receiving everlasting life. By his Word he has emphasized that rule from the time of Adam when in Eden until this very day. Adam failed to obey the commandments of Jehovah God, and the result to him was death. The rules of God never change and are the same toward all. —Mal. 3:6; Acts 10: 34.
2 Life with the right thereto can be had and maintained only by the grace of God. Life everlasting can be had by those only who are obedient unto God. The word “father” means the one from whom life emanates. God is the Father, therefore, of those who gain life everlasting. He is the fountain of life. (Ps. 36:9) He gives or administers life everlasting by and through Jesus Christ, his Executive Officer. “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Rom. 6:23) There is no other possible way of obtaining life. (Acts 4:12) Christ Jesus is the Beloved Son of God, and he says: “I delight to do thy will, 0 my God; yea, thy law is within my heart.” (Ps. 40:8) Because of his full and complete obedience unto his Father under the most trying conditions Jesus was given life immortal, the highest place in the universe next to Jehovah, and the administration of Jehovah’s will: “And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” (Phil. 2:8-11) Because of his complete obedience Christ Jesus is made the Author of eternal salvation to all that obey him. (Heb. 5: 8, 9) It is of the greatest importance to know these facts, if one would live.
’ All of the human kind were born in sin because of the sin committed by Adam, and therefore all of his children inherited death. (Rom. 5:12) God has provided redemption and salvation of men from
death by and through the sacrifice of the man Jesus unto death. God therefore provides the gift of life to all men who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as the Savior and who then covenant to be obedient to the laws of God and hence obedient to Christ Jesus: “For as by one man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.”—Rom. 5:19.
‘ One becomes a child of God when he exercises faith in God and in Christ Jesus as his Savior and then agrees to do the will of God, and when God makes a covenant with that person. The one making the covenant, or who is taken into the covenant with Jehovah God, is then in the way to receive the gift of life. To such Jehovah addresses his words in Proverbs 7:1, 2, as first herein quoted. The general rules announced in these texts apply to all men who shall ever gain life everlasting.
COVENANT PEOPLE
’ Jehovah God chose the Israelites as a “people for his name”. In Egypt he made a covenant with that people and confirmed that covenant at Mount Sinai. The people of that nation, through Moses as their mediator, agreed to do whatsoever God commanded them, and thus they voluntarily entered into the covenant. (Ex. 19: 5, 8) As a nation the Israelites broke their covenant, and were cast away from God’s favor, but there were some individuals who remained faithful unto the covenant. All those who became religionists were cast away. Those who obeyed God’s law, as Christ Jesus always does, were preserved unto life.
6 When the man Jesus became thirty years of age he presented himself to God and submitted to baptism in the Jordan, thus giving outward testimony that he had entered into a covenant with his Father by sacrifice. (Luke 3: 21-23) Jesus there became the head and chief of the antitypical spiritual Israelites. His disciples were Israelites by nature, eleven of whom continued faithful, and were taken into the covenant with Christ Jesus for the kingdom of God. Then in due time God began to take out from amongst the Gentiles, or other nations, a people for his name
51
52
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
who would follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus. (Acts 15:14) Each one thus taken into the covenant must become a footstep follower of Christ Jesus, suffer reproaches like those that came upon Jesus, and be faithful even unto death. Such faithful followers of Christ Jesus are spiritual Israelites, chosen of God to be witnesses unto his name and his kingdom. Concerning them it is written: “But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light; which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God; which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.” —1 Pet. 2:9,10.
T That which was written in the law and in the prophecies applies specifically to all spiritual Israelites, or Christians who follow Christ Jesus. Upon this point there is not a possibility of doubt, as it is written: “Now all these things happened unto them [natural Israel] for ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that thinketh he stand-eth take heed lest he fall. Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry.” (1 Cor. 10:11,12,14) “For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.”—Rom. 15:4.
8 Such true followers of Christ Jesus are begotten or accepted by Jehovah and acknowledged by him as his children or sons, and these must be obedient to Jehovah God their Father if they would receive life everlasting. These became new creatures in Christ Jesus, who is the Head of the new creation or spiritual Israelites: “Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.” (2 Cor. 5:17; Eph. 1: 22) Having received the spirit of God, these are led by his spirit and are his sons: “For as. many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.”—Rom. 8:14-16.
’As children of God they must be obedient to his commandments; otherwise they could not live. To such Jehovah God says: “My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments.” (Prov. 3:1) “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.” (Rev. 2:,10, Am. Rev. Ver.) Such are and must be witnesses to Jehovah and bear testimony to his name and to his kingdom, and hence they are called by the Lord Jehovah “My witnesses”. —Isa. 43:10-12.
10 The Lord announces his purpose to provide a “great multitude” with the opportunity of life everlasting on earth. (Rev. 7: 9-17) All who compose the “great multitude” must agree to do the will of God, and therefore, exercising faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus as their Redeemer, must consecrate themselves to do the will of God, and must then serve him. They must obey the commandments of the Lord. They are commanded to “seek righteousness” and “seek meekness” (Zeph. 2: 3), which means that they must endeavor to learn what is God’s will concerning them and then do that which is righteous by obeying the will of God.
DUTY OF PARENTS
IVThe law of Jehovah God announced and given to typical Israel applies with equal force to all men who gain life everlasting. To all such as have agreed to do the will of God he says: “See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil.” (Deut. 30:15) To his covenant people Jehovah says: “One law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you.” (Num. 15: 1G) “Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for one of your own country; for I am the Lord your God.”—Lev. 24: 22.
12 The “stranger” amongst the typical Israelites pictured those who are now on earth who covenant to do the will of God and who, being faithful, shall form the “great multitude”. Those who form the “great multitude” Jesus designates as his “other sheep”, and when these are gathered unto the Lord and given life all shall be of one fold under Christ the great Shepherd. (John 10:16) God’s announced purpose is to grant life everlasting to those only who believe on him and on the Lord Jesus Christ and render themselves in obedience. This rule applies to both the spiritual Israelites and those of the “great multitude”, that is, to all who shall live: “The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”—John 3:35,36.
12 Marriage and child-bearing are God’s arrangement for humankind. All parents who have agreed to do the will of God, and who have children, are bound by the commandments of Almighty God to teach their children the Word of God and to instruct them in the way of righteousness. To his consecrated or covenant people Jehovah says: “Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; but teach them thy sons, and thy sons’ sons.” (Deut. 4:9) “And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart; and thou shalt teach them
February 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
53
diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walk-est by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.” (Deut. 6:6,7) “Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the Lord thy God.”—Deut. 12: 28.
14 Addressing himself to his people who are in a covenant to do his will, Jehovah God gives this specific commandment: “And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do, all the words of this law.”—Deut. 32:46.
16 It cannot properly be said that these laws of God apply only to the ancient Israelites. Exactly the contrary is expressed in God’s Word. His law is the same toward all who seek to live. Children seek knowledge and must be taught, and it is the desire of all sane persons, both adults and children, to receive life everlasting. Obligation is laid by the Lord upon consecrated parents to see to it that their children are instructed in the law of God. They cannot disregard this obligation and expect God’s favor. It is also the duty of the parents to have their children in subjection and to carefully guide them in the way of righteousness. Upon this point note these words of the Scriptures addressed to the consecrated parents and to their children: “Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right. Honour thy father and mother, which is the first commandment with promise, that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth. And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.”—Eph. 6:1-4.
16 Parents are the ones responsible for bringing children into the world, and it is their responsibility to properly instruct those childrep. The custom amongst the people of all nations of leaving the instruction of children to schools, presided over by some person as a teacher, is man’s way, but it is not God’s way. Parents cannot escape their obligation laid upon them by the Lord by leaving the instruction of their children to others. In matters pertaining to worldly affairs it seems that instruction of children by a competent teacher in the schools is proper; but, as to the Word of God, it is the first and bounden duty of consecrated parents to teach their children. That instruction must be given in the manner God has commanded. The consecrated parents must bring up their children “in the nurture ... of the Lord”; which means as God has commanded. They must bring them up in the “admonition of the Lord”; which means that advice, counsel and instruction must be given them in righteousness, as this instruction is set forth
in the Word of God, the Bible. This is a sacred duty that no one has any right to interfere with. It is a duty that the parents have no right to ignore.
” Life for the children is involved, and hence it is of great importance to the child that it be taught in the right way, that is, God’s way. Otherwise it can never obtain life everlasting. Concerning this it is written in God’s Word: “Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it.”—Prov. 22: 6.
18 The foundation of the child’s education must be laid in the Word of God, because that is the only way that leads to life everlasting. By nature a child’s mind seeks information or knowledge. Only those persons who seek the way to life as the Lord has pointed out in his Word shall ever find it. This was emphasized by the Lord Jesus. Little children were being brought to Jesus by their parents that they might learn of him, and the religious-minded tried to prevent the children from being brought to Jesus: “But when Jesus saw it, he was moved with indignation, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me; forbid them not; for to such be-longeth the kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall in no wise enter therein. And he took them in his arms, and blessed them, laying his hands upon them.” (Mark 10:14-16, Am. Rev. Ver.) By these words the Lord clearly meant that only those persons who seek knowledge from him, as the little children were seeking, can find the way of life; that the kingdom of God is for those and those only who seek the knowledge of truth found in God’s Word and then obey by doing what the Lord commands. It would be impossible to make it more emphatic concerning the obligation to teach the children, from their youth up, than what God has put in his Word.
COMMANDMENTS
18 The obligation upon the parents begins to be specially binding only after they have made a covenant to do the will of God and have been taken into a covenant with Jehovah God. Parents who are in a covenant to do the will of God must then inform themselves of his will or commandment toward themselves and toward their children, and then must obey those commandments and teach the same to their children and admonish their children to obey. The state or nation, through its rules of education, has no right whatsoever to limit, interfere with, or hinder the instruction by parents of their children in the Word of God. By one inquiring, how one might obtain eternal life by obeying God’s commandments the question was propounded to Jesus: “Which is the great commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
54	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.”—Matt. 22: 36-40.
10	To love God means that the person must be wholly and unselfishly devoted to Almighty God, seeking always to know and to do the will of God. This is well defined by the words of Jesus addressed to Jehovah God: T delight to do thy will, 0 my God; thy law is written in my heart.’ (Ps. 40:8; Heb. 10:7) “Neighbour,” within the meaning of the Scriptures, is one’s fellow creature who is also a believer on Jehovah and Christ, and who has agreed to do the will of God. God’s commandment requires that one Hove his neighbour, even as he loves himself’, that is to say, puts his brother Christian on an exact equality with himself. The only way a person can prove his love for God is by fully and sincerely obeying the commandments of God; as it is written: “If ye love me, keep my commandments.” (John 14:15) The Christian proves his love for God by joyfully obeying God’s commandments. (1 John 5: 3) Where the commandments of men are in conflict with God’s commandment there is but one thing to do, and that is, to obey God first.
ONE GOD
21	There is one God Eternal, The Almighty, whose name is Jehovah. (Ps. 83:18) He is “from everlasting to everlasting”, and from him proceeds everything that is good. (Ps. 90: 2; Jas. 1:17) All the ways of God are perfect. (Deut. 32:4) God’s commandments are perfect, and if a man could at all times deport himself exactly in harmony with God’s law he would never make a mistake: “The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes: the fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.”—Ps. 19: 7-9.
22	Jehovah God is the fountain of life and the Giver of life everlasting to them that obey him. Necessarily it follows that, if man makes some creature or thing a god to which he renders obeisance and obedience, it is written, he could never find or possess life everlasting. By reason of the goodness and loving-kindness of Almighty God this unchangeable commandment is given to all who have hope of life everlasting, to wit :
“Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; thou shalt not bow down thyself to them,
nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.”—Exodus 20: 3-5.
22	The people who resided in Palestine at the time God sent his covenant people, the Israelites, there were worshipers of gods or demons; and in order to safeguard his covenant people from such demonworship God commanded them that they should have nothing to do with other gods, lest they be ensnared by such. Again God emphasized this law or commandment to his covenant people by saying to them : “Neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.” (Deut. 7:16) His commandment further emphasized his instruction that his covenant people must have nothing to do with graven images or even have a desire for them. “The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire; thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein; for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.”—Deut. 7: 25.
24	God, being the Fountain of life, and the only source of life, and life being granted upon condition of obedience, it was his Word of great loving-kindness that provided for the protection of his covenant people by commanding them to refrain completely from giving any worship to any creature or thing. The Israelites violated the covenant of God and became ensnared, and that nation was destroyed. (Ps. 106:36,40; Ezek. 21:24-27) Thus God emphasized his unchangeable rule that a willful disobedience to his commandments means death to the creature.
CHRISTIAN
25	A Christian is one who follows in the footsteps of Jesus Christ and joyfully obeys the commandments of Almighty God. All Christians must follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. (1 Pet. 2:21) There is a wide difference between persons who have not made a covenant with the Lord and those who have covenanted to do his will. Those who enter into an agreement or covenant to be obedient to God, and who are accepted by him as followers of Christ Jesus, are entirely separate and distinct from others in the world. At the end of his earthly ministry Jesus uttered these words, addressed to Jehovah God and concerning those who agree to follow in his steps, to wit: “I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. I pray not that thou should-esttake them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is truth."—John 17:14-17.
28	For centuries Satan has been the invisible ruler or “god of this [wicked] world”. (2 Cor. 4:4; John
February 15, 1941
STie WATCHTOWER
55
14:30) Only those who have strictly obeyed the Lord's commandments have been saved from the influence and power of Satan the Devil. For this reason the faithful followers of Christ Jesus are instructed to 'keep yourselves unspotted from the world'. (Jas. 1:27) It follows, therefore, that rules that nations make concerning their people in general cannot always apply to the one who is in a covenant to do God’s will.
27	All true and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are and indeed must be witnesses to Jehovah by declaring his name and his kingdom under and by Christ Jesus. (Isa. 43:10-12; Ex. 9:16) All such covenant people must preach the gospel of God’s kingdom in obedience to his commandments. (Isa. 61:1,2; Matt. 24:14) All persons thus devoted to God and his kingdom must teach their children the gospel of The Theocracy or Kingdom. Jesus specifically instructed his followers to continuously pray to God: ‘Thy kingdom come; thy will be done, on earth as in heaven.’—Matt. 6:10.
RELIGION AND CHRISTIANITY
28	Indulging in any ceremony or practice whatsoever contrary to the commandment of God is religious. Religion originated with the demons of which Satan is the chief. It has at all times been used to ensnare and has ensnared multitudes of people and kept them blind to God’s will or commandment. Religion has been the moving influence for the persecution and violent treatment of others, and particularly the persecution of Christians.
29	Christians are those who do the will of God as commanded in his Word. They are called “Christians” because Christ Jesus is always obedient to God’s will and he is the Head and Leader of all who are diligent to obey God’s commandments. Christians are therefore commanded by the Lord to avoid anything and all things that are contrary to God's commandments.
supreme
30	The Word of Jehovah God, as expressed in the Bible, is his law, given to man for his correct guide: “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.” (Ps. 119:105) The law of God is supreme and is the only instruction that man can receive and be equipped to walk in the way of righteousness and life. “Every scripture inspired of God is also profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruction which is in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, furnished completely unto every good work.’’—2 Tim. 3:16,17, R.V.
31	Every Christian is bound by his covenant to be obedient to God’s law, as written in the Scriptures. If he voluntarily breaks the terms of his covenant he is subject to death. (Rom. 1: 31, 32) All Christians
conscientiously believe that the Word of God, as recorded in the Bible, is the truth; and if they willingly violate their conscientious belief, such act constitutes the breaking of their covenant. To cause a Christian to violate his conscience is denounced by the Scriptures as “sin against Christ”. (1 Cor. 8:12) These general rules stated in the Bible apply to all persons who believe on God and on Christ and who start to walk in the way of righteousness that leads to life everlasting.
82	In forming the United States government the lawmakers were careful to safeguard the conscience of men, particularly concerning the worship of Almighty God. That part of the Constitution known as the Bill of Rights guarantees to all citizens the right to freely exercise the conscience relative to belief or non-belief, worship or non-worship. Almost all the state constitutions provide that all men shall be free to exercise their conscientious belief and to practice the same without interference unless that practice endangers the welfare of others. As an illustration: William Penn refused to remove his hat when entering the presence of others because he conscientiously believed that such would be a violation of God’s commandment; and for that he was punished. Penn had much to do with framing the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and especially with reference to the freedom of the exercise of conscientious worship. The highest court of that Commonwealth, discussing the principles of liberty of conscience, said: “Liberty necessarily embraces the right of the individual to exercise his conscience and that without interference. That includes the right to worship the Supreme Being according to the dictates of his own conscience; to adopt any creed or hold any opinion whatsoever on the subject of religion; and TO DO OR FORBEAR TO DO ANY ACT FOR CONSCIENCE’ SAKE, the doing or the forbearing of which is not prejudicial to the public weal.”—Commonwealth v. Lesher, 17 S. & R. 155.
83	The Supreme Court of the United States, in the case of Church v. United States, 143 U.S. 457, held that God is supreme and that America is a Christian nation. The leading recognized law-writers of the nations of the world called “Christendom” have said, concerning the supremacy of the law of Almighty God, this, to wit:
“It is binding over all the globe, in all countries, at all times. No human laws are of any validity if contrary to this [God’s law]; and such of them as are valid derive all their force and all their authority, mediately or immediately, from the original. The revealed or divine laws are to be found only in the Holy Scriptures. No human law should be suffered to contradict this.”-Blackstone Commentaries, Chase 3d Ed., pages 5-7.
56
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“No external authority is to place itself between the finite being and the Infinite when the former is seeking to render homage that is due, and in a mode which commends itself to his conscience and judgment as being suitable for him to render, and acceptable to its object.”—Cooley’s Constitutional Limitations, 8th Ed., page 968.
VIOLATION
34	In more recent years irreverent persons, who have no respect for the supreme law of God, and who have no faith in God or in Christ, have taken the lead in public affairs and in lawmaking. Such men, ambitious to appear as the guardians of the public welfare, have conceived the idea of compelling school children to indulge in a certain ceremony of a formal or ceremonious saluting of the flag. The idea appeared to be good to others who give no heed to God’s Word, and soon school boards began to make rules compelling all the children to indulge in such ceremony. This has developed until now there is a general hysteria abroad in the land, which has led to the punishment of children by ill-treatment of them and by expelling them from school because they conscientiously decline to indulge in the religious ceremony of saluting any flag. Such children have been taught by their parents to obey God, and, obeying their parents and obeying God, the children are expelled from school and their parents are punished for not compelling their children to violate their conscience and to violate the law of Almighty God. This modern ceremony of “heiling” men and saluting flags first became prominent in modern times in the arbitrary government of Germany.
35	If boards of public education believed in Jehovah as the Almighty God, and in Christ Jesus as the Savior of men, and that God’s law is supreme, they would never attempt to compel any child to violate its conscience by saluting any flag or bowing down to any creature or thing. Boards of education in the United States in recent years have shown a zeal in the one direction, of attempting to instill patriotism into children, and in this they have completely ignored God’s Word. The words of Mr. Justice Brandeis, late of the Supreme Court of the United States, are here quite appropriate, to wit: “The greatest dangers to liberty lurk in insidious encroachment by men of zeal, well meaning, but without understanding.”—Olmstead v. United States, 277 U. S. 479.
30	In the time of the apostles there were religionists of the same category as above mentioned, and concerning which the apostle wrote: “For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For they being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth.” —Rom. 10: 2-4.
3r The wrong is not in the flag, because the flag of the United States is the symbol of liberty and justice. The wrong is not in the salute, but, as to a conscientious Christian, the wrong lies in compelling or attempting to compel that one against his conscience to violate God’s specific commandment. As above stated, God has specifically emphasized his law that no form of worship or reverence shall be given to any creature or thing, and to attempt to compel a person to violate his conscience and to violate God’s commandment is absolutely wrong.
33 According to the authoritative definitions, the saluting of the flag is a religious ceremony which gives reverence and worship, contrary to God’s law. These definitions are given as follows, to wit:
“The flag, like the cross, is sacred. . . . The rules and regulations relative to human attitude toward national standards use strong, expressive words, as, ‘Service to the Flag,’ . . . ‘Reverence for the Flag,’ ‘Devotion to the Flag.’—The Encyclopedia Americana, Volume 11, page 316.
Sacred means “set apart by religious ceremony”. Devotion means “a" form of prayer or worship”.
—Webster.
Reverence means “veneration, expressing reverent feeling, worship”.
Salute means “to greet with a kiss, to bow and courtesy, the uncovering of the head, a clasp or wave of the hand or the like ... to honor formally or with ceremonious recognition”. (Century Dictionary, page 5321) “To greet with a sign of welcome, love or deference, as a bow and embrace, or a wave of the hand.” —Webster.
Under the word “image” this definition is given by Webster’s Dictionary: “Image, in modern usage, commonly suggests religious veneration.”
According to the Bible, ‘Bow down to a symbol or image’ includes all postures or attitudes toward the image, even a kiss. (See 1 Kings 19:18; Hosea 13:2; Job 31:25-27.)
39 Thus worldly lexicographers recognize the saluting of a flag as a religious formalism. According to the Bible there cannot be the slightest doubt about it, because by such salute there is bestowed upon the image or thing reverence, devotion, a form of prayer or worship, and which thing, or image or that which it represents, is regarded as sacred.
*° Non-Christians may salute the flag without reference to the foregoing rules. Those who are real conscientious Christians are in a class entirely different from others of the world. Jehovah’s witnesses
Febbuaby 15,1941
WATCHTOWER,
57
are Christians and in a covenant to be entirely obedient to God’s law. They must teach their children and admonish them to obey God’s law as he has commanded. They are conscientious and they sincerely believe that for them to indulge in the formalism or ceremony of saluting any flag is a violation of God’s specific commandment as set forth at Exodus 20: 3-5 and emphasized in many other scriptures. The reason that such flag saluting is a violation of that commandment is that the salute attributes salvation to the state, which the flag represents, thus making the state a mighty one, or a “god”, whereas ‘salvation belongeth alone to Jehovah, the Almighty God’, and to none other. (Ps. 3:8) Jehovah’s witnesses conscientiously and sincerely believe the Word of God and that their violation of their conscience and the violation of God’s commandment would mean their certain destruction; as it is written: “For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.”-Acts 3:22,23.
41	Children who have been reared and taught in the nurture and admonition of God’s law and who, because they are in a covenant to do God’s will and conscientiously attempt to obey God, refuse to indulge in the ceremony of saluting any flag and for that reason are expelled from school and denied the right of education, what shall they do? The parents of those children, who have obeyed God’s law to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, are punished because they do not compel their children to violate their conscience and to violate God’s law, and the parents are deprived of their liberty and right to have their children educated in the schools, as the law requires. What shall they do? Many children and many parents in the United States find themselves confronted with this important question.
42	Members of the boards of education have the responsibility of answering these questions. Let the members of the boards of education ask themselves this question: If I had made a consecration to God, and entered into a covenant to do His will, and conscientiously believed that the Word of. God is supreme and that His Word forbids me to indulge in flag saluting, what would I do if an attempt were made to compel me to violate my conscience and to violate God’s law? Would I refuse to comply with man-made rules and suffer punishment at the hands of men? or would I break my covenant with God and suffer everlasting punishment by destruction at the hand of God? These are serious questions and fraught with great weight. Every person must either
choose to be obedient to God’s commandment or choose to take a contrary course.
GOD FOBGOTTEN
43	Most of the men who had to do with laying the foundation of the American government believed in God and relied upon his Word; but in recent years there has been a rapid falling away from faith in God and in the Bible, particularly so amongst those who have to do with governmental or public affairs. Today many of the lawyers and judges of the courts, as well as other public officials, entirely ignore the Word of God. There are some lawyers, however, who firmly hold to the fundamental principles relied upon by the nation, and who trust in God, and who believe that every man should be free to exercise his conscientious reverence and worship of God without interference and that the conscientious and sincere belief of all should be respected and not interfered with. More than one hundred years ago the courts of America laid down the rule that the individual alone is pbivileged to determine what he shall and shall not believe, and that the courts have no right to interfere with belief or practice, except when the practice endangers the welfare of others. In 1784 Thomas Jefferson introduced a bill in the Virginia legislature, which he had prepared, the preamble of which, written by him, reads as follows: “That to suffer the civil magistrate to intrude his powers into the field of opinion, and to restrain the profession or propagation of principles on supposition of their ill tendency, is a dangerous fallacy which at once destroys all religious liberty, it is declared that it is time enough for the rightful purposes of civil government for its officers to interfere when principles break out into overt acts against peace and good order.”
44	The Gobitis case, which originated in Pennsylvania, aptly illustrates the point with reference to forgetting or ignoring God. The Gobitis parents are conscientious Christians, in a covenant to do the will of Almighty God. They have brought up their children as commanded by the Scriptures, “in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” The children also consecrated themselves to God and entered into a covenant to do his will. The school board promulgated a rule requiring a daily practice of saluting the flag, and going through a certain ceremony in connection therewith. The Gobitis children, because of their conscientious belief that such flag saluting would be a violation of their covenant and a violation of God’s law, asked to be excused therefrom and to remain silent during the ceremony. For this they were expelled from school. Suit was begun in the United States District Court, presided over by Judge Maris. That court held that the flag-salute rule
58	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
could not be enforced against the Gobitis children because of their conscientious belief in God and His Word; and in his Opinion, amongst other things, he said: “In these days, when religious intolerance is again rearing its ugly head in other parts of the world, it is of the utmost importance that the liberties guaranteed to our citizens by the fundamental law be preserved from all encroachment.”
45	In that Opinion Judge Maris quoted from the Opinion of Justice Gibson, rendered in the Lesher case, and further said: “In these words that eminent jurist [Justice Gibson] clearly stated that the principle which underlies the Constitutional provision of the state, and which is one of the fundamental bases upon which our nation was founded, namely, that individuals have the right not only to entertain any religious belief but also to do or refrain from doing any act on conscientious grounds, which does not prejudice the safety, morals, property or personal rights of the people. ... On the contrary, that regulation [of the School Board], although undoubtedly adopted from patriotic motives, appears to have become in this case a means for the persecution of children for conscience’ sake. Our beloved flag, the emblem of religious liberty, apparently has been used as an instrument to impose a religious test as a condition of receiving the benefits of public education. And this has been done without any compelling necessity of public safety or welfare.”
40	On appeal the United States Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment of the District Court. The case was then appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States and there the judgments of the lower courts were reversed. The majority of opinion in that case did not hold that citizens can be compelled to salute the flag, but did hold that the board of education may make and enforce rules compelling children to indulge in the ceremony of flag saluting. The real issue was side-stepped. It is manifest that the writer of that Opinion does not believe in and rely upon God and Christ, but that he is devoted to “science and public opinion”. The first paragraph in that majority opinion says: “A grave responsibility confronts this Court whenever in course of litigation it must reconcile the conflicting claims of liberty and authority. But when the liberty invoked is liberty of conscience, and the authority is authority to safeguard the nation’s fellowship, judicial conscience is put to its severest test. Of such a nature is the present controversy.”
47	The Court further in that opinion ruled that the responsibility is upon school boards or boards of education, and not upon the courts, to determine what rules shall be made and enforced. Further discussing the matter the opinion says: “The influences which help toward a common feeling for the common coun
try are manifold. Some may seem harsh and others no doubt are foolish. Surely, however, the end is legitimate. And the effective means for its attainment are still so uncertain and so unauthenticated by science as to preclude us from putting the widely prevalent belief in flag-saluting beyond the pale of legislative power.”
“The wisdom of training children in patriotic impulses by those compulsions which necessarily pervade so much of the educational process is not for our independent judgment. Even were we convinced of the folly of such a measure, such belief would be no proof of its unconstitutionality. For ourselves, we might be tempted to say that the deepest patriotism is best engendered by giving unfettered scope to the most crochety beliefs. Perhaps it is best, even from the standpoint of those interests which ordinances like the one under review seek to promote, to give to the least popular sect leave from conformities like those here in issue. But the court room is not the arena for debating issues of educational policy. It is not our province to choose among competing considerations in the subtle process of securing effective loyalty to the traditional ideals of democracy, while respecting at the same time individual idiosyncrasies among a people so diversified in racial origins and religious allegiances. So to hold would in effect make us the school board for the country. That authority has not been given to this Court, nor should we assume it.”
“Judicial review, itself a limitation on popular government, is a fundamental part of our constitutional scheme. But to the legislature no less than to courts is committed the guardianship of deeply-cherished liberties. Where all the effective means of inducing political changes are left free from interference, education in the abandonment of foolish legislation is itself a training in liberty. To fight out the wise use of legislative authority in the forum of public opinion and before legislative assemblies rather than to transfer such a contest to the judicial arena, serves to vindicate the self-confidence of a free people.”
48	A minority Opinion was also rendered and filed in that case, and the learned Justice who differed from the majority Opinion, amongst other things, said: “The Constitution may well elicit expressions of loyalty to it and to the government which it created, but it does not command such expressions or otherwise give any indication that compulsory expressions of loyalty play any such part in our scheme of government as to override the constitutional protection of freedom of speech and religion. And while such expressions of loyalty, when voluntarily given, may promote national unity, it is quite another matter to say that their compulsory expression by chil
THE WATCHTOWER
59
February 15,1941
dren in violation of their own and their parents’ religious convictions can be regarded as playing so important a part in our national unity as to leave school boards free to exact it despite the constitutional guarantee of freedom of religion. The very terms of the Bill of Rights preclude, it seems to me, any reconciliation of such compulsions with the constitutional guaranties by a legislative declaration that they are more important to the public welfare than the Bill of Rights.
“But even if this view be rejected and it is considered that there is some scope for the determination by legislature whether the citizen shall be compelled to give public expression of such sentiments contrary to his religion, I am not persuaded that we should refrain from passing upon the legislative judgment ‘as long as the remedial channels of the democratic process remain open and unobstructed.’ This seems to me no more than the surrender of the constitutional protection of the liberty of small minorities to the popular will. . . .
“The Constitution expresses more than the conviction of the people that democratic processes must be preserved at all costs. It is also an expression of faith and a command that freedom of mind and spirit must be preserved, which government must obey, if it is to adhere to that justice and moderation without which no free government can exist. For this reason it would seem that legislation which operates to repress the religious freedom of small minorities, which is admittedly within the scope of the protection of the Bill of Rights, must at least be subject to the same judicial scrutiny as legislation which we have recently held to infringe the constitutional liberty of religious and racial minorities.
“With such scrutiny I cannot say that the inconveniences which may attend some sensible adjustment of school discipline in order that the religious convictions of these children may be spared, presents a problem so momentous or pressing as to outweigh the freedom from compulsory violation of religious faith which has been thought worthy of constitutional protection."
“ The majority opinion in the Gobitis case ignores the supremacy of God’s law, declines to exercise its authority under the Constitution to restrain the infringement upon liberty properly exercised and which is guaranteed by the Bill of Rights, and shifts the burden upon boards of education and advises fighting it out in the public forum.
RESULT
80	The result of that legal Opinion breaking down the Constitutional guarantee of liberty of worship, and ignoring God’s law, was seized upon as an excuse for immediate violent action against sincere Chris
tians. It was like a lighted match applied to a field of dry grass. In communities dominated by the Catholic Hierarchy, who lead men that are controlled neither by law nor by reason, and where “Catholic Action’’ is rampant, Catholic priests led fanatical or demonized mobs that assaulted, abused and ill-treated hundreds of Jehovah’s witnesses, merely because these witnesses remained faithful and true to God in declaring and obeying his Word. Those mobs abused and ill-treated men, women and children; destroyed their property; drove them from their homes; burned their houses; burned their books; burned their money, and tied groups of them together, forced castor oil down their throats, herded them like wild beasts and drove them through the land; and committed numerous other deeds of wickedness against sincere Christians, and continue to do so to this day. Public officials, yielding to the influence of Catholic priests, broke into homes of private citizens, kidnaped and carried them from one state to another, broke up their private meetings in the study of the Bible, burned their furniture and their literature. Sincere lawyers called upon the attorney-general frequently to invoke the law of the land against such lawless elements and received promises that this would be done, but more than six months has passed and no action has been taken whatever against lawless mobs of this nature. The harsh, arbitrary, totalitarian-gestapo methods have rapidly spread throughout the United States since the rendering of that Opinion. This public opinion expressed in lawlessness, instead of instilling patriotism, has induced even greater lawlessness, and mobs continue to assault Christian people without any just cause or excuse. School boards in many of the states continue to expel children from school and to ill-treat them and their parents because the parents and children ask to be permitted to conscientiously obey the law of Almighty God without interference. Freedom of speech, and freedom of worship, are rapidly disappearing in America. The nation is entirely forgetting God. Appropriate here for consideration are the forceful words of Mr. Justice Sutherland, late of the Supreme Court of the United States, to wit: “Do the people of this land—in the providence of God, favored, as they sometimes boast, above all others in the plenitude of their liberties— desire to preserve those so carefully protected by the First Amendment: liberty of religious worship ... T If so let them withstand all beginnings of encroachment. For the saddest epitaph which can be carved in memory of a vanished liberty is that it was lost because its possessors failed to stretch forth a saving hand while yet there was time.”
51	If boards of education and other legislative bodies, and the nation in general, continue to ignore
60
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the law of God and to punish innoeent children and parents because such conscientiously give heed to and obedience to the Word of God, what will be the end thereof? Can a nation once acknowledging itself to be “Christian”, a nation that has based its fundamental laws upon the law of God and recognized that the law of God is supreme, and which nation then forgets God and ignores his law, expect to continue to exist? Let the Word of God give the answer to that question: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.”— Ps. 9:17.
52	Will Almighty God excuse or pass by unnoticed those who directly or indirectly inflict punishment upon children and their parents for exercising their conscientious belief in obedience to God’s law? Will Almighty God avenge his covenant people, whom he has selected to serve him? The answer is found in the words of Jesus, to wit: “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?” —Luke 18: 7, 8.
LOYALTY
“ “Loyalty” means to be obedient to the law. Anyone who attempts to take the law into his own hands and compels others to obey it is lawless. Duly constituted authorities may make and enforce laws that are consistent with the supreme law. Should not all citizens be loyal to the country in which they reside ? Yes; in harmony with and consistent with God’s law they should obey the laws of the land. Jesus Christ stated the rule by which all Christians must be governed: “Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.”— Mark 12:17.
54	Necessarily that means obedience to God’s law or commandments is first, and then obedience to the laws of the state that are not contradictory to God’s law. Jesus emphatically stated the supremacy of God’s law, and all his followers must abide thereby.
" God commands his servants that they shall not give reverence, devotion or worship to any image or thing. No human authority can rightfully compel the doing of that which God’s law forbids. If the child of God conscientiously believes that the flag-salute ceremony is a violation of God’s law, and for that reason asks to be excused from indulging in such ceremony, no human authority can rightfully interfere with the exercise of the conscience of that person who is devoted to Almighty God.
66	Jehovah’s witnesses, being devoted followers of Christ Jesus, gladly obey all laws of the state or nation that are not in conflict with God’s laws and commandments. This they do, not because of compulsion,
but because such is right. That they may show their devotion to Almighty God and at the same time show their respect for the flag and the laws of the nation, all of God’s covenant people, both parents and children that have agreed to be obedient to God, do willingly make and subscribe to the following pledge, to wit:
“I have pledged my unqualified allegiance and devotion to Jehovah, the Almighty God, and to His Kingdom, for which Jesus commands all Christians to pray.
“I respect the flag of the United States and acknowledge it as a symbol of freedom and justice to all.
“I pledge allegiance and obedience to all the laws of the United States that are consistent with God’s law, as set forth in the Bible.”
” What honest, sincere and law-abiding person can find objection to that pledge? It places God and the nation in their proper places in the mind of all persons. The tendency will be to cause others to have greater reverence for Almighty God and have greater respect for the nation and to make of them better citizens. In harmony with this it is written in the Scriptures: “Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord [Jehovah].” (Ps. 33:12; Am. Rev. Ver.) The adoption of such a pledge would be entirely consistent with the course taken by the founders of the American nation. To deny Christian children the right and privilege to publicly make the foregoing pledge in the schools, and to compel them to violate their conscience by saluting the flag, as school boards have done, means that the human authorities of the nation are fighting against God and hence have forgotten God. The responsibility, therefore, must rest upon the shoulders of those who refuse to recognize the right of a consecrated Christian to exercise his conscientious belief in and devotion to Jehovah and his Word. Those who oppose Almighty God he declares are wicked, and the fate of such individuals and nations he announces in these words: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.”—Ps. 9:17.
68	The highest court of the land has placed the responsibility of compulsory flag-saluting upon boards of education or school boards, manifestly because some members of that court are ashamed to acknowledge Jehovah, the Almighty God, as the Supreme Being. The school boards must now decide whether it is of greater importance to compel children to violate their conscience in. order to comply with human rules or to have them to obey Almighty God. (Acts 4:19, 20) Which will do the greater amount of good to the people ?
•’ A somewhat similar question was before the United States Senate, and that law-making body went on record that the flag of the Papal Hierarchy
February 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
61
is above the flag of the United States. The question before the Senate was, Whether the flag of the pope should be displayed during religious services on the ships of the nation above the flag of the United States. A senator from Massachusetts, in his argument before the Senate, took the position that the flag of the pope is the flag of God. In his argument before the Senate he used these words: “I for one refuse to depart from the time-honored American custom of placing the emblem of God above every other emblem of the world. I will not run down the pennant of God for any other emblem.” The Senate by a vote of 68 to 10, decided that the religious flag of the pope should be displayed above the flag of the United States. That occurred February, 1929. (See the Congressional Record No. 47, page 2851.)
60	It is entirely inconsistent for the nation and its constituted legal authorities to attempt to compel little children to acknowledge the flag of the United States as above or superior to the specific commandments of Almighty God, and to then punish such children and their parents because they insist on obeying God rather than men. The nation by its senators, and previously by its courts, has acknowledged a religious institution as superior to laws of the land, and, even though they did it ignorantly, with stronger reasoning should we acknowledge the commandments of Almighty God as supreme and above the laws of man.
ALTERNATIVE
61	Two propositions are before the parents and children who are in a covenant to obey Almighty God:
(1)	Participate in the prescribed ceremony of saluting the flag, even though the same be in violation of your conscientious devotion to Almighty God. Penalty for refusing is expulsion from school and additional punishment to the parents.
(2)	Render obedience to Almighty God first and obey the rules of the state when such rules are not in conflict with God’s commandments. Failure or refusal to do so means punishment at the hand of the Lord by everlasting death.
62 The person who is in a covenant with God to do His will does not hesitate as to which of these two propositions he will accept. He knows that the most severe punishment the state can inflict upon him is death, from which death God will resurrect his faithful servants who have been put to death by man by reason of their faithfulness to God. He knows that the willful violation of God’s commandment means death everlasting, from which there is no resurrection. He prefers to have everlasting life. He follows the advice of Christ Jesus, to wit: “And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” (Matt. 10: 28) The covenant people of Jehovah God unhesitatingly obey God first and at all times, and implicitly trust him as to the final result.
88 In taking that course the conscientious children and parents in obedience to God’s commandments are following the same course as that taken by the apostles of Christ Jesus. Those faithful men were in a covenant to do God’s will, and, receiving his commandments, they obeyed by going about preaching the gospel. Their action was contrary to the law of the land, as declared by religious Jews. Those faithful men were punished by imprisonment, and yet as soon as they were released they straightway went again to publicly preaching the gospel of the Kingdom. Again they were haled into court, charged with violating the law, and their reply was: “We ought to obey God rather than men.” (Acts 5: 29) They chose to follow the rule which Jesus had announced. (Mark 12:17) The Bible records many instances showing God’s approval of the course taken by the apostles in rendering full obedience to God rather than obeying men.
64 The government of Babylon promulgated a law requiring all persons to bow before a certain image. Three of God’s typical covenant people were in Babylon. They remember,ed Jehovah had commanded: “Thou shalt have no other gods before me. . . . Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them.” (Ex. 20:3-5) They had respect for the commandments of God. They refused to obey Babylon’s command and were told by the highest authority of that nation that they would be put to death by burning. They replied to the law-enforcement body: We have no need to obey you in this matter; and if it be that you cast us into the fire, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the fiery furnace, and he will deliver us.’ They were cast into the fiery furnace, which was so hot that it destroyed the men who cast them in, and from that fiery furnace God delivered them, with not even a scorch on their garments. God always rewards faithfulness.—Dan. 3:15-27.
85 Daniel, another man in a covenant with God to do His will, was cast into a den of lions because he declined to obey the law of the nation, obedience to which law he conscientiously believed to be idolatry. For his faithfulness God delivered Daniel unharmed. —Dan. 6:1-23.
88 Over a period of many centuries Satan has caused men to form conspiracies to kill or otherwise punish faithful servants of Almighty God. The hypocritical ceremony of flag saluting and “heiling” of men originated in Germany, with the Nazis, and is another effort on the part of the Devil to break down faithful devotion to Almighty God by men who have
62
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
pledged themselves to serve God. That same Satanic, totalitarian rule is attempting to be enforced throughout the nations of the earth. In the United States the people have gotten on for 150 years or more without being compelled to salute flags; and the saluting of flags has never lessened crime. All criminals salute the flag, when it is required, and then straightway violate the law for which the flag stands. The most enthusiastic flag-wavers in America today are those who have no respect for the law of man nor for the law of God. On the contrary, Christians respect the flag and are diligent to obey Almighty God and they refuse to yield to the Satanic conspirators, and in this they have ample proof of God’s approval.
67 At the eleventh chapter of Hebrews God caused to be recorded a list of faithful men who throughout the ages withstood the unreasonable rules or laws of nations which attempted to break down their devotion to the Almighty God. Those men steadfastly served God in the face of all opposition, and for such faithfulness they suffered cruel punishment at the hands of men. Of them the Lord’s Word says: ‘The world was not worthy of them.’ They all received God’s approval for their faithful obedience, and they have the assurance that they shall live forever.— Heb. 11:1-40.
68 Today Jehovah’s covenant people are taking a course like to that marked out by other faithful men that have gone before, and these modern faithful followers of Christ Jesus may confidently expect to receive the approval of Almighty God for so doing. If they suffer punishment because of their constant faithfulness and obedience to the commandments of God, they know that others who have gone before them have likewise suffered for faithfulness and have received the approval of Jehovah God. The suffering will not be for long, because this is the day of Jehovah and soon he shall completely wipe out all his enemies and deliver his faithful servants and grant unto them life everlasting and all attending blessings. Have faith in God and continue to obey his commandments, and live.
WITNESSES
88 The chief reason for God’s covenant people to now be on earth is to bear witness to Jehovah’s name and his kingdom. The Watchtower advises both parents and children that have covenanted to do God’s will to see to it that they faithfully bear testimony to his name and to his kingdom. To that end let such parents and children bear testimony before the boards of education or school boards that have taken occasion to expel the children from school and to deny them the privilege of a common-school education because of their faithfulness to God. Apply to the school authorities to have the children reinstated in the school. Prepare and sign a petition addressed to the school authorities, demanding that they grant unto the children their rights under the law. Support that petition with the Scriptural reasons why those children cannot indulge in the religious ceremony of saluting the flag and pledge themselves as they have been required. Set out in that petition the pledge which is published herein, and express therein your willingness to abide by that pledge. Both parents and children should sign the petition and deliver copies to the school authorities. The Society will furnish printed forms for this purpose to all the consecrated who request the same. That petition and application will be a witness to the name and kingdom of God by Christ Jesus, and we may confidently expect the Lord’s approval and blessing upon it. The tendency necessarily will be to fix in the mind of the people that their hope must rest in God and that they must be obedient to him and to his kingdom, if they would live.
70 Render unto the state the things which belong to the state, and render unto Jehovah, the Almighty God, the things that are God’s. Place the name and the kingdom of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus his King above all things. Remain firm and steadfast in your devotion to The Theocracy and confidently wait upon the Lord, and be assured of his everlasting blessing.
RESURRECTION
ESURRECTION” means “standing up again; being raised again to life”. It is the very opposite ■^^of death, because it means recovery out of death. It is manifest that there could be no resurrection of the creature unless that creature first dies. If there is no death, then a resurrection would be not only useless but impossible. Immortality means not being subject to death. An immortal creature cannot die. Religious clergymen are especially emphasizing the statement that all men are immortal souls or that every man possesses an immortal soul. By their statement they deny the resurrection of the dead. Their con
clusion finds support only in what Satan the Devil said in the garden of Eden.—Genesis 3:1-4.
The law of God is his will, expressed or unexpressed To Adam in Eden He made known his will when he said. “In the day that thou eatest [of the forbidden fruit], thou shalt surely die.” (Gen. 2: 17) When man broke the law God pronounced upon him the sentence of death. Satan had said: “Ye shall not surely die.” That is equivalent to saying: ‘There is no death.’ For a long time the clergy have been saying the same thing. At John 8:44, Jesus said that Satan is a liar and the father of lies. By adopting Satan’s
February 15, 1941
WATCHTOWER,
63
lie and denying God’s truth the clergy have taken their place on the side of Satan. They do the will of their father, even as Jesus said.
To the fact of the resurrection of the dead Jesus gave convincing testimony. His testimony consisted both of his spoken words and of his actions. He called his friend Lazarus forth from the grave, but he did not resurrect Lazarus. He awakened Lazarus out of the sleep of death; which illustrates how he, as the great Executive Officer of Jehovah God, will call forth all those dead in the tomb in due time. Later Lazarus died, and in God’s due time he must participate in the resurrection. To his sister Martha Jesus said: “I am the resurrection, and the life.” (John 11:25) By that he meant that God has provided for the resurrection of “all that are in the graves” from the condition of death, and that Jesus Christ is God’s chosen means whereby He will accomplish that great work. Jesus further testified that the time would come in which all in their graves shall be awakened out of death.—John 5: 28, 29.
While hanging on the tree on Calvary Jesus died. That was not a sham death, but a reality. It was the soul that died. Isaiah 53:12 declares: “He hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.” Had Jesus been inherently immortal from his creation on, or had he possessed an immortal soul, he could not have died. He was made a mortal man in order that he might die and by his death provide the redemptive price for the human race. “And the Word [Jesus] was made flesh [not, was incarnated in flesh].” “That he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.” (John 1:14; Hebrews 2:9) He gave his life by being put to death as a ransom for man that believes, to the end that obedient man may live. (Read Matthew 20:28 and John 10:10.) The soul Jesus went to hell, which is the grave, according to the Bible and contrary to religious theology. God had foretold that fact when he caused his prophet to write concerning Jesus: “For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell [ (Hebrew) Sheol] ;
(Continued from page 50)
tian company should therefore assemble after six p m. of April 11, and the anointed ones celebrate the Memorial, and their companions, the Jonadabs, be present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse just before the partaking of the emblems, the short article “Memorial” as published in the Watchtower issue of March 15, 1939, should be read instead. Since the breaking of the bread and the drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine, to follow the example of Jesus and his apostles, who used real red wine in symbol of his blood. A report of the celebration should be promptly made to the Society, showing total attendance and number of partakers. In preparation for this 1941 celebration the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
1941 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
In the face of an almost impossible year the publication of the 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah's witnesses represents an accomplishment made possible only by Jehovah’s power. Confirmation of this you will find when you read the comprehensive report, as written by the Society’s president, covering the world-wide activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, under continuous enemy fire, during the past service year Besides this amazing report the Yearbook also offers
neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption Thou wilt shew me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.” (Psalm 16:10,11) Fifty days after Jesus’ resurrection the apostle Peter quoted these words of David and added: “He, seeing this before [hand], spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell [ (Greek) Hades], neither his flesh did see corruption.”—Acts 2:31
Before Jesus’ death God had promised Jesus that He would give him life inherent, or immortality, as a reward for his faithfulness. Said Jesus: “For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself.” (John 5:26) Jesus was faithful and true even under the greatest difficulties; and God, true to his promise, raised him up out of death to the highest position in His great realm next to Himself. (Acts 2:32; Phil. 2:7-10) Concerning his death and his resurrection to immortality Jesus later said to John: “I am he that liveth, and was dead ; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell [the grave] and of death.”—Rev. 1:18
The foregoing statement of Jesus Christ is conclusive proof that Jesus from his creation on was mortal and did not inherently possess immortality; that as a mortal man he died; that God raised him up out of death and gave him life inherent, which is immortality; that he is alive for evermore, and that never again can death have power over him “Knowing that Christ, being raised from the dead, dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him. For m that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.” (Rom. 6:9,10) Those who insist on teaching the doctrine of immortality of all souls deny the death of Jesus and deny his resurrection, and therefore deny the resurrection of all those dead in the graves. When God raised up Jesus out of death He provided proof abundantly of the fact thereof in order that everyone who believes in the resurrection might have his faith completely established.
the president’s comment on the 1941 yeartext and a text with a Watchtower comment thereon for each day of the new year The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thus enhancing the costs involved; hence a contribution of 50c per copy is stipulated therefor. Organized companies should combine the orders of all individuals therefor and send such through the company servant
1941 CALENDAR
The 1941 Calendar is exceptionally beautiful and expressive. Under the yeartext, to wit, “Salvation unto our God . . and unto the Lamb” (Rev. 7:10, A.R.V.), the artist portrays with Scriptural symbolisms and modern details Jehovah’s “strange work” of judgment now fast reaching its climax among all nations. The Calendar date pads mark the special testimony periods for 1941, and also give field service suggestions for the intervening months. A contribution of 25c per copy is asked therefor, or $1 00 for five copies mailed to one address. Companies do well to send in combination orders through the local company servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 16: “Obedience,”
][ 1-27 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1941.
Week of March 23: “Obedience,”
28-49 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1941.
Week of March 30: “Obedience,”
|[ 50-70 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1941
FIELD EXPERIENCES
“OVER THE WALLS” IN ENCINO, CALIF.
“The last house on the street was situated up a winding driveway inside of beautiful grounds and many trees. At the entrance to driveway was a closed electric gate. Just outside was a telephone for guests to phone the house. I went to phone and pushed the bell, wondering what sort of reception I would receive. A woman’s voice came through the speaker: ‘Who’s there?’ I answered, ‘One of Jehovah’s witnesses, with a message of hope for you from the Bible.’ She said, ‘All right, go ahead!’ I asked, ‘Well, could you let me in so I can talk to you inside?’ She said, ‘I’m sorry, I can’t.’ Quickly I inquired, ‘Then shall I play the recording right here over the phone ?’ ‘Surely!’ By that time I had the phonograph open under my arm and the grand message streaming into the mouthpiece. When it was completed the voice came through, ‘I enjoyed that so very much! My husband will be right down.’ While waiting for him I prepared the phonograph for the next house, and by that time he was at the gate.' I asked, ‘Did you hear the record all right?’ He said, ‘Yes, we both heard it fine. I’m sorry we can’t let you in, but we’re only the servants here and have orders not to.’ Upon a contribution I handed him Religion, Conspiracy Against Democracy and a 'Watchtower."
PIONEER MEETS HONEST POLICE CHIEF
“I called on the chief of police, name McMahon, a Catholic. He took Religion and booklet “Uncovering Fifth Column’, copy of Consolation and Kingdom News No. 6. He asked how long it would be before we would finish the town, as there were so many calls coming in, and he would not drive Jehovah’s witnesses out of town. He told the people who phoned to let Jehovah’s witnesses alone, as they were doing a good work, but, ‘When you are all well out of town I will send the squad car around to satisfy them.’ Later I called at a lawyer’s office. He and the stenographer were busy and would not be interested anyhow. I decided to wait, and just then the police chief came out of the lawyer’s office, saw me, and said: ‘Here is the girl now I was telling you about.’ He invited me in and I placed a booklet ‘Uncovering Fifth Column’. The chief advised him to read it, as it was the best little booklet he had read. After working until dinnertime I proceeded to the car to eat lunch with the rest of our group. Unknown to us our car was parked in front of the chief’s house. While we were eating a lady came out with a big bag of grapes, stating her husband said we called at his office and that she was to take us some grapes: thought we might enjoy them with our lunch. After handing her a Watchtower and thanking her, she went into the house. Soon after, as we watched to find out who lived there, we saw the chief leave the back door. Starting to witness after dinner, I called at the home of the lawyer the chief had been visiting. He said he wanted the same combination the chief had gotten.”
RELIGION PREFERS GAMBLING TO TRUTH
“Reno, Nevada, was given the first concentrated witness in its history, but the religious racketeers could not stand the heat without much howling. Their howls caused the Chamber of Commerce auditorium to be denied to us for the public meeting on Judge Rutherford’s lecture ‘Violence’ that was thoroughly advertised from house to house and
on the streets. It all worked out for a greater witness, and one of the newspapers in the city took the side of Jehovah’s witnesses; and this resulted in spreading the truth, and the public meeting was held, regardless, in the Kingdom Hal] of the Reno company, and 53 of the public attended and listened with great interest to Judge Rutherford’s lecture, which was so timely for the occasion. Beginning at 1 p.m., Saturday, the street work with magazines was carried on. This further burned up the religionists. In a city where every form of gambling is wide open and other rackets are carried on, the truth only can stir up the religionists to action, especially the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, which, as usual, used the Veterans’ organizations to bring pressure on the police department and others so the meeting hall was closed to us Sunday evening. They did not interfere with our afternoon and evening meetings Saturday and Sunday, but were bound to stop the public meeting of Judge Rutherford. Every fight against us, however, does more to advertise The Theocracy, by the Lord’s grace.”
DOWN LOUISIANA WAY
“Upon arrival we found a number of people gathered at the court yard listening to what sounded to us like a politician, telling how rotten politics were in Louisiana and at the same time denouncing anyone who was not for God and country. For the time being we could not place any Watchtower or Consolation here, so we passed out Kingdom News No. 6. As we crossed the street to take our positions on the street comers we heard this ‘gentleman of the cloth’ shout, ‘There are people here in Franklinton today putting out literature who don’t believe in a burning hell. When they get there they will wish they were back in Franklinton.’ Evidently he knew we were not overjoyed to have to listen to him rant and rave, but we kept right on announcing ‘Religion is a snare and a racket—The Bible tells why. Read The Watchtower. 5c.’ In spite of his efforts to discourage the people from receiving the Kingdom message, in two hours 60 magazines were placed by 8 publishers, ranging in ages from 7 to 60.”
RIGHT ACTION BY INDIANA OFFICIALS
“Someone called the police and had four witnesses taken to headquarters for investigation. On arriving they were asked, ‘Who are you.?’ ‘We are Jehovah’s witnesses.’ They were then asked, ‘Well, why are you brought to police headquarters?’ ‘We don’t know. We were told we would have to come with this officer to headquarters for investigation.’ They were then informed they did not need to be investigated, that Jehovah’s witnesses were holding a two-day convention in this city (Fort Wayne) and that they might return to their work without being further detained, and if they did not know their way back to the place where they had been working they would be directed there and not to worry about any interference from the police. Later in the day some other police picked up one of the publishers and phoned the chief of police for instructions as to what to do with her. The chief asked, ‘Is this lady one of Jehovah’s witnesses?’ The reply was ‘Yes’. The chief then said, ‘You turn that lady loose and she will attend to her business and you attend to yours.’ All the friends in Ohio Zone 8 appreciate the co-operation of the officials in Fort Wayne.”
THE WATCHTOWER
PUBLISHXB SXIIIMONTHLT By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
orriOEBS
J. F. Buthebford, President____W. E. Van Ambuboh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
JEUS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Ykaiz.t Subscription Price
United States, 11.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Fobsign, $1.50; Qexat Britain, Australasia, and South ateica. 6*. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Omczs
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian__________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian___________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African__________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have Ths "Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, 1(79.
“GOD AND THE STATE”
A new booklet, by Judge Rutherford! The urgency of the rapidly tightening world situation has hastened the issuance of this timely booklet. Parents, children, and all lovers of righteousness will be grateful for the clearness, completeness and helpfulness of the author’s treatment of the supreme issue today, as presented in its 32 pages. A neat cover design makes it very presentable. Due to the growing need for just such information, a large circulation of this latest booklet is bound to follow. Get your copy now, at a contribution of 5c the copy.
MEMORIAL
The Scripturally assigned date for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah’s name and the sacrifice of His provided Lamb, Christ Jesus, is Friday, April 11,1941, after six p.m. Each Christian company should therefore assemble after six pan. of April 11, and the anointed ones celebrate the Memorial, and their companions, the Jonadabs, be present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse just before the partaking of the emblems, the short article “Memorial” as published in the Watchtower issue of March 15,1939, should be read instead. Since the breaking of the bread and the drinking of the
wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine, to follow the example of Jesus and his apostles, who used real red wine in symbol of his blood. A report of the celebration should be promptly made to the Society, showing total attendance and number of partakers. In preparation for this 1941 celebration the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 6: “Victory Song” (Part 1), fl 1-19 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1, 1941.
Week of April 13: “Victory Song” (Part 1), fl 20-40 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1, 1941.
“THEOCRACY”
This new booklet by Judge Rutherford, in 64 pages, offers the clearest and best description yet of the world’s leading issue today, “The Theocracy.” The visible operations of its representatives on earth are plainly set forth, together with the vicious opposition which they are encountering world-wide. A specially fine cover (Continued on page 79)
J&eWffCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	March 1, 1941	No. 5
VICTORY SONG
PART 1
'And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God; many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord”—Ps. 40:3.
TEHOVAH is the Author of the song of victory. I It is a song of praise. Songs of which Jehovah J is the composer are always of praise, telling of deliverance of his devoted servants and glory to his own name. They are prophetic of the time when Jehovah manifests himself for the honor of his name. The faithful servants of Jehovah have always been oppressed by the enemy Satan and his agents; and when Jehovah’s servants wait upon the Most High and put their trust fully in him, then he in due time delivers them. The song of praise tells of such coming victory in a great conflict led by Christ Jesus, to the honor of his Father.
2	Proof of this rule is shown in the song of David recorded at Psalm Forty, embracing the foregoing text. David had suffered much at the hand of his enemies. He had waited patiently for Jehovah to manifest himself and to deliver David from his enemies. Jehovah did deliver David in his own due time. To wait patiently means to fully trust in God and to confidently move forward in performance of assigned duty, well knowing that one is on the right way and backed up by the King of Eternity. Such ones never try to run ahead of Jehovah, but follow explicitly the instructions given. One who is patient is anxious in his mind, watching with great care that he may not miss an opportunity to honor Almighty God. To be patient, therefore, means a trial of faith and a refusal to be turned aside from steadfast devotion to God, regardless of what persecution the enemy may bring upon the servants of the Most High. When Jehovah’s due time arrives for him to avenge his servants he will do so, his primary purpose being to vindicate his holy name.
3	David, whose name means “Beloved”, was a man of whom God said: ‘He is a man after my own heart.’ He was a type of Jehovah’s beloved Son, Christ Jesus. In the Davidic picture are also shown all the members of “the body of Christ”, that is to say, the 144,000, all of whom must suffer tribulation before entering into the Kingdom. This is shown by many prophetic pictures recorded in the Bible. Quite ap
propriate to the victory song of Barak and Deborah, which we are about to examine, is the Psalm or song of David above quoted. God’s faithful servants, and particularly the class known as “the remnant” of his organization on earth, have suffered much at the hands of the enemy and continue to suffer, but Jehovah has given them such a clear vision of his purpose that now they clearly see that the Lord has set their feet upon the solid rock, that is, upon Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and that the victory is assured to them if they remain faithful to the end. By faith now they see the day of deliverance is near, and they are all filled with the song of praise to the Most High. And what results from their singing of the victory song and continuing faithfully in the service in these dark days that are now upon the world? They see people of goodwill who are being awakened, hurriedly taking their place on the side of The Theocracy and wending their way to refuge and life. As the Psalm of David says: “Many shall see it [The Theocracy, and the deliverance and blessings that righteous government brings], and fear [Jehovah God], and shall trust in the [King Christ Jesus and in the King of Eternity, Jehovah].” It is timely and appropriate that they join in the song. Therefore those who will compose the “great multitude” are putting their trust in the Lord and are finding refuge under his organization, and they too join in the song.
4	In the preceding issues of The Watchtower consideration has been given to the drama of vengeance, in which Barak and Deborah and Jael played prominent parts. That drama, plainly a prophetic one, foretells of God’s purpose to avenge his faithful people and to completely vindicate his own great name. Quite appropriate, therefore, is the prophetic song of victory that follows and which is now considered in The Watchtower. “Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying.”—Judg. 5:1.
5	This was actually sung before King Jabin’s death and after the destruction of his army under Sisera and after Sisera had been slain. The killing of Sisera
67
68
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
by Jael pictures the Jael class, that is to say, the people of good-will, slaying religion, which Sisera represented, and making religion dead so far as the people of good-will are concerned. Thus putting religion out of their lives, they devote themselves to the Almighty God. Those people of good-will now look upon religion as no longer having any influence or power over them, but that it is dead and putrid; and therefore they shun religion. The “other sheep” of the Lord, which are the modern-day Jael class, are taking that action today against religion, counting it a dead thing. The persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, that is, “the remnant,” is calling out the “great multitude” from amidst the people, and that in a time of great tribulation upon the world; and these people of good-will are ‘washing their robes in the blood of the Lamb, Christ Jesus’, by exercising and showing their full faith in the ransom sacrifice, the blood of Christ, which is the redemptive price of all who hear and obey the Lord.—Rev. 7:14.
•	Deborah and Barak sung that song under divine inspiration. It was a song which Jehovah had composed and put in the mouth of his servants, Deborah and Barak. Jehovah is the author of that song, which is a prophecy of God’s “strange work” and telling of his “strange act” of complete victory. The song expresses the joy of Jehovah’s organization at the early vindication of his name. It is the “joy of the Lord”, that is, the joy of the Lord Jesus Christ and which joy he invites his faithful servants to enter into when they are approved. (Matt. 25:21) The faithful servants of Christ Jesus have now entered into that joy and are now singing the praises of the Most High and of his kingdom. Their “companions” hear the song of praise and hasten to join therein.
T Deborah pictured God’s “woman”, that is to say, his organization, now fully united in devotion to the Most High, the great Theocrat. Through that organization Jehovah now brings to his people the revelation of his holy purpose, which is testified to in the prophetic song. Barak (whose name means lightning) pictures Christ Jesus, the Head of the capital organization of God. The “remnant of her seed” (Rev. 12:17), that is, the last members of the body of Christ now on earth, are made a part of Jehovah’s organization, and they participate now in the song from the viewpoint of its certain fulfillment in the near future.
•	In the picture the song was sung “on that day”: “So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the children of Israel.” (Judg. 4: 23) “That day” means the foretelling of “the day of Jehovah”, which began in 1914, when the Almighty God sent forth his beloved Son the King, Christ Jesus, to rule in the midst of his enemies. (Ps. 110:2) Then
followed the “war in heaven” and the World War on earth, which the Lord had foretold. (Rev. 12:7-9; Matt. 24:7) The day of Jehovah began there and continues until Armageddon, when “the battle of that great day of God Almighty” will be fought, with full and complete victory to Jehovah and his King, the Greater Barak. We are now in that “day of Jehovah”, and it is appropriate in the light of very recent developments that all of God’s faithful people now join in the song of appreciation and joy, looking confidently to the hour of early deliverance. Note that the song opens not with felicitation to creatures, but the opening words are to the praise of the Most High. “Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves.”—Judg. 5: 2.
* The American Revised Version renders this part of the text: “Bless ye Jehovah.” Unto whom shall the song of praise to Jehovah be sung? Another prophet of Almighty God answers the question: “I will declare thy name unto my brethren; in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.” (Ps. 22:22) The application of this song cannot be left in doubt. Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak, uses the same words, which are repeated by the apostle at Hebrews 2:12: “I will declare thy name unto my brethren; in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee.” For centuries Christ Jesus has sung this song, well knowing the day of complete victory he will gain, when all the survivors of the great battle of that day shall praise the name of the Most High. Now the time has come when all members of “the body of Christ”, both in heaven and on earth, join in the song and all those of good-will toward God are invited to participate in the song. The angels in heaven sing because they all see that the day of the vindication of Jehovah’s name and the complete victory of Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak, is at hand. (Rev. 7:9-12) So today Jehovah’s witnesses must “bless” or speak words of praise to Jehovah’s name and to his kingdom, and do so amongst all people who have a hearing ear and who desire to see the triumph of righteousness in the earth. All those who are of the “other sheep” of the Lord must likewise take the same course that Jael took.
10 For what did they praise and bless Jehovah in that song, and to what does it look forward? “For the avenging of Israel” and, now, for the avenging of spiritual Israel. It was the time “when the people willingly offered themselves”, as the song states. The faithful people of God now on the earth by faith see that for a certainty soon Jehovah will fully vindicate his name; and, having this full assurance, they raise the song of praise before the battle is fought and won. When the battle of that great day of God Almighty is fought and won every surviving creature will join in that song of praise to his holy name: “Let
March 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
69
every thing that hath breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord."—Ps. 150: 6.
11 Jehovah’s witnesses must now declare “the day of vengeance of our God”, which vengeance will vindicate Jehovah’s name and will avenge all oppressed of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions, upon whom oppressions and persecutions have been heaped by the modern-day Sisera, the religious leaders and others of Satan’s organization.
11 While the Authorized Version of this text is comforting, the matter is made much clearer by other renderings of the text, to wit: "In the leading on of the leaders in Israel, in that a people willingly offered themselves.” (Literal rendering) "For that the leaders took the lead in Israel, for that the people offered themselves willingly, bless ye Jehovah.” (American Revised Version) “For freeing free men in Israel, for a people willingly offering themselves, bless ye Jehovah.” (Young) “For the leadership of leaders in Israel, for the volunteering of the people, bless ye Jehovah!”—Rotherham.
11 The time of the fulfillment of this prophetic song is definitely located and fixed beyond any question of doubt by the words recorded at Psalm 110: 2, 3: "The Lord [Jehovah] shall send the rod [His King] of thy strength out of Zion; rule thou [Jesus Christ] in the midst of thine enemies. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning; thou hast the dew of thy youth.”
11 It was in 1914 that Christ Jesus was enthroned King and sent forth to rule, and immediately there began a “war in heaven", resulting in the ousting of the Devil and his angels and the casting of them down to the earth. (Rev. 11:18; 12:1-12) God’s faithful people thereafter willingly have offered themselves unto the Lord in his service. Christ Jesus took the lead, and whithersoever he leads the faithful servants on earth follow. In the prophetic drama the ‘leaders” were Barak and Deborah, picturing Christ Jesus and God’s organization; and “the governors of Israel" willingly offered themselves. (Judg. 5: 9) In the fulfillment of the prophetic drama Christ Jesus, the King, and his heavenly army take the lead and all those on earth who are Jehovah’s witnesses voluntarily offer themselves, entering the service of the King and joyfully performing that service. The fulfillment of this part was specifically marked from 1937, when at a convention of God’s faithful people assembled at Columbus, Ohio, they arose as one and marched out into the service, singing the praises of the Most High, and they have been at it since. At that great assembly of God’s devoted people the keynote was the slogan taken from the Scriptures: “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle." (Obadiah 1) That was the yeartext for 1937; another strong cir
cumstantial proof that the Lord selects the appropriate text each year for his own people.
18	Note here the evidence in proof of the fulfillment of this prophecy: Up until 1937 the average number of publishers in the field service in the United States alone was 21,454. There was a great increase in 1938, and from then onward the number has continued to increase; and in the year 1940, there were 50,000 publishers in the field in the United States alone, and that amidst the greatest persecution that has been heaped upon them by the enemy in this land. In the countries of Europe, including Great Britain, and in other parts of the earth, the number of publishers has greatly increased since 1937. For this manifestation of the Lord’s blessing all who love The Theocracy sing: "Bless ye Jehovah." “Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing unto the Lord ; I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel."— Judg. 5: 3.
18	In the prophecy the song was sung before the death of King Jabin, and this is significant and is here noticed. The kings and princes of Canaan, who had not been cleared out up to that time, were demonworshipers, and included in that number was Jabin. This shows that in the fulfillment the song of victory is begun even before Armageddon clears out all parts of the Devil’s organization. The “strange work" of Jehovah is observed by all the servants of Satan, and that greatly angers them. They behold Jehovah’s people volunteering and willingly going forward in his “strange work” and doing so with great joy, and this they do in the face of all manner of persecution heaped upon them. The kings and rulers of the earth see this, and at the instance of religious leaders, particularly those of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, they redouble their efforts put forth to destroy the faithful servants of the Almighty God. Thus notice and warning is given by the Most High, who commands that the earthly rulers shall give heed for their own good or benefit. Jehovah does not take advantage of their ignorance, but sees to it that they have opportunity to hear. Jehovah has sent forth his King, Christ Jesus, to rule, and He announces his purpose to break up completely the organization of Satan; and therefore Jehovah gives warning and advises the earthly rulers of the nations to heed, when he says to them: “Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him."—Ps. 2:10-12.
IT If the worldly rulers and judges possessed and used the slightest bit of wisdom they would soberly give heed to the warning given them from Jehovah’s Word and, doing so, they would cease oppressing the
70
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
servants of Almighty God and thus save themselves from grief. Instead, they give heed to a vicious company of religious leaders; and so now there are among the political rulers those who indict and try Jehovah’s witnesses upon the false charges of sedition and conspiracy to provoke to riot, such false charges being based solely on the fact that Jehovah’s witnesses proclaim the message of the kingdom of the Most High as God has commanded them to do. The action on the part of these rulers is in defiance of Almighty God. Will such cruel, fanatical and demoniacal persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses stop the “strange work” of Jehovah God? Certainly not. That work of Almighty God will continue until the due time to have it end, and that end will immediately be followed by His “strange act”.
18	Mark this, in the prophecy, as it is written: “I, even I, will sing unto the Lord.” This means Barak and Deborah in the picture; the Greater Barak, Christ Jesus, and Jehovah’s organization, in the fulfillment, both of which continue to sing the song. That means that Christ Jesus and his organization, invisible and visible, will continue to sing the song of praise and victory to Jehovah, regardless of whether the “kings” and the “princes”, the judges and the sheriffs, and other officers of “Christendom” like it or not. The name and kingdom of Jehovah must be and is proclaimed throughout the earth, and that work must continue until Armageddon. As God plainly declared this must be done, therefore he said to the Devil and all who support him: ‘For this cause have I permitted thee to remain, that I might show thee my power, and that my name may be proclaimed in all the earth.’ (Ex. 9:16) The proclamation of his name must continue, therefore, until his time to exhibit his supreme power against Satan and his organization. Knowing Jehovah’s purpose to have his name and kingdom declared, and knowing that no power can successfully resist Jehovah and his King, the faithful servants of the Most High on earth will continue to worship and sing God’s praises and the praises of the great Theocratic Government, and this will continue regardless of what may come to pass amongst men. These faithful servants of Jehovah God count not their earthly lives dear unto them, having in mind one thing, that is, faithfulness to Almighty God that they might prove and maintain their integrity toward him and his King, and receive everlasting blessings at the hand of the Most High, and life that shall continue forever. Jehovah’s witnesses and companions will find some way to continue their testimony, whether they be in prison or out of prison, or whether in this earthly existence and body or elsewhere. If they seal their testimony with their own lifeblood, that will constitute a witness to the name and supremacy of Jehovah God. The words
“martyr” and “witness” are derived from the same Greek root. Every faithful servant of God, in life and in death, is a witness to his name and to his kingdom. They are martyrs to the cause of righteousness. From Abel to John the Baptist there was a “cloud of witnesses” to the name of Jehovah and to his kingdom. In this Christ Jesus took the lead and continues to lead, and this is the commandment given to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus when the princes of old and Christ Jesus are cited as examples to be followed: “Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.”—Heb. 12:1, 2.
18	In this text “weight” consists of anything that hinders or retards the servants of Jehovah in giving the witness; while the besetting or close-girdling sin is religion and its baneful influence upon those who hold to any part of religion; and this shows that God’s people in this hour of crisis must remove every possible weight and must shun religion as a deadly thing. The faithful cast such things aside and go forward with a song of praise upon their lips. “Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.” —Judg. 5: 4.
20	Jehovah has recorded many prophetic examples for the comfort of his people now on the earth, and these prophetic pictures he is now revealing to them. The Almighty God, by the hand of Moses, who pictured Christ Jesus, led the Israelites on a long and perilous journey from Egypt to the land of promise, thus picturing the long and perilous journey of God’s people from the world into the Kingdom. Verse four, above quoted from the song of Deborah and Barak, refers to the march of the Israelites, led by Moses on the way to the land of promise. Moses there described the course of Edom and Mount Seir. (Deut. 2:1-8) Edom, to whom Mount Seir belonged or was held in possession, refused to give aid to the marching Israelites and, on the contrary, showed themselves to be “goats” by ill-treating the Israelites: “And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath befallen us; how our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians vexed us and our fathers: and when we cried unto the Lord, he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt; and, behold, we are in
March 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
71
Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border; let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country; we will not pass through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of the water of the wells; we will go by the king's high way, we will not turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy borders. And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword. And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high way; and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it; I will only, without doing any thing else, go through on my feet. And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand. Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border; wherefore Israel turned away from him.”—Num. 20:14-21.
21	Today that prophetic picture of Edom and Mount Seir is in course of fulfillment, in this, that back there Edom and Mount Seir pictured the religionists, including all their allies, and all of which are opponents of The Theocracy, and these are all violently opposing the people who are advertising The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. The Lord sends his witnesses to the modern-day Edomites with a message, and the religionists and allies show the wicked “goat” spirit toward the witnesses of the Lord, and hence Christ Jesus, the great Judge and King, puts those goats on his left hand and. marks them for destruction at Armageddon. (Matt. 25 : 31-46) At Armageddon Jehovah visits them and, by his King, sends all the “goats” into everlasting destruction. (See also Obadiah 1-21; Ezek. 35:1-15;. Jer. 49:7-22.) When the Lord marches forth from modern-day Edom and Mount Seir, the religionists and their allies, he will there march forth as the mighty Conqueror and behind him he will leave all opponents of The Theocracy in utter destruction.
22	The prophetic song describes what shall be the result upon modern-day Edom and Mount Seir when the Lord shall have executed the “vengeance of our God” at Armageddon. Concerning this it is written: “The earth trembled.” Back there that “earth” was territory held by the enemy of God’s people. The earth trembled because of the presence of Jehovah God representatively by Moses, and that pictured the shaking which the Lord will give Satan’s religious and combined organization on earth at his presence representatively by the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus. That shaking will cause that wicked organization to suffer complete destruction. The earthquake was for the destruction of the dwellers of that “earth”, and in fulfillment the final shaking and destruction will be upon the earth now ruled in unrighteousness.— Hag. 2:6,7; Heb. 12:26, 27.
2*	Also the power of Almighty God will be exhibited from the heavens; as it is written: “And the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.” The description given in the song of Deborah and Barak foretells the destruction that shall be upon the world and all the organizations of Satan at Armageddon, and is further supported by other prophecies relating to the same thing, to wit: “The clouds poured out water; the skies sent out a sound; thine arrows also went abroad. The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven; the lightnings lightened the world; the earth trembled and shook. Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.”—Ps. 77:17, 18, 20.
24	Regardless of the opposition, Moses and Aaron led the people right on; and so now the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, who is also pictured by Aaron, leads his people on. These events are recorded in the Scriptures for the benefit of God’s people, and to increase their comfort and hope, who are now being wickedly persecuted by the enemy without a cause. Furthermore God’s prophet describes what Jehovah did to his enemies back there, and thus shows what is coming upon the enemy within a very short time: “Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers. The mountains saw thee, and they trembled; the overflowing of the water passed by; the deep uttered his voice, and lifted up his hands on high. The sun and moon stood still in their habitation; at the light of thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear. Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.” (Hab. 3:9-13) Thus is foretold that the Lord’s army, invisible to human eye, will completely overwhelm the enemy. The clouds denote the Lord’s presence for judgment, and the execution of his judgment by destroying all his enemies. Further describing the effect upon the enemy the prophetic song continues: “The mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before the Lord God of Israel.”—Judg. 5: 5.
25	The melting of the mountains here pictures terrific heat of such intensity as to melt the rocks or entire mass of solid rock into a liquid and cause the same to flow down like liquid fire. That would be far worse than lava from an active volcano. Such must be the effect upon religion and like organizations when Jehovah performs his “strange act” at Armageddon. In this connection note that Jehovah puts a prayer in the mouth of his people, which of itself shows the prayer to be a prophecy, which God in his
72
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
own due time will hear, answer, and completely fulfill.
26	The prayer of Isaiah pictures God’s people just preceding Armageddon, to wit: “Oh that thou worthiest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence. As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence! When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for, thou earnest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence.”—Isa. 64:1-3.
27	The earth is symbolic of those who rule in the earth contrary to the law of Almighty God, while the hills picture the highest part of that earthly-ruled organization; and concerning which the prophecy says: “He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth; he toucheth the hills, and they smoke.” (Ps. 104: 32) “What ailed thee, 0 thou sea, that thou fleddest! thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back! Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams, and ye little hills, like lambs! Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob.”— Pss. 114:5-7; 144:5,6.
28	"When at Armageddon the Almighty God threshes and cuts to pieces the modern-day Mount Seir, with her religious organizations, together with all other organizations allied thereto, such as the totalitarian, iniquitous and wicked earthly rulers, then the heat of divine judgment there expressed by and through Christ Jesus will completely melt down all such oppressive systems and destroy them for ever. This indicates the manner in which Jehovah will avenge his elect or select ones and how he will vindicate his name.
28	A literal example of what shall come to pass at Armageddon was given by the Lord at Mount Sinai, concerning which it is written: “Even that Sinai from before the Lord God of Israel.” Jehovah God there demonstrated to all that He is the Almighty, the Most High, when he came down in fire upon the mountain. Thus he indicates how his vengeance will be expressed at Armageddon, when he showed that he is the Almighty God: “And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.”—Ex. 19:18.
20 Mount Sinai was not there literally melted down on that occasion, but it was there used as a type or prophetic picture of Mount Zion, that is, God’s capital organization of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and which organization will completely destroy everything in opposition thereto, executing the enemies of Jehovah and putting them out for ever. Representatively God there appears by Christ Jesus, and concerning which it is written in his Word: “For,
behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth. And the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a steep place.”—Mic. 1:3,4.
81 In the day of King Jabin the Israelites, God’s typical people, were greatly oppressed and all their freedom denied. That also appears to be prophetic, which corresponds with the oppression now upon the anti typical Israelites, the faithful people of God on earth. In every nation of the earth Jehovah’s witnesses and companions are hated solely because they advertise the name of Jehovah, his Theocratic Government, and the King thereof, Christ Jesus. This is exactly as Jesus said it would be: “Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.” (Matt. 24:9) Describing the oppressive conditions that obtained in that day of Israel the prophetic song says: “In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.”—Judg. 5: 6.
82 Such was the fear of the oppressed Israelites, and so fully were they cowed and their freedom denied and their movements harassed and their worship of Almighty God interfered with, that they walked not in the roads or highways; they would go from place to place in the by-passes to avoid the ill-treatment heaped upon them at the hands of Jabin’s secret police. A like condition today exists in other countries ruled by the totalitarian dictators, all of whom are instruments of Satan, and all are against The Theocracy and those who tell about that gracious government of Almighty God. The Israelites could not with safety leave their homes and go up to the tabernacle of the Lord at Shiloh to there celebrate the feast as required by the law of God. (Josh. 18:1) It was in that time that the Lord raised up Shamgar as a deliverer; which was following the time of Ehud: “And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad; and he also delivered Israel.” (Judg. 3:31) Doubtless Jael’s life overlapped that of Shamgar, and these are both mentioned in the prophecy, which further shows that they were both pleasing to the Lord, and their course foretells what others must do to receive the blessing of the Lord.
88 A like condition of oppression of spiritual Israelites, the people of Almighty God, began about the year 1918, when the enemy took advantage of the World War conditions and abused and oppressed the servants of Jehovah God. In that persecution the religionists took the lead and by means of lies induced the political authorities to inflict great punishment upon Jehovah’s servants. It was then that many of
March 1,1941
^He WATCHTOWER,
73
God’s people used the byways or secret ways to serve God and his kingdom, rather than to face the danger of coming out in the open and boldly proclaiming Jehovah’s name and his kingdom, as the Lord had commanded. That condition of fear continued for some time after the World War had ended, and even after the anti typical Jael class, that is, the people of good-will, began to come out and declare themselves on the side of Jehovah and his King. The persecution of Jehovah’s servants grows in severity in the present day, and even now some take to the byways, but these are few compared to those who boldly declare themselves for Jehovah and his kingdom. To be sure, it is always wise to use discretion and sagacity and not to unnecessarily provoke anyone to wrath, but, when necessary, the servant of God should not hesitate to declare himself for Jehovah God and his King, Christ Jesus. There can be no compromise.
FEAR
84 The prophetic song now shows what results from fear of men. One who has made a covenant to do the will of God, and who then because of fear of men fails or refuses to faithfully carry out that covenant, is certain to be ensnared by the enemy. Without criticism of the Israelites, who were merely men and not spiritually minded, mention is made of the course they took. It should be kept in mind that the Israelites were being used to make a prophetic picture foretelling what would come to pass upon the consecrated people at the end of the world, where we are now. While, of course, the acts of the Israelites resulting from fear could not be approved, yet if that people were acting out their part then without knowledge of the meaning thereof, they are not subject to criticism. Those who are in a covenant to do the will of God, however, should weigh well the results that come from fear of men. “The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.”—Judg. 5: 7.
88 Other renderings of this text illuminate the subject matter: “The rulers ceased in Israel, they ceased.” (A.R.V.) “There was a failure of rulers in Israel, a failure.” (Rotherham) The leaders among the Israelites failed to faithfully represent the Lord God. That foretold that the time would come when among the covenant people of God, the antitypical Israelites, that fear would lead some into a snare; and the facts show it was even so. The persecution that resulted from the World War caused almost all, if not all, of the consecrated then to fear man, because it was believed that the “higher powers” were the worldly rulers over nations. Many of God’s servants desired to lead off in the active service of the Kingdom, but were arrested and imprisoned and thus prevented from doing so, while others were forcibly re
strained ; and still others who had been leaders went into inactivity, that is, remained silent; while still others became unfaithful and betrayed their brethren to the enemy at the price of their own freedom, and such became a part of the “evil servant” as the Lord had foretold.—Matt- 24: 9-12,48-51.
80 Referring now to the typical condition and oppression that obtained as described in the prophetic song of Deborah and Barak, which says: “Until that I Deborah . . . arose a mother in Israel.” That was not boasting on the part of Deborah, but was a mere statement of the facts, as stated in the prophecy, that she judged Israel at that time. She was making a prophetic picture. In the fulfillment conditions of fear persisted amongst God’s people during the World War and until the Lord came to his temple and began judgment and the purging of the remnant by removing from them their fear due to religion, together with fear of creatures, and everything due to subservience to human organizations in opposition to the will of God. The time had come for the Lord to build up Zion, his capital organization, which organization was pictured by Deborah; and therefore it is written: “When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.”—Ps. 102:16.
87 The Lord Jesus Christ began the building up of Zion by gathering unto himself those of his own and gathering them into one organized body, that is to say, all who had proved their integrity and been faithful. First he gathered those who had died in faith and faithful by awakening them out of death, and then he gathered “the remnant”, that is, the faithful on the earth still in the flesh, who were “caught up ... to meet the Lord in the air”; and all were gathered into unity into the organized “body of Christ”. (1 Thess. 4:15-17) The time had come for God’s “woman”, his organization, to bring forth her children and to rejoice: “Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame; for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more. For thy Maker is thine husband; the Lord of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called. For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”—Isa. 54:4,5,6.13.
88 To these children of God by his organization, and who are yet on the earth, Jehovah says: “Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.” “That ye • may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her
74
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.”—Isa. 66: 8,11.
118 It was thereafter that the remnant began to see by faith the victory of Jehovah that he would give through Christ Jesus his King. It was then that they recognized that Jehovah’s anger had been turned away from those who had feared men and who had now fully turned to the Lord, and so they began to raise a song of praise to his holy name; and concerning that song it is written: “And in that day thou shalt say, 0 Lord, I will praise thee; though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and
thou comfortedst me. Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.”—Isa. 12:1-3.
40 It should be expected that the faithful servants of Jehovah God on the earth would from that time forward make progress and that their joy would increase, and that they would go forth with confidence and with singing; and the Scriptures and the facts show that it is even so.
(To be continued)
FROG PLAGUE ON "CHRISTENDOM”
THE plagues upon ancient Egypt Jehovah God speaks of as “wonders” and “signs”: “And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.” (Ex. 7:3; also Ex. 3: 20; 8: 23; 10:1) “He . . . wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan.” (Ps. 78:43) It now appears to those devoted to the Lord that the ten plagues upon Egypt were prophetic, and have a modern-day fulfillment.
Pharaoh the king of Egypt served the Devil, Satan, and represented him on earth. Why Jehovah the Almighty God has permitted Satan to remain and continue his nefarious work in all the centuries past is stated by Jehovah thus: “To show thee my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.” (Ex. 9:16, Am. Rev. Ver.) The declaring of Jehovah’s name throughout the earth takes place at the end of the world, hence now. Jehovah has taken out from the nations a “people for his name”, and he uses them in connection with the declaring of his name, just as he used Moses and Aaron in Egypt. “He sent Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen. They showed his signs among [the Egyptians], and wonders in the land of Ham.” (Ps. 105:26,27) Moses pictured Jehovah’s great Prophet, Christ Jesus; whereas Aaron, the brother of Moses, pictured the members of the “body of Christ”, over which Christ Jesus is the Head, and of which there is a small remnant on earth today. They are the anointed witnesses of Jehovah.
The plagues from one to nine were in effect pointed declarations and notices of Jehovah’s supremacy over the oppressors of his people, and thereby both Jehovah’s organization and Satan’s organization are made to appear prominently. The tenth plague brought the release of Jehovah’s people from Satan’s organization and their deliverance out from Egypt. Such plagues were performed before Pharaoh, and hence constituted notice to him. The modernday, antitypical fulfillment of the plagues must be before Satan and his organization, and they constitute notice and warning to Satan and his organization. Economic depression, woes and misfortunes have come upon the peoples of the world, but we know that Jehovah is not responsible for such, because it is expressly stated, at Revelation 12:12, that Satan has brought these woes. Therefore the nine preliminary plagues upon ancient Egypt could not properly foreshadow and apply to such woes, but must have some
symbolic significance, such as the seven last plagues described in Revelation, sixteenth chapter. Each plague is a specific message of misfortune from the Lord, and these messages delivered in modern times against Satan’s organization irk, disturb, plague and forebode the downfall of Satan and his organization. As the plagues upon Egypt constituted notice and warning, antitypically fulfilled today the plagues must be notice and warning.
Jehovah commanded Moses to perform certain signs in Egypt, first before his own brethren, the Israelites, and then before the ruler of Egypt, Pharaoh, the purpose of which signs was to supply convincing proof that Jehovah is God and that Moses was sent to Egypt as God’s representative. The third of those signs when performed by Moses and Aaron before Pharaoh constituted the first plague upon Egypt. That sign or wonder was the turning of the waters of the river Nile into blood; Jehovah “turned their rivers into blood; and their floods, that they could not drink”. “He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.” (Pss. 78: 43, 44; 105: 29) Jehovah’s commandment to Moses concerning the first plague is recorded at Exodus 7:14-25 Moses there appearing before Pharaoh was a type of Christ Jesus, the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name. The rod which Moses lifted up represented the divine authority conferred by Jehovah upon him. Antitypieally it represents the divine authority conferred by Jehovah upon Jesus, the authority and power of the Lord Jesus Christ to oust the enemy and deliver his people. Aaron acting with Moses pictured in the antitypical fulfillment today the remnant on earth performing the duties of Jehovah’s witnesses to whom is committed the “testimony of Jesus Christ”. Aaron in using Moses’ rod shows that these witnesses are acting under divine command.
Satan, as foreshadowed by Pharaoh of Egypt, is totally depraved, and many of his visible agents on earth give evidence of their total depravity. God continues to give them notice and warning, as he did of old to Pharaoh. The second plague upon Egypt was that of frogs. “He sent . . . frogs, which destroyed them.” “Their land brought forth frogs in abundance.” (Pss. 78:45; 105: 30) The full record of the second plague appears at Exodus 8:1-15. Jehovah commanded Moses (the type of Christ Jesus) to say unto Aaron (the type of the earthly mouthpiece of Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s witnesses) to proceed with the work of carrying
Mabch 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
75
out the second plague: “And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt. And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.”—Ex. 8: 5, 6.
The hand stretched out holding the rod, which manifestly was Moses’ rod, represented and pictured the power and authority of Jehovah God conferred upon Christ, the Greater Moses, and by him upon the earthly members of his organization, the servant class, who bear the message or testimony of Jehovah before the rulers and before the people, particularly of “Christendom”. The rivers and ponds and other waters pictured the peoples of the world, but particularly of “Christendom”. According to the Hebrew text frogs are “marsh leapers” and inhabit shallow waters or marshes. They give the appearance of great wisdom and importance and make a loud and discordant noise, and these particularly represent the modern agitators amongst the common people who suggest divers and numerous remedies for the salvation of the world; for example, the socialists, communists, Christian Scientists, and the various elements of organized religion. According to the Bible frogs are unclean; and their coming out of the waters of Egypt, that is, the world, shows that whatever they represent today is from Satan’s organization, because Egypt was a part of Satan’s visible organization. Frogs are mentioned in the Bible only in connection with the plagues upon Egypt, and nowhere else aside from Revelation 16:13, which reads: “And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.”
It was the exercise of divine power and authority that caused the frogs to come up and to be exposed and to harass the Egyptians. Antitypically, it is the authoritative exercise by Jehovah’s servants (including those on earth) of the power and commission from Him in delivering the message of notice and warning to the enemy organization and which exposes the many so-called “remedies” for the human race. According to the physical facts of modern times it appears that the second plague, that of frogs, as antitypically fulfilled had its beginning upon Satan’s organization from the year 1927 and onward and corresponds to the sixth vial of God’s wrath, at the pouring out of which there appeared the “three unclean spirits like frogs” (Rev. 16: 12-16), also to the sixth trumpet and its effects as described at Revelation 9:13-21. The facts which relate to the antitypical fulfillment of this plague are these:
The Lord Jehovah caused his people to assemble in general convention at Toronto, Canada, in July, 1927. The Lord had so arranged conditions that the broadcasting combine was put in a position that its radio facilities must be used to the glory of the Lord on that occasion. Before a visible audience of 15,000 people, and within the hearing of an unseen audience of millions, an address entitled “Freedom for the Peoples” was delivered at this Toronto assembly, and the resolution entitled “To the Peoples of Christendom” was read, and the visible and invisible audience by vote adopted the resolution. Fifty-three radio stations were linked together in the greatest radio network up to that time, extending from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast,
and these, together with short-wave broadcasting apparatus, heralded the truth through the United States and Canada and to the lands across the sea. The spirit and substance of that message was: TJoose those who are bound in Satan’s organization and let them go free.’—Rev. 9:14.
The message broadcast on that occasion was afterwards printed and distributed by the millions of copies to the peoples of earth and in many languages. Amongst other things that message said was in substance this: ‘The blessings so much desired by the people can never come through any unrighteous system of “Christendom” or any organization of so-called “Christianity”, because the same forms a part of Satan’s organization, and there is no reason for the people to give support to that hypocritical and oppressive system that blinds them, misleads them, and turns them away from God. Further, in this hour of perplexity Jehovah God bids the people to abandon and for ever forsake “Christendom” and all of her misleading systems and organizations, because all of these are of the Devil’s organization.’—Bee Light, Book One, page 163.
At the time of the delivery of that message (two years before the world depression began in 1929) commerce was at its zenith in operating fraudulent and oppressive schemes to get rich, and which schemes were oppressive to the people. About the time of the delivery of that message men and women through the public press and by other means began a great croaking noise in the way of palaver and talk and agitation, and wind-puffing, assuming great wisdom and making much noise about the ability of their various systems to bring about the desire of the people, the falsity of which talk and agitation the message of Jehovah’s witnesses “To the Peoples of Christendom” exposed as being from Satan. Amongst these croakers were included the religious clergy and their newspapers, as well as the secular press. All of these things were the expression of human or man-made wisdom and were all opposed to God’s kingdom under Christ, The Theocratic Government. Included also amongst these croakers is the class of consecrated persons who, because of unfaithfully turning against the Lord’s organization, became “that evil servant” foretold by Christ Jesus at Matthew 24:48-51. Such “evil servant” class join with the public press and the clergy and other agitators to speak against Jehovah’s witnesses and against the message of truth delivered by these. Many who thought they were amongst God’s people were misled by these croakings and became offended at Jehovah and Christ and fell away, joining Satan’s organization openly. Some of these offended ones said in substance: “Had the radio speech at Toronto been tempered with moderation the National Broadcasting Company would have permitted the continued use of its radio facilities to the Watchtower Society.”
None of such frog-croaking, of course, came from Jehovah’s witnesses, but came from those that opposed the Kingdom; and the fact that Jehovah’s witnesses called attention to and exposed these croakings as being from the Devil, and cited the Scriptures in support of that fact and showed that none of such schemes were from God, made the croakers very angry.—See Jeremiah 23:16-21, 31, 32.
The message above mentioned exposing the frog-croaking was distributed to the official element of Satan’s visible organization pictured by Egypt as well as to the people.
76
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Satan induced his wiseacres to try to offset it by bringing forth some “frogs” of their own, just as Pharaoh of old had his magicians do. “And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.” (Ex. 8:7) These latter frog-messages did not proceed from the croakers amongst the common people, but, as Revelation 16:13 declares, they “come out of the mouth of the dragon, and . . . the beast, and . . . the false prophet”, the official element of the Devil and his organization. This latter scripture gives the clue to the meaning of the frogs of the second plague upon Egypt: “for they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty.” (Rev. 16:14) In the above text in Revelation and in connection with the Egyptian plagues are the only places in the Bible where frogs are mentioned, and both references show they represent the beastly and fraudulent claims made by Satan and his organization which the Lord by his power has exposed.—See Light, Book Two, pages 42-51.
The plague of frogs does not in any manner refer to Jehovah’s witnesses as being suchlike, nor to the message delivered by them, but that plague does show what resulted by reason of the delivery of the divinely given message, because the message resulted in exposing these various croak-ings or false claims.
The record, at Exodus 8:8-15, reads: “Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Entreat the Lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the Lord. And Moses said unto Pharaoh, ... Be it according to thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the Lord [Jehovah] our God. And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river only. . . . And the Lord did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields. And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank. But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.”
The dying of the frogs does not mean that Jehovah’s witnesses as the exposers of the “frogs” stopped proclaiming the message of truth, because Jehovah commands them to continue their work; but it does seem to say that the reasonable people on earth begin to see that these croakers have no real means of bringing blessings of life to the people, and such persons of good-will cease giving heed to them. By the croaking of these antitypical “frogs” the official part of Satan’s organization was greatly disturbed, and hence, fearing that the same might interfere with their schemes, they, like Pharaoh, lied in order to have themselves released from these frog annoyances and continued to oppress Jehovah’s people. (Ex. 8:8) The frogs of Egypt did not all die, but only those that were on the dry land and in the houses of Pharaoh and his official family. All the other frogs remained in the rivers. (Ex. 8:11) Correspondingly, in 1928 the Watchtower Society published a new book Government, and that message of God’s kingdom specially pointed out that all attempts of government by agitation and agitators, such as hereinbefore described, must fail or die because only God’s kingdom under Christ can bring what is the desire of the people. (See Government, pages 242-247.) That message was put in the hands of practically all the official visible part of Satan’s organization in “Christendom”. Satan and his official crowd probably have taken some satisfaction in believing that they will not be overthrown by such agitators, but that their own schemes, namely, the false, unclean messages that come from the mouth of the Devil, his beast, and his false prophet, bespeak the remedy for the controlling of humankind.
The message contained in the book Government further exposes the many false systems and attempt of government by imperfect human creatures and points out that the only possible means for the blessing of the people of good-will is through The Theocracy, God’s kingdom under Christ. The message of truth therefore angers Satan’s organization, the antitypical Egypt, the members of which harden their hearts, like Pharaoh. Hence further testimony of notice and warning must continue, which will plague Satan’s organization, and which will be to the honor of Jehovah’s name.
THE FIRST RESURRECTION
THE FIRST ONE to be resurrected from death, and who is therefore “the firstborn from the dead”, said: “Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection; on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.”—Revelation 20:6.
The use of the word the emphatically in connection with the resurrection means the chief resurrection or that resurrection which is of greatest importance. The phrase "the first resurrection” means that it is first in importance and also first in time. The inference to be drawn from this, of course, is that there is a resurrection subsequent to and to some degree less in importance than the first.
When Jesus was on earth as a man no one had been resurrected. He stated that at that time no one had ascended into heaven. (John 3:13) Later the apostle Paul, as God’s witness, gave testimony to the same effect: “But now is*
Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.”—1 Cor. 15: 20.
“Christ” means the “Anointed” of God. “The Christ” is composed of Jesus, “The Head,” and the anointed members of “his body”, which are the church. (See Colossians 1:18, 24; Ephesians 1: 22, 23.) The Scriptures prove that Christ Jesus is the beginning of the resurrection, that his resurrection precedes all others and is first in importance as well as in point of time. It is manifest therefore that all who have a part in “the first resurrection” must be in Christ and therefore be a part of “The Christ”. To be “in Christ” means that one must be begotten to spiritual life and anointed by the spirit of Jehovah, and thereby adopted into the “body of Christ”.
The Scriptures are explicit as to the conditions that must b'e met and performed by all who will ever participate in the first resurrection. To merely profess to be a Christian
Mabch 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
77
will not suffice. One must make a full consecration of himself to Jehovah God. That consecration must be accepted, followed by one’s justification by Jehovah. The one justified must be accepted by Jehovah as a sacrifice through God’s great High Priest, Christ Jesus, and then be begotten to spiritual life, and called to the heavenly calling, and from that time on enter upon his trial or test. He must be “baptized into his [Christ’s] death” by the sacrifice of his right to live everlastingly on earth as a human creature, which right to life resulted to him by reason of his being justified. He must become “dead with him” in order to live with Christ Jesus in the spirit. Only those who are baptized into Christ’s death can possibly partake of the first resurrection.—Rom. 6:3-8; Luke 12: 50; Matt. 20: 22, 23.
From Jehovah’s side of the covenant of consecration, the Christian is counted dead as a man from the time he is begotten of God’s holy spirit. The one thus begotten must finish his contract or covenant in actual death and there be actually baptized into the death of Christ Jesus. Such is the testimony of the apostle: “Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.”—Rom. 6: 3-5.
At the timp of his consecration the Christian enters into a covenant with Jehovah. This is called a “covenant by sacrifice” and must be fully performed. The importance of the performance of that covenant is stressed by the apostle when he wrote: “Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith: that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.”—Phil. 3:8-11.
The apostle was determined that nothing should stand in the way of his full performance of his part of the covenant in order that he might partake of the resurrection of the dead. To this end he put everything else in the background and pressed forward that he might attain unto the prize. He was not willing to take any chance by being active in God’s service for a time and then to rest upon what he had done, but he realized that he must continue faithful even unto death. There is a temptation to become weary in the service of the Lord, and for one to think that he has done enough; but such a one should remember that the Christian reaps in due time provided he does not relax in the performance of his covenant. (Gal. 6:9) The faithfulness of the “new creature” must continue even unto death if he would receive the “crown of life”, which means to participate in the first resurrection.—Rev. 2:10.
“Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection.” (Rev. 20:6) That means that such a one is wholly devoted to the Lord, and that his condition is happy because
thereof; but this condition must continue unto the end of his earthly journey if he would participate in the first resurrection. The whole or complete devotion to the Lord cannot begin after one reaches the heavenly realm; there must be a complete devotion to God while the Christian is on the earth. Only these are granted the prize of immortality.
Since “The Christ” means “The Anointed”, and is composed of the Head Christ Jesus and the many members of “his body”, it follows that the first resurrection, which had its beginning when God raised up Jesus out of death, will be completed only when every member of the “body of Christ” has been raised to glory and immortality. And the completion of the resurrection of the Christ must precede the general resurrection. The Scriptures appear to indicate that God through Christ Jesus will exercise his power and raise to life on earth those faithful ancient witnesses mentioned by the apostle Paul in Hebrews the eleventh chapter before the completion of The Christ by taking the last member of the body of Christ from earth to heaven.
At Pentecost, fifty days after the resurrection of Jesus, the selection and begetting of the “body of Christ” began. Thereafter as each Christian finished his earthly course, full in the faith, he went into the grave to await the Lord’s time for the resurrection. Concerning this the apostle Paul said shortly before his own death: “Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.” (2 Timothy 4: 8) “That day,” as used here, must mean the time when the Lord resurrects those saints who have been asleep in Christ Jesus, waiting for his appearing.
At the time Paul wrote his second letter to Timothy, quoted above, his work was done. He was satisfied that he had been faithful. He had the testimony of the Lord that he had been true and had performed his covenant. He was ready to depart. His great desire, as he expressed it, had been, and was at that time, that he might participate in the resurrection of Christ. Now he knew that he must die and wait in death until “that day” when the Lord would call him forth from the state of death and give him a crown of righteousness. That crown would be life in the highest condition. Then he would be victorious. Then he would “put on immortality". (1 Cor. 15:53,54) He would then gain the victory over death and the grave, because no more should death have power over him. Then, as he nad written to the Corinthians, Paul could say: “0 death, where is thy sting 1 O grave, where is thy victory ?”
The Lord had illuminated the apostle’s mind and had made it clear to him at that time that he would triumph over death and the grave; and that that time would come in the future, when not only would the apostle triumph but all others of the Christian saints who were sleeping in death would likewise be awakened and given the crown of life; that is to say, all those saints who ‘dove his appearing”. The apostle does not say that all who would be expecting the second coming of the Lord or all who would desire to see him come would receive the crown of life by participating in the first resurrection, but those who “love his appearing”; that is to say, those who would rejoice in the fact that the King has come and has taken unto himself his power and begun his reign as earth’s rightful Ruler.
78
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
It follows then that all such as love the outward manifestation of the Lord's invisible presence would prove their love by keeping his commandments.
Christ Jesus could not consistently take power and begin his reign until the expiration of the “times of the Gentiles”, or “times of the nations”, and the “times of the Gentiles" did not expire until A.D. 1914, that being 2,520 years after the first destruction of Jerusalem in 606 B.C.—Luke 21:24; Ezek. 21: 24-27; Dan. 4:16, 23, 25, 32.
When Jesus was on earth Satan was “the god of this world”. Satan also had access to heaven, because he was the invisible ruler of the earth as well as the heavens relating to the earth, and must continue in this position until God’s due time for Jesus to assume power and act. God does everything in due time. His statement, at Ezekiel 21:24-27, was that the Gentile Times should continue until he “whose right it is” to rule should come. The Gentile Times began with the overturning of Jehovah’s typical theocracy in 606 B.C., and must continue for 2,520 years (or "seven times”) and therefore end in A.D. 1914; and until that time Jesus must wait at the right hand of Jehovah God. Upon this point the Scriptures are explicit: “But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; from henceforth expecting [waiting] till his enemies be made his footstool.”—Heb. 10:12,13.
During a part of that period of “waiting” the Lord was doing a preparatory work. Until the end of the Gentile Times Satan was in possession by God’s permission. When that time expired it was due time for Jehovah to become active against him and for Jehovah, through Christ Jesus, to take possession and oust the Devil from heaven and restrain him to the earth. The clear statement of the prophecy is that God would make the enemy his footstool, and since the prophet declares that the earth is the footstool of Jehovah, we must conclude that God would cast Satan out of heaven into the earth. The prophecy then says that when God’s due time had arrived he sent forth his beloved Son to do the work of ousting the enemy, saying to him, “Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies."—Ps. 110: 2.
In what capacity did Christ Jesus go forth to do this work? In the capacity of the great Priest or Executive Officer of Jehovah God, which Priest was foreshadowed by King Melchizedek, “priest of the Most High God.” (Gen. 14:18-20; Heb. 7:1-3) It was God doing the ousting, exercising his power against Satan by and through his beloved One, his great Priest. Since all things are from Jehovah and by the Lord Jesus Christ, his Executive Officer, it is proper to say that it was God’s fight against the Devil and by and through Christ Jesus. This is supported by the statement of Revelation 11:17-19: “We give thee thanks, O Lord God, the Almighty, who art and who wast; because thou hast taken thy great power, and didst reign. And the nations were wroth, and thy wrath came, and the time of the dead to be judged, and the time to give their reward to thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and to them that fear thy name, the small and the great; and to destroy them that destroy the earth. And there was opened the temple of God that is in heaven; and there was seen in his temple the ark of his covenant [symbol of the Lord’s presence]."—Am. Rev. Ver.
It pleased God to cause a prophetic statement to be
recorded whereby the followers of Christ on earth could locate the time when he would begin action against the Devil, and the fulfillment of this prophecy in world events shows that it took place in A.D. 1914. It is written, at Revelation 11:18, that “the nations were angry" when he took his power to reign. The Gentile Times ended in 1914, and the nations were then angry, in the first World War, and it was the Lord’s due time to take possession and oust Satan. Seeing, then, that the Scriptures conclusively prove that the Lord Jesus Christ did not take his great power and begin his reign till 1914, it follows that the resurrection of the faithful Christian saints that slept in death did not take place prior to 1914.
Referring again to Revelation 20:6: It is there stated that these blessed ones who participate in the first resurrection are made priests unto God and unto Christ Jesus They could not become an active part of the great Melchizedek priesthood prior to 1914, for the proof shows that Christ Jesus, as the Head of that great priesthood, began his action against Satan after the Gentile Times ended, to wit, in 1914. Reasonably, the sleeping saints would not be awakened to life in the spirit in heaven and thereby be resurrected to the office of priesthood prior to the time that the Lord would begin the exercise of his priestly office against the enemy.
Note Revelation 20:6 says: “They shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.” It is manifest that the reign of Christ Jesus did not begin prior to 1914. Reasonably the saints would not be resurrected to the position of kingship prior to the time that the Lord Jesus became active against the enemy, as foreshadowed by the prophecy which began to have its fulfillment in 1914.
In the Scriptures "Zion” means God’s organization, and is pictured or symbolized as a pure woman, God’s “woman”. Zion, or God’s organization, brings forth or gives birth to God’s capital organization, the Kingdom, of which “the man Christ Jesus” is God’s anointed King and Head. Hence the Kingdom is pictured or symbolized as a “man child”. Zion also gives birth to the other members of God’s royal house or family, to wit, the members of the “body of Christ”. Thus "Jerusalem”, or Zion, “which is above,” is spoken of as the "mother" of all the Kingdom class, God’s royal family or capital organization. (See Galatians 4: 26.) Does it necessarily follow that the sleeping saints would be resurrected simultaneously with the time when the Lord Jesus took his power and began to reign ? Not necessarily. The weight of Scriptural evidence shows that he first took his power, and that thereafter the resurrection of the sleeping saints followed unseen to human eyes because "it is raised a spiritual body". (1 Cor. 15:44) The words of Jehovah, through his prophet (Isaiah 66:7,8), are: “Before she [Zion] travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child [the Kingdom, in which Christ Jesus is King of kings]. Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day ? or shall a nation be born at once ? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children [the others besides the King of kings]."
The woman referred to here is Zion, God’s organization. The man child mentioned is the nation or government which
March 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
79
shall rule the world in righteousness. That “nation” or righteous government rests upon the shoulder of Christ Jesus. Isaiah 9: 6 says: “The government shall be upon his shoulder.” In A.D. 33, when Jesus was resurrected from the dead, all power in heaven and earth was vested in him. (Matt. 28:18) The birth of “the nation” or Kingdom would therefore mean that when God’s time would arrive for Christ to function as King that would mark the birth of The Nation. It is evident that a distinction must be made between the Government, represented by “the man child”, and the individual members of the “body of Christ”.
It would not necessarily follow that the sleeping saints should be resurrected when the government is born, for the reason that the governing power rests upon Christ Jesus, and he could reign regardless of whether any members of his body were with him. It is a privilege for any of the body members to reign with the Head, but it is not a necessity. Isaiah 66:7, 8, above quoted, indicates the following order of events, to wit: The birth of the “man child”, which is the Government resting on the shoulder of Christ Jesus; then, following such birth, the period of pain or travail; and then the birth of the “children” of Zion. This is directly opposite to natural birth of humans, because in the natural birth the pain precedes the birth. Therefore the prophet asks: “Who hath heard such a thing? Shall a nation be born at once ?” That is exactly what happened. The birth of the “nation” was instantaneous, when Christ Jesus was sent forth to rule and took power to reign; whereas the birth of the body members of The Christ extends over a period of time.
When 1914 arrived, and the Gentile Times ended and Jehovah’s time had come to act, he sent forth his beloved Son (Ps. 110:1, 2) ; and that marked the beginning of The Nation. The nation was born without pain and before travail of Zion. After the nation was born Christ Jesus goes forth to make war against Satan and to oust him from heaven. That was the beginning of the controversy or travail. How long the fight lasted the Scriptures do not indicate, but they do indicate that the fight had ended and Satan had been east out of heaven before Zion gave birth to “her children”, the members of the “body of Christ”, including the sleeping saints
Concerning the birth of The Nation, or Kingdom, Revelation 12 5 states: “And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne.” This is a de
scription of the birth of the Kingdom, and not of the members of the body of Christ. Its being “caught up unto God and to his throne” would suggest that the authority proceeds from the throne of Jehovah God, because it is time for Jehovah to act, as indicated in Revelation 11:17, above quoted.
Then the account at Revelation 12 proceeds: “And there was war in heaven: Michael [this title applying to Christ Jesus in heaven] and his angels fought against the dragon [the Devil] ; and the dragon fought and his angels ” (Verse 7) In this fight between Christ Jesus on one side and the Devil on the other, Satan was cast out into the earth. The statement is that the angels fought with Michael. Who were the angels thus engaged? Are those angels “children” of Zion and members of the body of Christ? No, for the reason that the children were brought forth after the angels participated in the fight. The battle took place, and then Zion gave birth to the children. “Angel” means “messenger” Now, if the sleeping saints had at the time been resurrected, they would certainly be a part of The Christ, and not designated as “angels” of Christ.
At the time Jesus on earth was unlawfully arrested by the agents of Satan, the religious clergy as Satan’s agents were then Satan’s visible angels on earth. Peter wanted to fight them. To him Jesus said: “Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?” (Matt. 26:53) The word “presently” means now. So Jesus’ words meant this ‘Peter, if I ask my Father, he will now give me twelve legions of angels and more, to fight in my behalf.’ That being true even before the death and resurrection of our Lord, it is entirely consistent that these same holy angels would participate with him in the great “war in heaven” when the time came to fight.
Christ Jesus warred against the Devil and his demons in heaven, and the holy angels assigned to Christ were with him in that fight. When the fight was over, then Zion brought forth “her children”. That would indicate that the awakening of the sleeping saints in the “first resurrection” was sometime after 1914, to wit, in the spring of 1918, when Christ Jesus came to the temple for judgment, as Scriptures heretofore discussed together with the physical facts prove The birth of the children of Zion, to wit, the resurrection of the sleeping saints, would not take place until after Satan was cast out of heaven and the Lord came to the temple for the judgment of the Christians and the nations.
(Continued from page 66)
dignifies Theocracy, picturing in full-color illustration the judgment of the nations and the dividing of the people on this supreme issue and their ultimate destiny. Get your copy now, on a contribution of 5c, and study it preparatory to its general distribution shortly as elsewhere announced.
“MODEL STUDY NO. 3”
This new booklet, of 32 pages and bound in a durable cover, brings up to date the series of Model Study booklets, as it presents the study outlme covering the latest recorded speeches by Judge Rutherford, to wit, “Religion as a World Remedy,” and “The End” This booklet is very valuable, even if you do not possess the phonograph recordings of the speeches named, and with it anyone should be able to conduct a model study of the Bible in the
home or in public. Order several for use of others whom you hope to have study with you. Model Study No. 3 will be sent you postpaid at a contribution of 5c a copy. Company servants should make up combination orders for all in the company wanting copies.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks By filling m these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the tune of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip
FIELD EXPERIENCES
FROM THE WATCH TOWER’S BRITISH BRANCH
“It is a pleasure to be able to report that all is well with your London family, and with the Lord’s interests here. For some days, and especially nights, the bombing by the Nazis has lessened considerably. In the daytime raiders have been driven back from London, and at night raiders have been traveling north. Great damage has been done in some of the provincial cities. First they send a wave of light bombers with incendiaries, try to get fires going, to guide the following waves, traveling by various routes, and hoping to focus their heavy explosive attacks by the flares. Till some means of meeting this murderous, destructive work is met there seems to be nothing for it but to bear up against the havoc and suffering. But the people are bearing up in a wonderful manner, and there is not the least sign of panic, but, on the other hand, there is a clear stiffening of determination to try to put an end to the awful thing which is abroad in the earth. Our immediate neighborhood, which got so much evil attention recently, has been almost free from further damage. Another thing, wonderful in its way, is the pertinacity of Jehovah’s witnesses in continuing their work of witnessing, and in trying to comfort the people by the knowledge of the truth. They are surely a people with a purpose, set in that by the grace of God, who purposed at this time to have a people for his name. The weather has been milder than might have been expected, except for cold winds, and this has been favorable to the people, who, in their thousands, nightly carry some extra clothes for their nights in the Tubes and shelters, and who in the early morning must go out to their homes, sometimes to discover they are wrecked, wholly or in part, and uninhabitable. The branch servant will be keeping you informed of the growing difficulties in importing. The mails have come through very well on the whole, though the non-arrival of The Watchtower of November 15 and December 1 issues seems to indicate a loss at sea. The constant refreshment of the reading is a great ‘miss’, for every issue has its portion. One feels the need of the prayer, ‘Give us this day our daily bread’; and no doubt the Lord is causing his people to remember the need to pray for His gifts.”
COMMUNIST RAISES CATHOLIC MOB (ORIENTE, CUBA)
“We were arrested and charged as thieves. This was caused by a Communist who was looking for a chance to relieve his father of some cash and other goods. It so happened that we worked that district about the same time his fever was on, therefore he seized the opportunity, cleared his father of $60 and some other things, then went right away and reported at Omaja that this robbery was done by two men, Jamaicans, selling books with a phonograph. So they were out looking for us. We were attacked by a mob of twenty men and boys with sticks, machete and revolver, who compelled us to return and delivered us to the corporal of the rural guard as ‘two great thieves’. You could see the Devil coming out of their eyes, but Jehovah protected us from being hurt. I asked one of them what was their religion. Then came the loud shout, ‘We are Catholics cten por ciento [one hundred percent] !’ That night we had to go ten kilometers with the corporal, who was very nice to us. He took our bags on his horse and prepared meals when he got to Omaja. The sergeant was also a very nice man. They gave us beds, and in the morning we saw the judge, who gave
us our liberty and declared that those boys were all mad. They took literature. We went out and covered Omaja, leaving over 75 pieces of literature in the hands of the people, and returned home thanking and praising The Theocrat.”
THE PHONOGRAPH IN EL TIGRE, VENEZUELA
“Today witnessing in the above village with the recorded lecture ‘Enfrentense a Los Hechos’ (‘Face the Facts’), I had a very large group, all of fifty; then this number increased rapidly to a crowd. All seemed to enjoy themselves with facts stated. I asked the listeners if they believed in the resurrection of the dead. Some hesitated to answer; but then I said to them, To live without the hope of a resurrection is not Christian, because the hope of every Christian is to live again, whether in the spirit or in the flesh. I asked them to listen to the record ‘Resurrection’. At the same time the Devil seemed to operate his influence and the power of the demons on a young man present (he seemed to be intoxicated in every sense of the word). He said to me, ‘Are you a Protestant?’ He resorted to abuse. At the very time he interrupted the crowd was willing to clout him. He was taken away. So I continued ‘Resurrection’. Then I asked the crowd if they really understand what is or was ‘Protestantism’. They hesitated to answer. So I told them it was really Roman Catholics, against the false doctrines of the very Roman Catholic religion, who opposed such false teaching and withdrew themselves from that religion and started another way of worship which they believed was true according to their conscience or belief. I told them neither Protestants nor Catholics were worthy of anything if they ignored the truth of the prophecies. They were pleased to hear that there is a chance of living again. I explained how one’s life depends upon obedience to Jehovah and Christ Jesus our Salvador. I promised to be with them tomorrow night to give further explanation of this Christian hope.”
AT STATEN ISLAND (NEW YORK CITY) WATERFRONT
“Saturday evening, while distributing magazines at a ferry terminal, I approached a gentleman with The Watchtower. After a ten-minute discussion he said. ‘I believe in being honest. I’m not interested in The Watchtower, or what you believe, but if Judge Rutherford in this movement can get young people to do this work on a Saturday night instead of going out and having a good time, then there must be something in it.’ ”
‘DON'T YOU TALK: LET THE PHONOGRAPH!’
“Stating that the Bible is not a religious book almost always brings forth a ‘What’s that? The Bible, you say, is not a religious book?’ This helps to open the way to play a lecture series: you are an obstruction with many, and the phonograph certainly helps them. I just played ‘Government and Peace’ for a lady in her apartment. She was just not in favor of Judge Rutherford, but I finally persuaded her to hear it, and when finished she remarked, ‘Well[ well, I never knew there was such an inspiration for me in Rutherford!’ I immediately asked her a time to play ‘Religion’. Said she: 'Ey all means! Come at six o’clock Friday.’ An old gentleman to whom I played all the recordings said: ‘Don’t you talk, you just play that phonograph, and I vouch that everyone who hears those two lectures will have it settled in them ever after, that Rutherford’s O.K., and that he is for them 100 percent.’ ”
80
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, NY., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, J1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Fobeion, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian................ 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian ..........7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African .................Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may hare The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers; Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“THE SIGN” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This Testimony Period, covering the month of April, will be world-wide, and brings to a climax the three-month campaign with The Watchtower. Those looking for the early appearance of “the sign” for Armageddon to begin will not slack the hand in this final month of the campaign, but rather intensify their efforts, and unquestionably more Theocratic publishers will enter the field. Never have such had a finer offer to make to humankind in danger of Armageddon, to wit, a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, together with the book Religion and the two new booklets Theocracy and God and the State, all on a contribution of $1.00. Begin planning and preparing now for your part in this special Testimony Period. Write us if you need references to the local company organized for this service. Your report of work at the close of this Period will be appreciated.
“THEOCRACY”
This new booklet by Judge Rutherford, in 64 pages, offers the clearest and best description yet of the world’s leading issue today, “The Theocracy.” The visible operations of its representatives on earth are plainly set forth, together with the vicious opposition which they are encountering world-wide. A specially fine cover
dignifies Theocracy, picturing m full-color illustration the judgment of the nations and the dividing of the people on this supreme issue and their ultimate destiny. Get your copy now, on a contribution of 5c, and study it preparatory to its general distribution shortly as elsewhere announced.
MEMORIAL
The Scripturally assigned date for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah’s name and the sacrifice of His provided Lamb, Christ Jesus, is Friday, April 11,1941, after six p.m. Each Christian company should therefore assemble after six p.m. of April 11, and the anointed ones celebrate the Memorial, and their companions, the Jonadabs, be present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse just before the partaking of the emblems, the short article “Memorial” as published in the Watchtower issue of March 15, 1939, should be read instead. Since the breaking of the bread and the drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine, to follow the example of Jesus and his apostles, who used real red wine in (Continued on page 95)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	March 15, 1941	No. 6
VICTORY SONG
PART 2
"The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it; Of the fruit of thy bod/y will I set upon thy throne."—Ps. 132:11.
TEHOVAH’S Word makes it impossible for the I faithful servant to doubt the establishment and J complete domination of The Theocracy. Not only has Jehovah given his unchangeable Word, but he has confirmed his Word by his oath that he will build up his capital organization Zion with his beloved One, Christ Jesus, as the Head thereof, upon the throne of the organization, and that his good and righteous government shall rule the world in righteousness and that rule shall never end. David, whose name means “Beloved”, and who stood as the representative of Christ Jesus, had uttered a prayer unto Jehovah, and the words of the psalmist in the text first above cited is the response of Jehovah to that prayer; which words he binds with his oath, thus making doubly sure that he will bring forth his government, The Theocracy, to complete victory and glory, the vindication of his holy name. Over a period of centuries men who have pledged themselves to serve Jehovah God have divided themselves into two classes: some have departed from that covenant, while others have been faithful. The failure of some men, in turning away from their covenant, has in no wise altered Jehovah’s announced purpose. Having purposed it, he will do it. There cannot be the slightest doubt about the result in the mind of one who loves Jehovah, and for the comfort and assurance of His faithful servants the Lord Jehovah supports his word by his unbreakable oath. The apostle sums up the matter in these words, at Hebrews 6:17,18, which reads: ‘"Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.”
2 From Abel to the last of the holy prophets of God there were faithful men on the earth who not only believed in The Theocracy but staked their all on it and gladly suffered martyrdom rather than to yield to the adverse influence or power of the enemy,
and thus they maintained their integrity toward Jehovah. Within that period of time, however, many persons who once declared themselves to be believers on and servants of Jehovah lost faith, fell away, and became unfaithful to their agreement. The entire nation of Israel solemnly agreed to be faithful to Jehovah God, and yet that nation fell away, and the result is the loss of the benefit of The Theocracy, which can never be regained. In modern times nations of the earth have claimed to be “Christian” and claimed to have faith in the kingdom of God, and have publicly uttered prayers that it might come and God’s will be done on earth as in heaven, and yet all these nations have forgotten God, and today there is not one nation on earth of the organized governments that advocates or even believes in The Theocracy. On the contrary, The Theocracy is opposed by every nation, and those who are witnesses to the name of Jehovah and Christ Jesus are hated in all the nations, and this hatred, as Jesus declared, is because of their faithfulness to The Theocracy.—Matt. 24:9; John 15:19-21.
8 The promise and oath of Jehovah was to his beloved One, and that was not an unconditional promise so far as the creatures are concerned. Jehovah further added these words: “If thy children will keep my covenant, and my testimony that I shall teach them, their children shall also sit upon thy throne for evermore.” (Ps. 132:12) The condition is that the children of the beloved One, Christ Jesus, whom the Lord Jehovah gave to him, must “keep my covenant and my testimony”; and, so doing, such faithful ones shall be with Christ Jesus, the beloved One, in the Kingdom. Every one that has faithfully kept his covenant and testimony with Jehovah has suffered violence and persecution at the hands of the enemies of The Theocracy. Thus opportunity has been offered to each and every one that made the covenant to prove his integrity under adverse conditions and to thus prove Satan’s challenge to Almighty God a malicious lie.
83
84
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
4	Why have so many creatures failed? There has been one chief besetting sin that has caused such failure, and that besetting sin is demonism, otherwise called “religion”. It was that close-girdling sin, religion, concerning which the apostle wrote to those who had made a covenant to be faithful servants and witnesses of Jehovah, and of which the inspired witness said: Het us lay aside every weight and the sin which so easily besets us, and let us run with patience the race set before us; looking unto Jesus [the beloved One, to whom Jehovah gave the oathbound promise], the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy set before him [the joy of being the King and vindicator of Jehovah’s name] endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.’—Heb. 12:1, 2.
5	God’s people living on the earth today have all the wealth of Jehovah’s revealed Word and the record of faithful men who have gone before and who proved their integrity toward God, together now with an abundance of physical facts which have come to pass in fulfillment of God’s prophecies, to uphold and strengthen them and to fully fortify them against all opposition and violence heaped upon them by the enemies of The Theocracy. Amidst the strife and turmoil now upon the world, and with the demons exercising over men indescribable influence and power, Jehovah continues to reveal to his faithful servants the meaning of his prophecies written long ago, and which discloses that in the centuries past he had such faithful servants of today in mind and made these prophetic pictures for their benefit, comfort and hope. The “remnant”, and those “other sheep” of the Lord who are companions of the spiritual class, should now be strong of faith and very courageous and should continuously proclaim the name and the praise of Jehovah and his King and never permit anything to turn them aside from that complete devotion to The Theocracy. The “great multitude”, as well as the “remnant”, must be faithful in keeping covenant with God and must prove their integrity to the Most High and to his King. The same degree of faith is required of all who receive the approval of the Almighty and his King. The Victory Song has begun in the fulfillment of prophecy, and that song must continue to swell with increasing volume and until all who survive Armageddon shall know that The Theocracy is now exercising its authority and power and that everlasting peace and blessings have come to stay forever. The Victory Song, sung by Barak and Deborah, pictured the things that are now being fulfilled in the earth with those who are fully devoted to God and his King.
• Barak, who pictured Christ Jesus, and Deborah, who pictured the organization of Jehovah, with Christ Jesus as the appointed and anointed Head,
performed their respective parts in the prophetic drama and together raised the typical song of victory. This they did at God’s appointed time, and the fulfillment thereof is now in progress. Note then what brought about the terrible and deplorable conditions in Israel and why Barak and Deborah were used by Jehovah to make the prophetic picture and to sing the prophetic Victory Song: “They chose new gods; then was war in the gates; was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?”— Judg. 5:8.
’ Prior to the arising of Deborah, the Israelites, as a nation, were pursuing the course of idolatry. That people had fallen under the influence of demons and the nation had chosen to serve the demon mighty ones and thus to practice religion, which is demonism. The fact that Barak pictured Christ Jesus at the temple and that Deborah pictured the capital organization of Jehovah shows that the prophetic picture began to have its fulfillment with the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple for judgment, and is conclusive proof that at that time religion would be still clinging to God’s covenant people on earth and that they that would prove faithful must be cleansed of religion or idolatrous practices. As there were a few of the Israelites amongst those of the nation who were faithful and true to their covenant with Almighty God, even so it is to be expected that there would be a few faithful amongst the spiritual Israelites, or those who had made a covenant at the time of the beginning of the temple judgment by Christ Jesus. It follows also that there would be an unfaithful class made manifest at that judgment.
8	Note here the facts which did become so very manifest at the time of the beginning of the temple judgment with the appearing of Christ Jesus in 1918. Up to that time the people of God were indulging in many religious practices of which the following were some, to wit: Idolizing individuals, and “character development”, and exalting “character development” by men as a means by which entrance into the Kingdom could be had; the exaltation of individual men by setting some of them in a prominent place or upon a pedestal, figuratively speaking, and giving to them unusual honor and praise; the existence of man-made vows and ‘daily morning resolves’, and the performance of such ceremonies in the homes and at public assemblies; the fixing and forecasting of dates, attempting to tell what God would perform in the future ; consulting a pile of stone, the pyramid of Gizeh, for the fixing of dates; standing in awe of political rulers of the state as being the “higher powers” to which every Christian soul should be subject, and thus making of them gods or mighty ones; the practice of designating a fixed number of pages in certain books to be read daily, and the wearing of pins
March 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
85
or other marks of identification attempting to indicate that such by outward show were followers of Christ Jesus; long faces, long and solemn prayers in affected tones of voice; similarly a like outward appearance for the purpose of impressing upon observers the importance of the one thus performing. These are some of the things that represented the spots on the garments or identification of those who had entered into a covenant to obey Almighty God.
8	What is here said is not for ridicule of the consecrated of the “Elijah period” of the church, but to show how Jehovah foreknew and foretold the influence of religion and how it would affect those who consecrated themselves to do his will and who then followed the traditions of men. Also the prophecy foretells the necessity of cleansing the faithful ones that they might be used as servants of the Lord to offer to him an “offering in righteousness”. This and other prophetic pictures disclose to the people of God now what a subtle and devouring enemy religion is and the great havoc religion has wrought amongst men. Another strong and corroborative picture of the same thing is that recorded in the prophecy of Zechariah 3:1-3. As there described, “Joshua the high priest” pictured Christ Jesus, the great High Priest, while “Joshua”, alone, pictured those who had made a covenant to do the will of God, whom Christ Jesus the great Judge gathered together unto himself at the temple for judgment. Prior to the beginning of the temple judgment Christ Jesus, “the Messenger of the covenant,” hence “the angel of Jehovah”, did a great work of preparing the way before Jehovah, as stated by the prophecy. (Mal. 3:1) Then straightway that great Messenger came to the temple and there began the judgment of the covenant people of Jehovah God. Satan was there to look after his religionists, whom he had subtly entrapped by means of deceit and the practice of formalism and other religious ceremonies. The prophet of Jehovah describes the scene in these words: “And he shewed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.”—Zech. 3:1.
10	The faithful ones standing there with the Lord are described as ‘brands plucked from the fire’. (Zech. 3:2) What fire? The destructive fire of demonism or religion. Some of those who had covenanted to do God’s will had withstood that destructive influence and power even though they were mixed up with and identified as religionists. Their “garments” are symbols of identification, and the soils on their garments pictured the religion or demon influence. “Joshua,” thus distinguished from “Joshua the high priest”, pictured the prospective members of the Kingdom. Concerning those to be judged at the temple, the Lord’s Word describes them, to wit: “Now Joshua
was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel.”—Zech. 3: 3.
11	Even those who had been faithful to their covenant to the best of their knowledge were still subject to certain influences and practices to which they held and in which they indulged. The judgment at the temple begins and the great Judge, Christ Jesus, readily discerns the real heart condition and the degree of faithfulness of each one there, because he judges not by outward appearance nor by reason of the soft words and sanctimonious looks, but his judgment is based upon the heart or motive of each individual who has entered into a covenant with Jehovah God. The Lord Jesus judges according to Jehovah’s rule, because the Father has committed all judgment to him and he knows the secret “thoughts and intents of the heart”.-Heb. 4:12,13; 1 Sam. 16:7.
12	At the temple judgment the rejected ones were unwilling to divest themselves of their religious garments and they continued to wear their filthy garments of religion, but the faithful and approved ones were anxious to do the will of God and to follow the great Judge, Christ Jesus, whithersoever he would lead. Concerning those whom the great Judge found to be faithful servants, he speaks to them by and through his faithful angels standing by in these words, to wit: “And he answered and spake unto those that stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments [religion-demon influence] from him [the faithful, approved class].” The great Judge said: “Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.” “And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the angel of the Lord stood by.”—Zech. 3:4, 5.
13	That was an unconditional approval, and taking them into the Kingdom; but these from that time forward were required to walk in the way of the Lord and to shun religion, that is, other gods; and concerning this it is written: “And the angel of the Lord protested unto Joshua, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts; and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by.” —Zech. 3: 6, 7.
“ Henceforth everyone who receives the final approval of the Lord, and who receives an abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our God, must shun religion and must be a true and faithful witness to the name of Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government.
“When the Israelites “chose new gods”, that is, when they became idolatrous, “then was war in the gates.” Thus was foretold what should come to pass
86
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
at the time of the temple judgment. In the fulfillment of that part of the prophetic drama, which took place at the beginning of the temple judgment, the disapproved ones, that is, those who were not pure of heart but who held to religion, took their stand over with the other religionists, and all of whom become open opponents of the faithful servants of Almighty God. The facts exactly corroborate this, as it is well known that in 1918, at the beginning of the temple judgment, there was no peace amongst those who claimed to be in covenant with God, that is, between the faithful and the unfaithful. The religionists of the various denominations, together with the disapproved ones at the temple judgment, began a warfare and carried on a warfare against the faithful servants of Jehovah up to the point of cruel persecution and imprisonment and did all within their power to hinder the witnesses in their bearing testimony to the name of Jehovah God and to his King. From 1918 onward there was no unity of action amongst those who professed to be on the Lord’s side at the beginning of the temple judgment, because the religionists continued their warfare against the approved ones; and these religionists the Lord designates as the “evil servant”. The “evil servant” class have ever since been open opponents of the “faithful servant” class, who put forth their best endeavors to advertise The Theocracy.—Matt. 24: 45-51.
16	Concerning the Israelites the words of the prophetic song are: “Was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?” It is estimated that there were four million Israelites in the land at that time, and, that being true, there would have been less than one hundred shields and spears in the hands of the Israelites. At any rate, there must have been a very small amount of war equipment at hand. That condition was due to the fact that the Devil-worshipers, or religionists, the Philistines, had almost completely disarmed the Israelites, and this the Philistines did that they might feel safe in their position. Likewise the church denominations prior to 1918, and up to that time, endeavored to overreach all of the consecrated and induce them to surrender their devotion to the Lord’s kingdom and to join with the church denominations in their religious practices, even saying to those who insisted on remaining faithful: “If you will come along with us, there will be no persecution of you by the warmongers.” Later the Philistines repeated their disarmament program against the Israelites when they regained control over Israel just before Jonathan and David arose in Israel. The record of that disarmament set forth in the Scriptures reads: “Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel; (for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears;) but all the Israelites
went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock. Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads. So it came to pass, in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan; but with Saul, and with Jonathan his son, was there found.” (1 Sam. 13:19-22) The Lord provided the equipment for his faithful people in times past, and the Lord has provided equipment for warfare by his faithful people ever since.
17	King Jabin and his forces must have thought it very strange that Barak and his little army of ten thousand would arise against the mighty organization of Jabin; and when Barak led his little army of ten thousand unto Mount Tabor and prepared to fight against King Jabin and his Captain Sisera, whose army was equipped with nine hundred chariots of iron and other strong equipment, it would still appear to be a very strange action on the part of Barak. The Israelites being almost without arms, it was necessary at that time for Jehovah to perform a “strange act” in using his mighty power to destroy the enemy and to deliver his covenant people, who had remained faithful to him in Israel and had stood out against other gods or religionists.
“Likewise in the latter part of the “Elijah period” the covenant people of God had so conformed themselves to religion or religious practices, which the enemy had brought forward, that they were almost without any equipment to stand against the assaults of the enemy. God’s covenant people were then looked upon as just another religious sect that held peculiar ideas. They were recognized as only a part of other religions. They looked upon the political governors as the “higher powers” and were otherwise conforming to religious practices; and yet amongst them there were some who insisted on obeying God rather than men. Then shortly after the beginning of the temple judgment Christ Jesus as the great Executive Officer of Jehovah brought his faithful approved ones into the temple, equipped them for warfare, not with carnal weapons, but with an understanding and appreciation of God’s Word, and sent them forth to engage in Jehovah’s “strange work”, that is to say, in the work of boldly declaring the name of the great Theocrat and his government. He armed them in the holy cause of righteousness and afforded the ability to stand against the machinations of religious influence. This “strange work” amidst organized and fully equipped opponents must continue and shall continue until Jehovah God, by Christ Jesus, begins to carry to complete success his “strange act” and to use his equipment to completely annihilate the enemy.
March 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
87
18	The faithful Israelites, under the command of Barak and Deborah, went forth with joy to their task, trusting wholly in Jehovah God and that his power would be exercised in their behalf. Even so the “strange work” of Almighty God has continued to progress under the command of Christ Jesus and his organization, including the faithful servants of Jehovah now on earth, and these have, with much and increasing joy, engaged in that “strange work”. It has seemed strange to the enemy, because the faithful ones have denounced religion as God’s enemy and continued to do so. The faithful have increased in their zeal and devotion, and it has been a time of joyful song in which they have sung and continue to sing the praises of Almighty God; and today that song of joy and victory is ever increasing in volume because the faithful servants of the Most High know that soon Jehovah shall vindicate his name and that he will bring about their complete deliverance. “My heart is toward the governors [the lawgivers {Young}] of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye the Lord.”—Judg. 5: 9.
20	Both Barak and Deborah sung of their heart devotion to Jehovah’s righteous cause, thus picturing the heart devotion of Christ Jesus and those of his organization singing the praises of The Theocracy. It is that warm appreciation and genuine love of Christ and the capital organization under him that causes them to express their burning zeal and heart devotion to The Theocracy, and a heart that ‘esteems them [their fellow laborers in the vineyard of the Lord] very highly in love for their work’s sake’.— 1 Thess. 5:13.
21	“Governors,” or “lawgivers”, of Jehovah’s organization are those who announce or proclaim the law and statutes of Jehovah. In the fulfillment of that part of the prophecy those in the organization of the Lord upon whom rests the obligation to outline the work that is being done and who stir up action to accomplish that work which Jehovah has commanded to be done are prefigured by the word “lawgivers”. It must be true beyond all doubt that such are guided and directed by the Lord and that they carry on the work assigned without, knowing at the time that it is in fulfillment of a certain prophecy. The Lord causes his faithful servants to do his will and then afterwards reveals to them how every man has had to do with the fulfillment of his prophetic utterance. The song of victory here under consideration was not understood as being a prophecy of victory until very recently, yet, back in 1919, those who were devoted to Jehovah went forward in the work assigned, doing with their might what their hands found to do, and it now appears to have been done according to and under the command and direction of the Lord. In 1919 certain imprisoned servants of Jehovah were
released and immediately they began to outline and draw up a program of activity in the service, and this must have been according to the Word and will of the Almighty God.
22	This Jehovah had foretold through his prophet, to wit: “I will appoint the oversight of thee to Prosperity, and the setting of thy tasks to Righteousness.” (Isa. 60:17, Rotherham} Sincere, heart devotion or love for Jehovah and his King was the moving cause for his servants to engage immediately in activity in the service work of proclaiming The Theocratic Government.
23	Acceptable service must be a willing service; therefore says the Victory Song prophecy: “My heart is toward the governors . .. that offered themselves willingly among the people.” Such is the proper and therefore exemplary course to be taken by the faithful. In line with this the apostle instructed Timothy, and hence all servants of the organization whom Timothy pictured, in these words: “Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.” (1 Tim. 4:12) The faithful ones must be “doers of the word, and not hearers only”.—Jas. 1: 22.
24	The Israelites who followed the lead of Barak against their oppressors, the Canaanites, must have been men of faith and courage to volunteer to go to war against the far superior force which was well armed and equipped for war. It took faith to believe that God would fight their battles for them and give the Israelites the victory over their enemies. Likewise following the World War, when the call came through Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak, who is the Head of the organization pictured by Deborah, to go into action, those who willingly offered themselves and voluntarily entered the service did so because of their faith and love for God and Christ. They were courageous because they recognized that they were backed up by the Almighty God, who had exercised his power in their behalf. Those charged with the responsibility of the oversight and directing of the work must promptly take the lead in the active program and with zeal carry forward the work against the entrenched and well-equipped enemy. The faithful servants of God have gone forward and have not been dismayed or discouraged by reason of the equipment of the enemy and their activities. The faithful servants of God trust him and go forward in the strength of the Lord and in the power of his might. Their weapons are not guns and swords and tanks and airplanes, but their weapons consist of “the sword of the spirit”, the message of Almighty God and his King, which they deliver in the name of Jehovah, and which is “mighty ... to the pulling down of strong holds” of the enemy. (Eph. 6:17;
88
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
2 Cor. 10:4) The faithful believe and appreciate the promise that Jehovah has given to them, to wit: “No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord; and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.”—Isa. 54:17.
25	And what is the continued attitude of all such faithful servants of The Theocracy? The answer follows in these words: “Bless ye the Lord” is their song of joy. To bless the Lord Jehovah means to praise him and serve him with joy. Those who have the interests of The Theocracy at heart do bless or praise Jehovah for providing them with the opportunity to serve him and to prove their integrity toward him and for stirring up their zeal and courage to vigorously attack demonism. All of Jehovah’s witnesses do bless or praise Jehovah for providing his faithful, fearless and progressive Society organization on earth, by and through which the Lord carries forward his witness work to the honor of Jehovah’s name. They cannot keep back the song of joy.
26	“Speak [Meditate (marginal reading)'], ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by the way.” (Judg. 5:10) This prophetic admonition was appropriate when uttered and has been appropriate at all times since. The word of God should never be passed over lightly, but should be soberly considered. Here is an admonition forcibly addressed to all who have made a covenant with the Lord, and particularly those who are not performing their duties and privileges. The Scriptures and the physical facts which apply thereto should always be considered together. One in a covenant with Jehovah should face the facts and take them to heart as to their significance and then after calm meditation act properly, seeking the wisdom that comes from above. God put in the mouth of his servant Asaph the sweet singer the appropriate words: “I will remember the works of the Lord; surely I will remember thy wonders of old. I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings. Thy way, 0 God, is in the sanctuary; who is so great a God as our God? Thou art the God that doest wonders; thou hast declared thy strength among the people.”—Ps. 77:11-14.
27	Manifestly the admonition to meditate was primarily addressed to those who had not willingly offered themselves as did the governors or leaders in Israel. On the contrary, the ones primarily addressed were those who in their hearts had said: “Let others do the hard work, and we will take it easy.” Such are the ones whom the prophetic song describes as “ye that ride on white asses”; that is to say, the elite classes who think more of themselves than they do of their brethren, such as lords and ladies, who, because of their position amongst others,
think themselves to take it easy and pursue a soft way. The song further says: “Ye that sit in judgment”; (Rotherham) “ye that sit on carpets”; (Young) 'who wear long robes’; that is to say, those who sit in style and would not think of soiling their fine garments by squatting on the ground and talking the Kingdom message to others who might hear. Now applying the prophecy to the present day of fulfillment: The admonition is addressed to those who profess to be in a covenant with God to do his will but who insist that it is their privilege to take it easy and let someone else do the witness work in the field. These excuse themselves, and they do not ordinarily tramp from door to door to publish the Kingdom message. They are too delicate and refined to set foot on the ground. Moses gave a description of such in these words: “The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter.”—Deut. 28: 56.
28	Such have not the zeal for the Kingdom that is pleasing to Jehovah. Such look upon those who have less of the material wealth of this earth and no luxuries as the ones who should bear the hard part of the field work. The faithful, zealous ones are willing to sit anywhere and on anything, even on boards or on wheel chairs or on slabs of stone or on prison benches in the cells while delivering the message of The Theocracy. The ones who are specifically admonished in this prophecy to meditate are inclined to “sit in judgment” on those who do not have the outward appearance of being so much favored as themselves. The willing ones who form the ten thousand volunteers who followed Barak and who trod the rocky and roadless slope of Mount Tabor gladly took things as they were, having in mind but one thing, and that to do the will of Almighty God and to follow their leader who pictured Christ Jesus. Others of Israel’s many thousands took the easy way, to “walk upon the road” (Roth.), and thus stayed out of the rugged mountain. The prophecy here pictures some today who have made a covenant to do God’s will and who then seek the way of least resistance and least opposition and who desire the way of ease; and they are in contrast with those covenant people of God who joyfully bear the brunt of the hardships. The one class desires the easy way, and they have much reason to meditate upon their present-day opportunities and responsibilities and to deny themselves ease and personal comfort when such is necessary to engage in the service of The Theocracy. They should be willing to follow the lead of the Greater Barak and his ten thousand willing fighters who in this day of the fulfillment of the prophecy de
Mauch 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
89
sire to bear witness to the name of Jehovah God under any and all circumstances. What the Lord requires of those who receive his approval is the zeal peculiar to the Lord’s house and the zeal that consumes them in his service, which the Lord Jesus has always had. (Ps. 69: 9) The Lord requires unstinted devotion to The Theocracy. The faithful ones are such, who have entered into the joy of the Lord and have a keen appreciation of having a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Mark the fact that the prophecy began to have its fulfillment with the temple judgment by Christ Jesus, and the physical facts disclose that from that time onward there have been those who profess to love God but do little or nothing in the service, while there are those who profess to love God and do prove their love by willingly serving under all conditions and circumstances. This latter class sing the victory song by faith now with everincreasing joy. This should cause the others to meditate and to get busy.
29	“They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages in Israel: then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.” (Judg. 5:11) The King James or Authorized Version of this text interpolates the first four words, namely, “They that are delivered.” The text literally reads: “From the voice of those dividing between the water channels.” Apparently the meaning thereof is, those who divide the spoils of the enemy. This part of the prophetic song appears to mean that those who go out to battle against the enemies of God’s covenant people are the ones who should receive the abundant blessings of the Lord and who therefore refresh themselves at the watering places. As the prophecy says: “There shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord.” Such faithful and zealous ones are in a position to appreciate the manifold blessings of the Lord and to tell about them. They do tell of the Lord’s work of vindicating his name against all unrighteousness. They are privileged to tell others how religion has misrepresented Jehovah and brought great reproach upon his name. They have many thrilling and blessed experiences in going about among the people and telling them of the righteousness of Jehovah and the blessings that The Theocratic Government will bring. Those who seek the easy way and who avoid the more rugged field service, which brings upon them some hardships, have nothing to tell or relate about the Lord’s “strange work” and his “strange act”. They can only relate about their own self-righteousness and “character development”. They do not have the joy of the Lord and do not refresh themselves by his Word, pictured by the watering places. Those who willingly
and joyfully participate in the Lord’s “strange work”, bearing the reproaches that fall upon them for his name’s sake, do serve and do refresh themselves greatly from the waters of revealed truths that come from Jehovah’s wells of salvation. Thus it is that the prophet of Jehovah God described them: “Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.”—Isa. 12: 3.
30	They bear the brunt of the battle, the abuse and ill-treatment of the enemy, but that only increases their zeal, because to them such is evidence that they are servants of Jehovah according to his will. Therefore they lift up their voice with joyful sound, relating many thrilling experiences that are theirs while in the field service, some of which experiences are from time to time published in The Watchtower.
31	According to Rotherham that part of verse eleven reads: “The righteous acts of his rule over Israel.” As related in the prophecy, Jehovah did perform his righteous acts in behalf of Barak and Deborah, whom the Lord commissioned and sent forth to the service and who took the lead in Israel against the enemy. Now in the fulfillment of the prophecy Jehovah performed his righteous acts in behalf of his “woman”, that is, his organization, pictured by Deborah and under Christ Jesus, the Head thereof, the Greater Barak. Jehovah’s faithful witnesses now by the grace of God examine the prophecy and the physical facts, which the Lord has brought to pass in fulfillment thereof, and they learn that now the great prophecy is in course of fulfillment; and that gives them joy. When these precious truths are made known to the faithful witnesses of Jehovah they joyfully carry the message abroad and tell it to all who have the hearing ear. Such faithful, zealous field workers, as servants of the great Theocracy, are strengthened by Jehovah and they put forth greater efforts in his service. Each trying experience aids the faithful to meet other difficult tasks, which likewise brings them increasing joy.
32	“Then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.” (Vs. 11) Barak led the ten thousand, who were in Mount Tabor with him, and at the appointed moment they marched right down in the valley of the river of Kishon to the gates of Sisera’s headquarters, to the gates of Harosheth of the Gentiles, and there pressed the battle against the enemy. Says the prophecy concerning this: “But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles; and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.” (Judg. 4:16) Thus the prophecy clearly foretells that in Jehovah’s due time the Greater Barak and his faithful followers shall put the enemy to complete rout. Then, as stated in the prophecy, Barak pushed on to the royal city of King Jabin and there pressed
90
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the battle to the gates of Hazor: “And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan” (Judg. 4:24), and made a complete cleanup of the enemy’s stronghold.
83	Shall Jehovah’s witnesses today tremble with fear because of the enemy? Certainly not; because as the servants of the Most High they are backed up by his everlasting and irresistible power. The faithful under Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak, are not now on the defensive, but on the offensive against demon influence and the power manifested particularly in religion. These faithful ones zealously obey the commandments of the Lord Jesus Christ, their Leader and Head, and they press the battle right to the gates of the entrenched organizations that are against The Theocracy. This is the day of the Lord Jehovah, the almighty Lord of hosts, and concerning this time it is written: “In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue [remnant] of his people, and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate.”—Isa. 28: 5, 6.
84	The faithful followers of Christ Jesus know beyond all possibility of doubt that Christ Jesus, the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, shall gain the victory and that they who remain faithful and true to their Leader to the end shall share with him in that victory.
85	The combined and official enemy, led by Satan and his chief officer Gog, know that the great climax is at hand, even though millions of hangers-on do not realize that fact. It is certain that the Devil knows that his time is short (Rev. 12:12), and, knowing this, he musters all his forces in his efforts to destroy those who support The Theocracy. In most of the countries of the earth what appears to be a successful movement to suppress the Kingdom message has been accomplished. Such, however, instead of causing dismay among the faithful people, only adds strength to their faith and zeal, because they know the day of Jehovah’s victory through Christ, and the deliverance of his faithful servants, is at hand. The faithful have no doubt as to the result. They are fully determined to maintain their integrity toward Jehovah, and they trust him to provide all needed strength.
86	Jehovah’s promises never fail! With him failure is impossible! His promise to the antitypical David, his Beloved One, Christ Jesus, is that he shall rule The Theocratic Government. Jehovah has sworn it: “He will not turn from it. Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon [my] throne.” Jehovah gave to Jesus
twelve apostles. One of them proved unfaithful, and was destroyed. The eleven proved faithful, suffered great persecution, maintained their integrity, and are now for ever with the Lord Jesus Christ. When he was with them Jesus gave them the assurance that they would sit with him in his kingdom; and now their resurrection has taken place. (John 17: 6; Luke 22: 28-30; 1 Thess. 4:13-18) Jehovah has given unto Christ Jesus a sufficient number of others to make up the other 144,000 members of “his body”, and the obligation and requirements placed upon these are that they must keep their covenant and remain faithful: “If thy children will keep my covenant, and my testimony that I shall teach them, their children shall also sit upon thy throne for evermore.”—Ps. 132:12.
” Deborah and Barak pictured Zion and the Head thereof, concerning which Jehovah said: “For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest forever; here will I dwell; for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless her provision ; I will satisfy her poor with bread. I will also clothe her priests with salvation; and her saints shall shout aloud for joy.”—Ps. 132:13-16.
88	By faith the victory song, prophetically sung by Deborah and Barak, is now in course of fulfillment and is being sung. Jehovah has placed his beloved One on the throne, and the faithful are gathered to him. For the anointed Jehovah has provided a lamp which marks out clearly the pathway which his faithful servants now follow. These are not in darkness, because they are “children of the light”, and they are marching triumphantly on by faith, singing the victory song. For their further comfort Jehovah says to them: “There will I make the horn of David [power of Christ Jesus the Beloved] to bud; I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed. His enemies will I clothe with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish.”—Ps. 132:17,18.
” The enemies are now on the run, and soon their complete destruction will be accomplished. The faithful remnant, together with their companions, the “other sheep”, are singing the praises of Jehovah and of Christ Jesus, and all together sing: “Salvation to our God . . . and unto the Lamb.” (Rev. 7: 9-12) None of the faithful will now slack the hand, but will continue to proclaim the truth of Jehovah and his King, regardless of what the enemy may say or do. In his day Paul could say, and now all of the faithful together say: “Rejoice in the Lord alway; and again I say, Rejoice.”—Phil. 4:4.
(To be continued)
Great is our Lord, and mighty in power; his understanding is infinite. Jehovah upholdeth the meek; he bringeth the wicked down to the ground.—Psalm 147:5,6, A.R.V.
EVIDENCE OF IMPENDING DISASTER
•’’/''"'CHRISTENDOM” has hardened her heart against I the Greater Moses, who is the great Prophet
Christ Jesus. Therefore the early destruction of “Christendom” is as certain as the death of Egypt’s firstborn and the destruction of her king’s chariots and hosts in the depths of the Red sea.
Jehovah’s primary purpose in sending Moses to Egypt was to place before the Egyptian ruling class and before the people the proof that He is the Supreme One. His primary purpose in sending Jesus, the Greater Moses, to earth at both his first and his second coming is to place before creation the proof that Jehovah is the Almighty, and that there is none besides him. This he does for his own name’s sake, that all may know that life and attending blessings come from God, and from Him only. This conclusion is proved by his words to Moses, to wit: “The Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah.” (See Exodus 7:5, Am. Rev. Ver.) Moses was Jehovah’s instrument in Egypt to place the evidence before the people. Jesus Christ is His instrument by which Jehovah places the evidence before all the world.
Since the divine purpose is to bring knowledge home to creatures with a view to the vindication of his holy name, Jehovah did this in Egypt in olden time by ten plagues. The modern-day plagues which are in fulfillment of those ten typical plagues consist of some definitely provided means of bringing before the peoples of the world the knowledge that Jehovah is God, that his Theocratic Government is here, and that his time is at hand when the oppressive power must get out and the people of good-will be delivered, and hence Satan must let them go or must suffer complete destruction. All this Jehovah does for his own name’s sake. Hence what came to pass three thousand years ago in Egypt was and is a memorial to Jehovah’s name. What is now done in the earth by Christ Jesus and his faithful remnant of footstep followers is a memorial to the name of Jehovah God. The plagues upon Egypt culminated in the slaying of Egypt’s firstborn, whereas the firstborn of Jehovah’s covenant people in Egypt were passed over due to the slaying of the passover lamb, which foreshadowed the death of the great Lamb of God, Christ Jesus. Since his death nineteen hundred years ago his faithful followers do, by yearly celebrating the Memorial feast, thereby show forth the death of our Lord, who is the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name.
The ten plagues upon Egypt were immediately followed by the destruction of Pharaoh’s army, which foreshadows that immediately following the present-day fulfillment of the antitypical plagues there must come the destruction of Satan’s organization at Armageddon. The third plague upon Egypt was one of lice. “And the Lord said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron [thy brother], Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt. And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man and in beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.” (Ex. 8:16,17) Lice are associated with filth and are found on creatures of unclean habits. The root of the Hebrew word translated 'Tice” means “to nip”. Hence the lice were
nippers which would greatly annoy and plague the Egyptians or anyone else whom they might bite. It was the order to Moses to direct Aaron to stretch out his rod and smite the dust of the land, thereby showing that it is divine power and authority conferred upon Christ and which power and authority are by him put upon the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses on earth to cause the coming of these antitypical nippers upon the world, which forms Satan’s organization, including “Christendom”. The lice symbolically stand for or represent that which results from the message of truth delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses and which greatly annoys, plagues and nips or bites the unclean organization of Satan, and particularly the official members thereof.
The visible part of Satan’s organization, particularly that section called “Christendom”, is an unclean and abominable thing and a good habitation for lice. It hypocritically claims to be on the side of the Lord, whereas it is a part of Satan’s wicked organization. In the days of Christ’s apostles Herod Agrippa the First, who was Rome’s representative in Palestine, killed the apostle James and imprisoned Peter and thereafter posed as the representative of God, but was in fact the instrument of Satan. It is said that he died of a loathsome or lousy disease. Acts 12: 21-23 records: “And upon a set day, Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto them. And the people gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not of a man. And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms [lice], and gave up the ghost.”
Aaron used the rod of Moses to smite the “dust of the earth”. That dust was symbolic of the earthly, human, visible part of Satan’s organization, and particularly “Christendom”, because that part is hypocritical in the superlative degree. The present-day mouthpiece of the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, is God’s remnant of anointed witnesses on the earth acting by authority conferred upon them by Jesus Christ, and these bear and give forth his message that smites “Christendom” and declares it to be not of God nor of Christ, but that it is unclean, filthy, and abominable in the sight of God and is exceedingly lousy with Satan’s agents who are nippers of the flesh and suckers of the lifeblood of the people. These lice bring upon the people great suffering, sorrow and death. The message of truth thus delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses to the visible organization of Satan declaring that organization to be lousy greatly offends the respectability of “Christendom” and plagues and annoys that organization. Thus Jehovah’s witnesses are used by him to bring a plague upon Satan’s organization by exposing the duplicity and hypocrisy of the chief visible operators therein.
It was in 1921 that The Watchtower, by the Lord’s grace, began to call attention to the fact that Satan has an organization and that its visible earthly part is made up of commercial, political and religious elements which exercise a beastly rule over the people, and is exceedingly filthy. From that time forward Jehovah’s witnesses have been continuously and consistently heralding this message before the people and exposing the hypocritical duplicity and lousy state of “Christendom” in particular and Satan’s organiza
92
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tion in general. By completely separating themselves from "Christendom” and refusing to have any part or anything in common therewith, or to touch the unclean, lousy, crawling thing, the faithful remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses add force to this plaguing message.
The lice plague came upon the ancient Israelites as well as upon the Egyptians; which means that in order for a professed Christian to be pleasing and acceptable to the Lord such must be separate from the world and be clean. Hence God’s sanctuary or temple class must be cleansed, which includes the removing from the Christian congregations such parasites as the self-seeking “elective elders”, and this must take place before God’s visible organization is entirely clean. (See Daniel 8:13,14.) As commanded at Isaiah 52:11: “Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels [the truths] of the Lord.” Also 2 Corinthians 6:17,18: “Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” The wide proclamation of the divinely provided message throughout “Christendom” has been to that devilish organization like nipping lice, greatly plaguing and annoying particularly the religious clergy and the principal ones of their flocks, including, of course, the commercial and political chief men.
Pharaoh’s magicians, including Jannes and Jambres, the class opposing Jehovah God, were unable to produce lice when commanded to do so and had to admit to their chief, Pharaoh, concerning the lice plague, “This is the finger of God.” (2 Tim. 3:8; Ex. 8:19) The modern opposers of Jehovah see themselves as unclean and that those devoted to him are clean and nothing can be found against them except their devotion to Jehovah. Jehovah declares that the unclean organization of Satan shall die like a louse. At Isaiah 51:6 it is written: “Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die like a louse [Hebrew] : but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.” (Marginal reading) The plague is still upon Satan’s organization, and he and his agents continue to harden their hearts as did Pharaoh and his officials of old.—Ex. 8:19.
It is noteworthy that, beginning with the fourth plague, the Israelites were spared and that the seven last plagues of the ten were only upon the Egyptians. This would indicate a complete separation of Jehovah’s faithful remnant today from the world. The fourth plague was that of a great swarm of flies, or, as the Bible marginal reading says, “a mixture of noisome beasts,” that came upon the Egyptians. (Ex. 8:21) In order that God’s chosen people at that time might be assured that Jehovah was with them, and that his enemies might know that Jehovah is God and favors those who love and serve him, Jehovah said by Moses to Pharaoh: “And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord [Jehovah] in the midst of the earth. And I will put a division between my people and thy people; to morrow shall this sign be.”
(Ex. 8: 22,23) Moses then served upon Pharaoh this fourth notice of warning demanding that Pharaoh release God’s chosen people and permit them to go and worship Him “And the Lord did so: and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants’ houses, and into all the land of Egypt; the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies.” (Ex. 8-24) “He sent divers sorts of flies among them, which devoured them.” —Pss. 78:45; 105: 31.
Just what composed the flies that came upon the Egyptians is not certain; in the expression “swarm of flies” the word “flies” appearing in the quotation above from the Authorized Version Bible is an added word. The word “swarm”, however, is in the Hebrew text and is from the root word meaning “to intermingle; to traffic with; to give security as a kind of exchange”. The expression well applies to swarms of flies which mix with one another in great numbers, especially in the East and the Near East, and are a great pest to the people. Ecclesiastes 10:1 says that ‘dead flies [(Hebrew) zebub] cause the ointment to send forth a vile odor5. The word zebub is derived from the Hebrew root meaning “to flit”. Hence the name “Baalzebub", according to the Hebrew, means “lord of the flitting one; that is, the side-stepper; the great transgressor”, which is Satan himself. This term would also apply to all who willingly act according to Satan’s will. The whole world, or modern-day Egypt, lies under Satan the wicked one. (1 John 5-19, Emphatic Diaglott) The world has been terribly pestered by these “flies”, that is to say, Satan and his numerous invisible and visible agents, especially since Satan has been ousted from heaven and down to the earth.—Rev. 12 • 12
After A.D. 1918 Christ Jesus, at the temple, has gathered unto himself the faithful remnant on earth and has anointed them as Jehovah’s witnesses and sent them forth with his message of truth to be given as a testimony. This message has been and is a great pest to Satan’s organization on earth. Such message has declared and continues to declare, particularly to “Christendom”, the truth of and concerning what constitutes “the higher powers” according to Romans 13:1. Prior thereto the people, including the followers of Christ, understood and believed that the "higher powers” mentioned in the Scriptures are made up of the visible rulers of this world. The Lord has enlightened his covenant people, and by his grace they now see clearly and declare to the world that “the higher powers’’ means Jehovah and Christ Jesus and that the world is serving the Devil, and that the big business, political and religious elements, jointly, rule and demand obedience from the people, yet are not of the “higher powers” but are in fact the agents of Satan and the opposers of Jehovah God His witnesses further declare that Jehovah is in no wise responsible for the woes that have come upon the peoples of earth in these last days, but that Satan and his agents are the ones that have brought these woes and troubles upon the people, and that all mankind holding on to Satan’s organization are afflicted by the bites, corruption, annoyance and all the schemes and blood-sucking doctrines of the wicked rulers of this world, including Satan himself. Jehovah’s witnesses now declare these truths, and this message exposing Satan and his organization galls and bites and plagues the chief rulers and their allies and supporters.
THE WATCHTOWER
93
March 15, 1941
Jehovah’s faithful remnant serve the true “higher powers”, God and Christ Jesus, and refuse to obey any part of Satan’s organization.
In obedience to God’s commandments Jehovah’s witnesses go about the country preaching the gospel of the Kingdom, which message bites the religionists and plagues them like numerous flies. The rulers in “Christendom” claim to be representatives of God, and if they were honest they would welcome Jehovah’s witnesses; but, instead, they sidestep the questions that are presented to them by the Lord’s witnesses and declare Jehovah’s witnesses to be peddlers and hawkers and not preachers of the gospel. The rulers of this wicked world claim that they have no objection to anyone if he worships God according to their ideas, but they denounce Jehovah’s witnesses and evade the real issue by declaring them to be engaged in a commercial enterprise instead of preaching the gospel. The truth plagues them so thoroughly that they must make some apparent plausible objection thereto.
The flies so greatly annoyed the Egyptians that “Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land”. (Ex. 8: 25) Otherwise stated, Pharaoh was willing that the Israelites might do some worshiping, but they must do it according to the Egyptians’ ideas and in the presence of the Egyptians. Now the antitypical Egyptians, the representatives of Satan on earth, say to Jehovah’s witnesses, in substance, ‘We have no objection to your worshiping your God, but do it in the church buildings (“our land”), as others do, and refrain from interfering with our commercial business or annoying our people by going from house to house.’ Moses told Pharaoh that for Israelites to sacrifice before the Egyptians would be an abomination to God. Likewise Jehovah’s remnant today reply to the modern Egyptians: ‘We must obey God, and not man; we will follow His commandments and obey the higher powers.’ In the issues of June, 1929, The Watchtower set forth for the first time the truth of and concerning the “higher powers”, and then the flies began to bite Satan’s crowd because the truth exposed that wicked organization.
As Jehovah separated the land of Goshen, where the Israelites dwelt, from the Egyptians, so God cleanses his people and separates them from Satan’s organization, showing them the truth as to who constitute the higher powers. To Pharaoh Jehovah declared: “And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth.” (Ex. 8:22) When that plague came upon the Egyptians there were no swarms of flies on the Israelites, God’s people. Even so now Jehovah cleanses his own people, whom he uses as his witnesses, and there are no flies on them. They are in the world, but not of it. They continue to declare the message of truth, and, as Pharaoh and his house hardened their hearts, even so now those of “Christendom” continue to harden their hearts and more testimony is required.
Pharaoh continued his obstinacy and hypocrisy, and Moses warned him that the hand of Jehovah would be upon all of his cattle in Egypt: “Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.” (Ex. 9:3)
The Lord specifically declared that this plague should not affect the Israelites, and then God appointed a set time for the coming of this plague upon Egypt, saying, “To morrow the Lord shall do this thing in the land.” “And the Lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died; but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one. And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go ” (Ex. 9:4-7) Before any of the plagues began to come upon the Egyptians Moses declared before Pharaoh that Jehovah would fall upon the Israelites with pestilence if they failed to sacrifice unto the Lord. (Ex. 5:3) Because of the faithfulness of Moses and Aaron in giving the testimony God spared the Israelites from the pestilence. ‘Obedience is better than sacrifice.’ The Lord spared the Israelites from these pestilences that now were coming upon the Egyptians.
The plague of grievous murrain was upon all the beasts of the Egyptians. The beasts of burden of the Egyptians, to wit, horses, asses, camels, oxen and that sort, represented the live wealth of the Egyptians in carrying on its commerce and war, and all such livestock and equipment were used by the Egyptians in exercising their selfish purpose and opposition against Jehovah’s kingdom. The plague of “murrain” or pestilence on the beasts of Egypt was a further notice and warning to the Egyptians and foreshadowed a message of truth to be declared by the power and authority of Jehovah God by and through the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, and in this the Lord’s faithful remnant on earth are used. This message is to the effect that this world’s ‘beasts of burden’, including all military and economic organizations, human inventions, and all kinds of national recovery schemes, and such things as the pope’s “holy year” of 1933, are all fraudulent and are not from Jehovah God, and are not due to the fact that Christ Jesus has ‘prepared the way before Jehovah’ (Mal. 3:1); but that all such things are of the Devil and will completely fail to bring relief to the people, and that all must die. This message Jehovah’s witnesses began to declare emphatically after the coming of the Lord to the temple in 1918 to begin judgment, and it is set forth in Book Two of Vindication, page 165 and forward. The Word of God declares that a great plague shall come upon Satan’s organization, and that all his instruments, represented by his cattle and livestock, shall die. This message of truth that their beasts of burden, their implements and other means of carrying on their commercial and fraudulent schemes must perish, is a great plague to “Christendom” and greatly annoys Satan and his visible organization.
The Lord’s Word then declares that ‘not one of the cattle of the Israelites died’; which foreshadowed that the means of activity, or the “beasts of burden”, employed by Jehovah’s faithful remnant of witnesses and their companions are wholly devoted to the Lord, and, being thus devoted to the Lord, He, of course, protects them. They separate themselves from the world and from its sacrifice unto the demons, of whom Satan is “the prince of demons”. (See Exodus 10:26; also Zechariah 14: 20, and the book Preparation, page 335.) That message declaring that vengeance shall come upon Satan’s organization because of its opposition to God and his Theocratic Government is now being delivered
94
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
by Jehovah’s witnesses and continues to plague the enemy organization.
The “botch of Egypt” was the sixth plague. The furnaces, limekilns and brickkilns of Egypt constituted a part of its economic or commercial industry, and hence pictured the things that now pertain to the commercial industry of the visible part of the world, which is Satan’s organization. (Isa. 33:12) Jehovah then directed Moses and Aaron to take the ashes from the furnaces and for Moses to sprinkle the same before Pharaoh. The record at Exodus 9: 8, 9 is: “And the Lord said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh". And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.” This resulted in the breaking forth of boils with blains, or, according to Rotherham’s rendering of the text, burning sores, breaking out with pustules.’ Such plague came upon man and beast throughout Egypt.
The sixth plague pictured a further message of Christ and his faithful remnant, his representatives on earth, which message is delivered by the power and authority of Jehovah God. The clue to the significance of this plague appears to be given in Revelation 16: 2,11, concerning the vials of God’s wrath, or messages of his judgment, which should be poured out upon “Christendom”, and which are spoken of as “the seven last plagues”. Revelation chapter 16 shows that the plague would affect all those who are members of Satan’s organization on earth as the leaders thereof, as well as those who are supporters of that wicked organization.—For further explanation see Book Two of Light, page 20 and pages following.
Pharaoh concluded that with all his equipment and power to rule he could defy Jehovah and get away with it. Even so Satan and his earthly agents have concluded that they can weld together and unite the nations and the peoples of earth into a confederacy or league and thus defy Jehovah God by setting up their own organization and thus rule and control the world continuously. (Isa. 8: 9-13) But all such schemes of the worldly organization must fail. Before the Devil and all his agents in the world, which constitutes modern-day Egypt, Jehovah causes his
faithful remnant of witnesses and their companions to proclaim that the League of Nations, the World Court, the peace pacts, disarmament conferences, the “holy year” schemes, the prosperity schemes, the so-called “New World Order”, and all suchlike schemes, are not of God, but of the Devil, and that the instigators and supporters thereof are unclean and an abomination in the sight of God, just as Uzziah, the king of Jerusalem, was unclean and became leprous for his wrongful acts of presumption before Jehovah. (2 Chron. 26:13-23) The declaration of this message of truth, beginning with the pouring out of the symbolical 'first vial’ described in Revelation 16, continues upon the world, and such declaration of truth throughout the realms of “Christendom” by means of books, magazines, portable phonographs, sound-cars, radio, and word-of-mouth testimony has been and is a great plague to the modern Egyptians. The ancient Egyptians blasphemed God’s name because of the suffering from their pains and sores; and likewise the modern-day class of Egyptians, Satan's earthly agents, do blaspheme and curse Jehovah.
This plague of putrid boils afflicted the magicians as well as the others of Egypt. “And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians ” (Ex 9:11) Those magicians could not stand before Moses to resist him; likewise the modern magicians, “Jannes and Jambres,” because of their corruption attempt to resist the message of God through Christ, but they cannot successfully do so, and their end is in sight and their fall shall appear before all men who survive. (2 Tim. 3:8) The religious clergy and all others of the “man of sin” class, and all like modern “wonder”-workers, and “holy year” workers of modern Egypt, now itch and scratch and are tormented, and thus mark themselves badly, and they continue to howl and express their agony, opposition to and indignation against the message of truth that is plainly placed before them, and thus they are guilty of the “transgression of desolation” against Jehovah God, as foretold at Daniel 8:13. Jehovah’s witnesses are divinely permitted to proclaim the message of truth which thus plagues the opposers of the Most High. Instead of giving heed thereto, these opposers harden their hearts against the Lord Jehovah God, and further plagues come upon them.
A GOD OF PURPOSE
••TXTTHEN I consider thy heavens, the work of thy \X/ fingers; the moon and the stars, which thou hast ’ ordained; what is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?” (Psalm 8 3, 4) The speaker, anointed with God’s spirit, revels in the great and marvelous things which by day man can see and which by night magnify themselves before man’s wondering gaze. He beholds the sun, which, in his might and majesty and to the exclusion of all other heavenly bodies, holds the attention of earth’s creation during the hours he shines. The sun is the only one of which man can take notice during the day; but when his glory is sunk in the west, and the curtains of night are drawn about the earth, then the millions of stars stand forth and sing the praise of the
Almighty Creator. These, together with the vast, far-distant nebulae and the nearer planets, speak joy to the mind and heart of the one devoted to God.
The clearness of the air in the vicinity of Palestine or in the desert lands enables man to more clearly see at night the unspeakable wonders of God’s visible creation above, and the reverential man involuntarily exclaims: “The heavens declare the glory of God.” These marvelous works of the heavens, says the psalmist, are “the work of Thy fingers”. From the contemplation of such gigantic creation, and the boundless space occupied thereby, and the greatness of the Maker thereof, the psalmist says, by way of contrast: “What is man, that thou art mindful of him ? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?”
March 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
95
Men of good-will are only beginning to appreciate something of the greatness of the eternal God, “whose name alone is Jehovah.” In all good conscience and with reverential devotion the expression was once used, to wit, “the divine plan,” meaning thereby that the Almighty God has a well-defined plan or scheme that he is working out in an orderly way. Now Jehovah’s people see that a “plan” or “scheme” is inconsistent with the Almighty God. A “plan” is a premeditated scheme marked out and to be followed that a desired or intended end might be accomplished. True, man carefully lays his plans and attempts to carry them out. Not so with the Creator. The Almighty Creator only needs to will that a thing shall be done and there is no further controversy and no worry about its accomplishment. "When God created the heavens and the earth he did not need to make a plan therefor. When he made the mighty oceans that wash the shores of the land he did not need to first plan that work When he made the sun, the moon, the stars, and the countless glories that appear in the heavens, he did not need to plan that work. His record concerning his creation is that ‘God said, Let it be so; and it came to pass’. (Gen. 1:15) The infinite wisdom of Jehovah God and his unlimited power render wholly unnecessary a “plan” by him. It was his will that the creature man should be made, and the work was done. If we say that God first made a plan for all his works, such an argument would indicate a limitation to his power and wisdom; and therefore we know that such a conclusion is incorrect. There is no limitation to God’s power. His wisdom is perfect.
It has been said concerning perfect man in Eden that God must have made a “plan” in the alternative; that if man remained faithful God would take one course, and if man sinned God would take a different course of action. Such statement is wholly inconsistent as to Almighty God. He is equal to any emergency that arises. He can withhold knowledge from himself if he so desires; and he is equal to any and all conditions that arise. The Scriptures do say: “Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of the world” (Acts 15:18) But these words do not indicate that Jehovah had or has a “plan”. The Almighty determines to do certain things and his infinite wisdom knows these things and knows when they will' begin and when they will end He is wholly and completely self-contained.
The apostle speaks of the purpose or will of God, “ac
cording to his good pleasure which he hath purposed m himself.” (Eph. 1:9) “Purpose” means a determination to do a certain thing. When God purposes a thing it is as though such were already done, and it comes to pass in his own good time and good way. He says: “I am God, and there is none like me.” “I have purposed it. I will also do it.” (Isa. 46: 9-11; 55:11) The words “intention” or “plan” admit of a possibility of failure to accomplish what is attempted. “Purpose” means a determination to do it, and with God the purpose is equal to the accomplished fact, because God is almighty. God never fails, and therefore the creature can always have complete and absolute confidence in hint. There is but one Almighty God, and to him are due all praise and glory. When the creature knows and appreciates that God does not need a “plan”, his appreciation of the Most High is broadened.
God has revealed himself by his name JEHOVAH, which name means his purposes toward his creatures. (See Exodus 3:13-17; 6:1-3.) Teachers of the Bible have had too narrow a view of Jehovah and have pushed his name into a corner; but now it is the Lord’s time to bring forth his name and to make himself known to his witnesses and men of good-will. These see that God does not need a plan which he must follow in order to carry out his purposes, because he is all-powerful and his wisdom knows no bounds To say that Jehovah has a plan to do certain things makes him appear insignificant and like unto creatures that must plan. The more we see of his greatness, the more we see the necessity for his creatures to have a knowledge of him in order that they may live and serve him for ever.
Jehovah is carrying forward his purposes according to his sovereign will, and not according to the ideas of any creature. It is his name that is involved. The controversy is between him and his enemy, Satan. Jehovah is supreme, and this he will prove to all of his intelligent creation He has declared his purpose to be that all shall know that he is the Almighty God, the Most High. (Ezek. 35:15; 38: 23; 39:7) He would let Satan go the full limit and let man have the opportunity to choose good or evil He would also furnish honest and faithful men with evidence of his supreme power, justice, wisdom and love, and prove that in his own due time he would establish a righteous government, destroy evil and workers of iniquity, and magnify his own name that all men of good-will might learn the way of life
(Continued from page 82) symbol of his blood. A report of the celebration should be promptly made to the Society, showing total attendance and number of partakers. In preparation for this 1941 celebration the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
“MODEL STUDY NO. 3”
This new booklet, of 32 pages and bound in a durable cover, brings up to date the series of Model Study booklets, as it presents the study outline covering the latest recorded speeches by Judge Rutherford, to wit, “Religion as a World Remedy,” and “The End”. This booklet is very valuable, even if you do not possess the phonograph recordings of the speeches named, and with it anyone should be able to conduct a model study of the Bible in the home or in public. Order several for use of others whom you hope to have study with you. Model Study No. 3 will be sent you postpaid at a contribution of 5c a copy. Company servants should make up combination orders for all in the company wanting copies.
“GOD AND THE STATE”
A new booklet, by Judge Rutherford! The urgency of the rapidly tightening world situation has hastened the issuance of this timely booklet. Parents, children, and all lovers of righteousness will be grateful for the clearness, completeness and helpfulness of the author’s treatment of the supreme issue today, as presented in its 32 pages. A neat cover design makes it very presentable. Due to the growing need for just such information, a large circulation of this latest booklet is bound to follow Get your copy now, at a contribution of 5c the copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 20: “Victory Song” (Part 2), fl 1-18 inclusive, The Watchtower March 15, 1941
Week of April 27: “Victory Song” (Part 2), fl 19-39 inclusive, The Watchtower March 15, 1941.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
ON THE FRONT LINE OF A MAJOR WAR (LONDON)
“The declaration of war itself occurred at 11 a.m. on a Sunday morning when almost all of Jehovah’s witnesses were in the field. In London the first air-raid warning was sounded within ten minutes of the declaration of war and struck abject fear to the hearts of millions. Years of propaganda had their effect and the rash came out immediately. Loyal Theocratic publishers rose to the occasion and proclaimed the Kingdom message. One publisher placed 24 Safety booklets in ten minutes; the book Salvation had a very timely distribution. As the various Defense of the Realm regulations came into force conditions became increasingly difficult, but at no time have the authorities interfered with the door-to-door work. The difficulties which had to be faced are those all the people have had to meet, air raids, the blackout, transport difficulties, food and petrol rationing and other curtailments. Today, at the end of 1940, with air raids a daily and nightly occurrence, the witness work has become a real strain, but Jehovah’s witnesses are standing up under it magnificently, going boldly forward in the Lord’s strength.
“In parts of the city recently, field drives have been scheduled and when the publishers arrive on the territory they have found the ‘contact point’ no longer existed, having been blown to bits and rows of the houses just shambles. The wholesale evacuation coupled with the constant bombing has caused an eerie condition to exist in numerous central sections of the city. Recently a party of publishers witnessing in the classy residential section of the West End, during two whole hours of door-knocking, found only about a dozen people living in a thick residential area formerly inhabited by the wealthy Bohemian class. In some of the big houses the publishers entered calling, ‘Is there any life around here?’ only to be met by grim specters of desolation, empty shattered dwellings and an occasional cat picking its way over the rubble. Truly the cities are being laid waste! Millions of windows have been blown out by blast and will not be replaced by glass this side of the end of the war. A kind of felting composition is being nailed up with wooden battens, and in thousands of houses absolutely no daylight enters from morning to night. Indeed, ‘gross darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people.’ A blackout literally and figuratively1 Often when back-calling we find the person has been bombed out and has disappeared. Magazine routes disappear overnight.
“The greatest scarcity is that of time ; the Devil has seen to that. The commonest remark at the doors is, ‘I haven’t got time for anything!’ Their time is occupied with feeding and preparing for their night in the dugout or air-raid shelter where the people put up with the utmost discomfort and with a kind of doggedness which could be found only in Britain. A typical doorstep conversation is often as follows: (Householder) ‘I haven’t time!’ (Publisher) ‘I should like to call back upon you with a phonograph lecture which will gladden your heart and bring you great comfort in these days of peril.’ (Householder) ‘My husband doesn’t get home till 7 o’clock.’ (Publisher) Wery well, I will come around about 8 o’clock.’ (Householder) ‘You can’t do that, because we go down into the shelter at 8 and stop there all night.’ The people alternate between working twelve hours a day, seven days a week, on war work and spending the
rest of their lives underground like moles in their own Anderson shelters or in the Tube shelters. It is almost impossible to get back to them for back-calls. Truly, ‘men’s hearts are failing them for fear of things they see coming upon the world!’ The Devil’s master stroke is filling the people’s time so that they have no time to consider calmly the Word of truth. Often air raids take place while Kingdom witnessing is in progress during the daylight, but, except the fighting should be directly overhead, the publishers take no notice whatever, but keep steadily on fulfilling their-divinely given commission. The total blackness of the nights makes back-calling extremely difficult, and, in the case of heavy raids, very dangerous, due to the vast amount of shrapnel falling from the barrage guns. Despite all the difficulties the London Theocratic publishers are determined to carry on to the end, well knowing that Jehovah is with them and that the day of their deliverance is rapidly drawing near.”
AT A COUNTY SEAT IN NEBRASKA
“When this young Jonadab couple moved to town it immediately became known that they were Jehovah’s witnesses, and so it was reported to the county sheriff. He came to see the wife and told her the reports he had gotten and that he told the talebearers that if that was the worst they knew about them they’d have some pretty good citizens in town. He wanted to know more about them and that if we had any meetings in town he wanted to attend. So we made a special trip last week through miles of cow-trails and rough prairies. The wife and the sheriff had arranged that we play ‘Religion as a World Remedy’ in the town hotel, since the lady there was somewhat interested too. Only five or six attended that first meeting, but the sheriff was so thrilled by the message he begged us to stay and put it on again the following night and he’d invite people he wanted to hear it. We accepted, and spent the day witnessing in the town, placing seven books and about one hundred booklets. Some were placed with the aid of the sheriff, who would appear at different places to see the reaction and to do what he could to create interest. The county attorney immediately reported us to the sheriff after we worked the court house ‘Those d----- Jehovah’s witnesses are working in town ’’
Sheriff: ‘Well, what is so wrong about that? Have you read any of their books?’ Attorney: ‘No, and I don’t intend to If those ------, ----- come to my house, I’ll run them
off the place!’ The sheriff came to tell us what had happened and to warn us not to go to that home ; too, that if we wanted to go to the place anyway, he would take us there in his car and that if the attorney did anything to us he, the sheriff, would welcome the chance to lock up the county attorney. We thought best not to antagonize the poor attorney, so did not call. Anyway, we had called on his wife earlier in the day and found her nice. Instead of making the call again, the sheriff took us on a back-call where we found a family getting both The Watchtower and Consolation and much interested. It felt queer to be riding in the sheriff’s car on a back-call instead of going to jail. The lecture that night was attended by fifteen townspeople. The hotel lobby was full and most of them gave good attention. Plans were made to have a Watchtower study at the hotel from now on.”
96
WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street »	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
officers
J. F. Butherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS M1C31ON
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction In the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British...................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................. 40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African ................  Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The "Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“THE SIGN” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This Testimony Period, covering the month of April, is world-wide, and brings to a climax the three-month campaign with The Watchtower. Those looking for the early appearance of “the sign” for Armageddon to begin will not slack the hand in this final month of the campaign, but rather intensify their efforts, and unquestionably more Theocratic publishers will enter the field. Xevcr have such had a finer offer to make to humankind in danger of Armageddon, to wit, a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, together with the book Religion and the two new booklets Theocracy and God and the State, all on a contribution of $1.00. By planning and preparing without delay you may now have part in this special Testimony Period. Write us if you need references to the local company organized for this service. Your report of work at the close of this Period will be appreciated.
“THEOCRACY”
This new booklet by Judge Rutherford, in 64 pages, offers the clearest and best description yet of the world’s leading issue today, “The Theocracy.” The visible operations of its representatives on earth are plainly set forth, together with the vicious opposition which they are encountering world-wide. A specially fine cover
dignifies Theocracy, picturing in full-color illustration the judgment of the nations and the dividing of the people on this supreme issue and their ultimate destiny. Get your copy now, on a contribution of 5c, and study it preparatory to taking part m its general distribution.
“MODEL STUDY NO. 3”
This new booklet, of 32 pages and bound in a durable cover, brings up to date the series of Model Study booklets, as it presents the study outline covering the latest recorded speeches by Judge Rutherford, to wit, “Religion as a World Remedy,” and “The End”. This booklet is very valuable, even if you do not possess the phonograph recordings of the speeches named, and with it anyone should be able to conduct a model study of the Bible in the home or in public. Order several for use of others whom you hope to have study with you. Model Study No. 3 will be sent you postpaid at a contribution of 5c a copy. Company servants should make up combination orders for all in the company wanting copies.
MEMORIAL
The Scripturally assigned date for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah’s name and the sacrifice of His provided Lamb, {Continued on page 111)
fc'VWCfflPOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	April 1, 1941	No. 7
VICTORY SONG
PART 3
"Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.’’—Isa. 60:1.
JEHOVAH gives this command to His covenant people when his time arrives for them to go into action. The commandments of the Most High cannot be ignored or side-stepped. To receive Jehovah’s approval every creature who has made a solemn covenant to do His will must act, not with sullenness or stubbornness, but with a burning zeal and genuine joy. Such a one has a heart full of gratitude which leads to unselfish devotion and zeal for the Lord. With Jehovah there is a fixed time for everything, and when that time arrives it is the duty and privilege of God’s covenant people to quickly respond to his commandments. Take note that Jehovah, in the text above quoted, gives the command for zeal and genuine activity at the time when there is great darkness upon the nations, both the rulers and the people, all of whom are anti-God, and at which time God’s covenant people are most viciously opposed and oppressed. The context of the foregoing text shows that the commandment is given at the time when the ruling powers of the nations of earth have forgotten God, if they ever knew him, and are in darkness as to Jehovah’s purposes. They are in perplexity, and at the same time the masses of the people are in gross darkness because of their ignorance of Jehovah’s purpose and because of the hindrances placed in their way by their earthly rulers. In that hour of gross darkness upon Satan’s organization and all people under it the great Vindicator of Jehovah appears and makes himself manifest to his faithful servants, and his glory and his power are seen to be upon those who faithfully follow his lead and obey the commandments of Jehovah God.
2 In the days of Barak and Deborah the Israelites, the typical people of God, were under the iron heel of the demon ruler, Jabin. The great mass of the Israelites at that time had turned to and chosen the demon gods and were indulging in religious practices. It was a time of darkness, and the Israelites were in that darkness as a nation, but there was a remnant who were walking according to the terms of their covenant to the best of their ability.
s Barak and Deborah were selected by the Lord
God to lead the willing and faithful ones out of darkness. The prophetic song of victory, which they together sung, foretold a like time of darkness that would come upon the nations of the earth called “Christendom”, both upon the rulers and upon the people who turned to the practice of religion. There never has been a time so marked by darkness amongst the professed Christians as now, because the nations have forgotten God. The fulfillment of that prophetic song began at the time of the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, when he stirred up those whom he had received unto himself and made a part of his organization, and then he sent them forth to make war upon religion and to proclaim the name of the Most High. As Barak and Deborah were sent forth by Jehovah just preceding the great battle, so the Greater Barak and his organization go forth and do the “strange work” of Jehovah just preceding the battle of that great day of God Almighty. The prophetic song therefore foretold the “strange work” of Jehovah now in progress and which takes place just preceding the battle of Armageddon, and that battle is now quickly to follow.
‘ “Awake, awake, Deborah; awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.” (Judg. 5: 12) Four times the word “awake” is uttered in this prophetic song at this point. It was a call from Jehovah to his servants then to awake and stir themselves unto active service and praise of his name. It was a fourfold call to awake, hence a full and complete call. The prophecy here foretells the call of Jehovah to his organization on earth at the coming of Christ Jesus to awake and arise to activity and to advertise his name and his kingdom. This he does just preceding the time when he exercises his supreme power against Satan and his entire organization. Those of Jehovah’s organization must obey his commandment to immediately and actively participate in declaring the name of Jehovah in singing his praises, and declaring his judgment already written against those who are opposed to him and to his kingdom. The prophetic song foretells the victory of Christ Jesus, the Greater
99
100
fEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Barak, over the enemy, and his organization shares in that victory, which organization was pictured by Deborah. Note that the command to organize is to “Deborah”, antitypically the organization of the Lord on earth. These must awake and sing or utter the song of praise to Jehovah’s name.
5	The moving cause for awaking and becoming zealously active is love, that is, unselfish devotion to doing the will of Almighty God. God’s servants, seeing their privilege, are grateful in their hearts, and they express their gratitude by unselfish devotion. As further proof that the fulfillment of the prophecy takes place shortly preceding Armageddon, note the inspired words of the apostle addressed to Jehovah’s witnesses. Here his Word recorded in Holy Writ declares that ‘love is the fulfillment of the law’; no other motive could meet the requirements of Jehovah: “Love worketh no ill to his neighbour; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law. And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep; for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.”-Rom. 13:10-12.
6	The fulfillment is in the “last days”, when the true and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are brought into the light, and hence are in the temple and are no longer in darkness. Now they are children of the light: “Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil.” (Eph. 5:14-16) “But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day; we are not of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober.”—1 Thess. 5:4-6.
7	The Greater Barak, the King of glory, has come, he who is the light of all who will walk in the light. It is the time of joy and zealous activity, and all the servants of the Most High willingly go forth in obedience to the commandment. Note, then, that the prophetic song refers exclusively to Christ Jesus in these words: “Arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.” The name “Abinoam” means “father of sweetness and grace”; which name applies to Jehovah God, the Father of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Jehovah is love, and he is sweetness and grace. Every attribute of perfection is in Jehovah God. He is the manifestation of sweetness, grace and goodness to all who joyfully obey him. Christ Jesus, his beloved Son and Executive Officer, at the fixed time receives the signal, the command from the Most High, to begin “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”; which battle was pictured
by Barak leading his army against the forces of Sisera, Jabin’s captain. Before the beginning of the battle of Armageddon the organization of the Lord on the earth, pictured by Deborah, must first awake and act under the commandment of the Greater Barak, Christ Jesus, and vigorously and zealously and unhesitatingly proclaim the name of Jehovah throughout the earth;
' Barak, no doubt, took many captives, but not for the purpose of sparing them alive. All of the forces of Sisera being against God and for the Devil, none of them were spared alive. “All the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.” (Judg. 4:16) Likewise when Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak, renders the forces of Satan panic-stricken and completely in rout he will take many of them captive and execute them. This part of the prophecy in reality means that all the enemies of God are destined to die, because ‘they are vessels of wrath for destruction’ (Rom. 9:22); “as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed.” (2 Pet. 2:12) At Armageddon the Greater Barak will spare alive none of the devils. “And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army. And the beast was taken [captive], and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone [symbol of destruction]. And the remnant [of the captives] were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth; and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.” —Rev. 19: 19-21.
’ This symbolic description of Armageddon foretells the destruction of Satan’s forces by the Greater Barak and, as shown in the context, is immediately followed by a great feast of rejoicing on the part of those who have remained firm, true and steadfast in support of The Theocracy and its King. The song of the faithful will fill the universe with praise of the name of Jehovah and to his government.
10	“Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people; the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.” (Judg. 5:13) The remnant of the Israelites that remained faithful under their covenant with Jehovah and that survived the twenty years of oppression under King Jabin were awake when called. When that proper time came they readily responded to the call to battle and went down and joined the chief or nobles that had willingly offered themselves for service under Barak. According to Rotherham this part of the text reads : “Then came down a remnant to the nobles—a peo-
April 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
101
pie.” That remnant was faithful, and they were Jehovah’s people. Likewise Jehovah’s people at the temple judgment faithfully followed Christ Jesus, obeyed his commandments, and were brought into the temple and made members of his organization. There they became Jehovah’s organized people and his witnesses on earth, appointed, ordained and commissioned to proclaim his name and to preach this gospel of the Kingdom. As foretold in the prophetic Psalm, they gave themselves willingly for the service from the time of the temple judgment onward.
11	Another part of the same verse thirteen of the prophetic song is rendered by Rotherham in these words: “Jehovah came down with me against the mighty.” That is what took place in the prophetic picture. Jehovah fought the battle of his people and gave them the victory over the mighty. Likewise today, when the “strange work” is being completed and the “strange act” is about to begin, Jehovah is with Christ Jesus (the Greater Barak) and his organization (Deborah) and is leading them on, and if the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses abide on the side of the Greater Barak and with Jehovah’s organization, then Jehovah is sure to be with them, fight for them, and give them the victory over the mighty forces of the Devil. This is further emphasized by the emphatic words of the prophecy, to wit: “The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.”—Ps. 110: 5, 6.
12	“Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after thee, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.” (Judg. 5:14) The rendering of this text by another scholar is better, to wit: “Out of Ephraim [came down] they whose root [settlement] was in Amalek.” (Rotherham) The ancient Amalekites spread out through central Palestine and made permanent settlement there and became rooted in the land. Concerning this it is written: “In the mount of the Amalekites.” (Judg. 12:15) This settlement of the Amalekites was in the land of the Ephraimites. It appears that the tribe of Ephraim had to subdue those Amalekites in order to live in that land, which had been assigned to the tribe of Ephraim. The tribe of Ephraim had a bad record as respects these Amalekites, in this: that at one time they had not fought valiantly against Amalek. They had been unfaithful to their national covenant with Jehovah by yielding to the demon religion and choosing the demons rather than obeying Jehovah God. Concerning them it is written: “And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation; a generation
that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God. The children of Ephraim, being armed, and carrying bows, turned back in the day of battle. They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law; and forgat his works, and his wonders that he had shewed them.”—Ps. 78:8-11.
18 That was the general reputation of the tribe, but there was a remnant of the tribe of Ephraim that remained faithful to Jehovah and they came down and joined Barak and wiped out that bad record that rested on the tribe as a whole. These faithful Ephraimites had to be against Amalek and they fought against him, and that fight was a great strength to the faithful Ephraimites when the time came to fight against Jabin and his Canaanite host under Sisera.
14 Note now the facts that have come to pass in fulfillment of this part of the prophetic song. Spiritual Israelites were, at the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, located right in and amongst the religionists. In fact, they were surrounded everywhere by religionists. Being so close to the practitioners of religion, the faithful Israelites had many religious spots on their garments at the time of the appearing of Christ Jesus at the temple. These faithful adherents to their covenant, however, first subdued and put away the influence and power of religion from them and then joined the Greater Barak, Christ Jesus, passed the examination at his judgment, and were approved. Then they entered fully into the service of the Lord. Thereafter they offered unto the Lord an offering in righteousness by zealously and faithfully proclaiming the name and the kingdom of Jehovah. The faithful remnant went forward in the fight against organized religion, that is, “Christendom” and heathendom, both practitioners of demonism. Thus Jehovah in this prophecy foretold the minute details of the progress of those who remained faithful to their covenant and were approved at the temple judgment.
15 “After thee, Benjamin, among thy people.” (Judg. 5:14) Benjamin’s territory bordered on the south with that which was assigned to Ephraim. The original Benjamin was an uncle of Ephraim, as Ephraim’s father, Joseph, was a full brother of Benjamin. The small company of the tribe of Benjamin furnished a part of the remnant of volunteers, and manifestly they did not stand back and wait for all the others to volunteer first, but some others volunteered and “after thee, Benjamin”. The prophetic song describes and identifies others of the tribes that were faithful.
14 “Out of Machir came down governors.” In the book of Genesis it is written: “The children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up upon
102
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Joseph’s knees.” (Gen. 50: 23) Machir was a man of war, a valiant fighter, and therefore he was assigned a hard territory to subdue and to hold, that is to say, that part known as Gilead that lies east of the Jordan river. (Josh. 17:1) It follows that he would train his men properly, so that the “governors” or leaders “out of Machir” must have been men of sturdy and excellent fighting qualities. They would be the very men counted on to join up with and fight under Barak; which they did. The leaders did not stay behind and tell others of the Machirites and Gileadites to go into the field and battle with Barak, but those leaders themselves went down and joined Barak and took part in the battle and the others followed.
17	Another tribe is mentioned with approval: “Out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.” (Judg. 5:14) Zebulun was a seafaring tribe. At any rate, they resided by the Mediterranean sea and, no doubt, carried on business which required the keeping of shipping records and other business; which doubtless they did, and in a proper way. “Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships, and his border shall be unto Zidon.” (Gen. 49:13) “And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and, Issachar, in thy tents. They shall call the people unto the mountain ; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness ; for they shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand.”—Deut. 33:18,19.
18	Although engaged in legitimate business those faithful men of Zebulun did not permit such things to interfere with their service to Jehovah and their fight against the enemies of Jehovah God. This clearly shows that being engaged in business is no excuse to fail or refuse to engage in the active service of the great Theocrat. Another rendering of this text reads: “And out of Zebulun such as bear aloft the staff of the marshal.” (Roth.) While they held the staff of authority for their part of the land they readily put themselves under the staff of the great Marshal and busied themselves to get more fighting men in the field for battle. In the present day the faithful servants of God, regardless of the position of importance held by them, put forth their best endeavors to get more publishers of The Theocracy into the field for the purpose of fighting the battle of the Lord against the enemy. Not all the covenant people of God respond, however. The prophecy continues to show the attitude of various ones of the covenant people toward God and the doing of his will, and thus the contrast is shown between those who appreciate their privileges and those who lack appreciation. “And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and also Barak; he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.”—Judg. 5:15.
18	The tribe of Issachar took a prominent and honorable place in the battle. The location of that tribe was on the south of the tribe of Zebulun. In Issachar’s territory lay the plain of Esdraelon and the city of Megiddo, and the valley of Jezreel. The main part of the fighting in the battle here under .consideration took place on that ground, and there Jehovah performed his miraculous and “strange” act. It was in that place where Jehovah fought the battle for the Israelites also under Joshua.—Josh. 19:17-23.
20	The instructions which God gave to Barak indicated that Issachar’s home territory would be the battleground. The leaders in Issachar’s land must have welcomed that arrangement for them to have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name and for the deliverance of the people from their oppressors. (Judg. 4:6,7) Those princes were not one whit behind the faithful Israelites in general. As it is written, they “were with Deborah”; that is to say, they were in full harmony with Deborah and, antityp-ically, in full harmony with God’s organization. For those faithful Israelites of the tribe of Issachar war was really on the ‘"home front”. This suggests that today one may serve on the home front if he cannot be a pioneer. Not all can engage in the pioneer work, but all of God’s servants may perform their duty wheresoever they are. Issachar was assigned a place, foretelling that class of God’s covenant people today who joyfully serve wherever they are put. They are wholly devoted to The Theocracy, and hence in full accord and in full unity with the visible part of God’s organization, taking their commands from the invisible, the Greater Barak, and performing their duties without hesitation. They are not pacifists, and they do not compromise. They are entirely for Jehovah’s organization.
21	“Even Issachar, and also Barak.” The American Revised Version rendering of these words is better, namely: “As was Issachar, so was Barak.” The tribe of Issachar furnished a genuine contingent of fighters for Jehovah’s name. They were exactly conformed to the image of their captain, Barak. In this they were foretelling that faithful and devoted servant class of Jehovah that will conform to the image or likeness of Christ Jesus, their Captain. Issachar’s tribe moved about and resided wherever it seemed to be best for them to reside. They were accustomed to tents, as indicated by the Scriptures: “Rejoice ... in thy tents.” (Deut. 33:18) Thus those faithful men of Issachar well picture the pioneers who gladly reside wherever their work takes them and are content with whatsoever conditions the Lord provides for them. They realize that they are given a place temporarily and, while there, doing with their might whatsoever is to be done and doing it with a grateful heart. The faithful of Isaachar were accus
SEe WATCHTOWER
April 1, 1941
tomed to bearing burdens and doing so willingly. Jacob pronounced upon Issachar this prophetic blessing: “Issachar is a strong ass, couching down between two burdens; and he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.” —Gen. 49:14,15.
22	Paying tribute to an anti-theocratic foreign power was out of order with that faithful tribe. Only Jehovah God and his Chief Executive Officer should be and are recognized as “the Higher Powers”. (Rom. 13:1) It was so with Issachar, and it is so with God's covenant people today. Issachar’s tribe foreshadowed the faithful ones of this time who recognize only Jehovah God and Christ Jesus as the Higher Powers.
23	The tribe of Issachar was right with Barak in overthrowing the power and breaking the grip of the Canaanites upon God’s people. This they did because it was God’s will and command that they do so. Likewise the faithful followers of Christ Jesus today attribute praise, honor, and glory and salvation to Jehovah and shun religion or demonism. Issachar, therefore, foreshadowed that company of Christian people who give their undivided and unstinted devotion to Jehovah and his King.
24	“He was sent on foot into the valley.” (Judg. 5:15) Thus Barak’s men went on foot, and that required real courage. The enemy under Sisera drove into the valley in 900 chariots of iron. The Israelites under Barak, from their position in Mount Tabor, could see that mighty mechanized enemy, and when the command was given from the heights to begin the fight they marched on foot right down into the valley and faced the enemy and their iron chariots. God inspired Deborah to say to Barak when the time came: “Up, for this is the day in which the Lord hath delivered Sisera into thine hand; is not the Lord gone out before thee?” Quickly Barak moved right down from Mount Tabor, and his little army of ten thousand men were right “at his feet”, all walking on foot, and the princes of Issachar were in the van of that marching army on foot. In the valley of Esdraelon, through which flows the river Kishon, they went on foot. (Judg. 4:10-14) The fact that the Divine Record emphasizes the movement of this little army “on foot” well fits the present-day condition, that there is a great deal of foot work in the house-to-house service. These servants of the Lord must walk. The Lord contrasts this with the others who take it easy, when he says: “Ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by the way [well-beaten, smooth roads].”—Judg. 5:10.
25	Such are the ones that take the easy way, and these have something to meditate about. The captain of Jabin’s army rode into the valley in great state,
103
in his chariot of iron, with his mighty mechanized equipment for war, and arrogantly displayed his power, expecting to win the battle quickly. Shortly thereafter, however, that overconfident military leader had to hop down from his chariot and take it on foot. So the Lord made the enemy do some walking. That foretells that they will be on the run at Armageddon, on foot or any other way they can go. From the prophetic record it clearly appears that ten thousand fighting men of Barak, and principally of troops from the tribes of Ephraim, Benjamin, Manasseh, Zebulun, Issachar and Naphtali, made up the little army. They did the work and did it with joy, and Jehovah gave the victory for them and completely delivered them. But how about some of the others who took a different course? and does the Lord point this out? and for what purpose?
26	“For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart,” says the prophetic record. (Judg. 5:15) Note here that the territory of the tribe of Reuben was on the east side of the Jordan and along the upper eastern shore of the Dead sea. The prophetic statement, to wit, “the divisions of Reuben,” evidently means that the tribe of Reuben was not entirely at unity, but was divided as to the war and every part in it. That being true, they were distracted and sidetracked, and hence missed the opportunity of taking a part actively in the field of battle, which activity foretells of God’s “strange work”. Reuben was Jacob’s firstborn and would be the “big brother” of the family, and he well foreshadows those who think themselves important because of birth and environment. In Israel’s emergency Reuben’s tribe did not seize the opportunity for a share in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, although that was the big brother’s part that he should have assumed as the bigbrother tribe. In contrast to this the tribe of “little Benjamin” (Ps. 68: 27) volunteered for the campaign and had a share in the “strange work” and in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Thus is explained why there was a division amongst Reuben’s tribe and, furthermore, why there was a 'great searching [great resolves (A.R.F.)] of heart’.
27	No doubt there was much noise about many good resolves and good intentions, but no real actions. Good intentions and resolves count for nothing unless there is some real activity in proof of their genuineness. Those Reubenites did nothing to set in motion anything for the furtherance of the field work, and that foretells the condition that exists amongst some at the present time. Those Reubenites, which represent a like class at the present time, cannot say with the faithful ones: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” (Ps. 13: 5) At this point the words of the psalmist appear to be well applied: “And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious gener
104
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ation; a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God.” “Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues: for their heart was not right with him, neither were they stedfast in his covenant.” (Ps. 78:8,36,37) One must prove his faith and devotion to Almighty God by acting in full harmony with confessions made by the mouth. That prayer was true in ancient times and is true now.
28	“Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.” (Judg. 5:16) Here the prophecy continues to take note of the unfaithfulness of Reuben. The Reubenites chose the peaceful pursuits and took it easy when the time came to vindicate Jehovah’s name; and, when the interests of the Israelites were at stake, the Reubenites were quite willing to have the Canaanites continue to assume the place of the higher powers over Jehovah’s people, just as long as the Reubenites could continue in their condition of ease and without interruption. They displayed no zeal for Jehovah and the honor of his name. They showed no real interest in the rights of the Israelites. They were shepherds, pastors for revenue and ease. This exactly fits the oldtime “elective elders” and other religionists, who claim to perform some part of the service but who are a part of the “evil servant” and who to this day continue to recognize earthly governments as the higher powers and who are also willing to compromise with Satan’s organization in order that they might enjoy their ease without disturbance.
28	Those Reubenites had forgotten what Moses, at God’s direction, had said to them on a previous occasion about sending a contingent of fighting men across the Jordan river to help their brother Israelites : “And Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will go armed before the Lord to war, and will go all of you armed over Jordan before the Lord, until he hath driven out his enemies from before him, and the land be subdued before the Lord; then afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel; and this land shall be your possession before the Lord. But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord; and be sure your sin will find you out.”—Num. 32: 20-23.
30	Suchlike are sinners, because they do not obey the Lord’s commandments as respects the conduct of the war against demonism or religion. Clearly this part of the prophecy foreshadows a class of professed followers of Christ who give honor to the Lord with their words but take no real and sincere action toward the publication of his name and his kingdom. They do nothing toward the vindication of the great Theocrat. Such are set forth in contrast with David, who attended to the sheep of his father, and who left
that flock in order that he might be on hand to fight for his brethren against the monster Goliath.— 1 Sam. 17: 20-24.
” “For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.” They had much cause to search their hearts and ascertain the motive for their lack of activity. It is even so today with those who say in their hearts or in their words: “Let others do the work.” The apostle evidently was inspired to write concerning modern-day Reubenites when he said: “Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates ? But I trust that ye shall know that we are not reprobates.” (2 Cor. 13:5,6) Another inspired witness of the Lord corroborates that class: “Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin.” (Jas. 4:17) “For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.”—Jas. 2: 26.
32	Today Jehovah has provided opportunity for all the consecrated to prove their integrity by giving their all in support of The Theocracy. The faithful cannot and will not compromise in order to avoid persecution. They know only one thing, and that is to do the will of God, obeying his commandments. Those whom Jehovah will approve must joyfully take their part in the service as opportunity is offered, regardless of what may be the conditions. Doing so joyfully and fully trusting in the Lord for results, they are certain to come off victorious.
33	“Gilead abode beyond Jordan; and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.” (Judg. 5:17) Here God calls attention to others that were derelict, foreshadowing a like class during his “strange work”. Gilead here named was that part of the territory assigned to the tribes of Reuben and Gad. (See Numbers 32:1, 2; Deuteronomy 3: 12-16.) There was another part of Gilead, however, which was assigned to the tribe of Manasseh, to which Machir, the fighter, was attached, and he volunteered for active service under Barak. (Josh. 17:1; Judg. 5:14) The tribe of Gad did nothing, doubtless concluding it was too much trouble and effort to cross the Jordan river and participate in the defense of the covenant people of God. Jordan means “descender”. Its waters descended or rushed down to the Dead sea, where there was no outlet. Gilead was a mountainous country, and it would appear to the tribe of Gad that the rough terrain and the Jordan river constituted for them a real obstacle and defense against the iron chariots of Sisera, and hence the Gadites concluded to let those on the other side of the river take care of themselves. This conclusion was evidently reached because those on the east side of the Jordan were
April 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
105
well protected naturally from.assault. Those conditions thus pictured what has come to pass in the modern-day fulfillment of the prophetic song. Since 1918 there have been a number of professed consecrated persons who seem to think it best for them to hole up at home and to avoid the conflict with the enemy, and have therefore let the intervening masses of humankind, pictured by the1 Jordan river, now rapidly descending into the ‘Dead sea’, hold them back from active service. Those modern Gadites have permitted the turbulent people of the present time to hinder them from crossing over the antitypical Jordan and engaging actively in the service of the Lord. They have, for selfish reasons, failed to be obedient to the commandments of the Lord, and are therefore in the same condition as if they had willingly violated God’s law. They have taken no part in exposing religion as the enemy of humankind.
34	“And why did Dan remain in ships !” Dan’s territory was close to that of the tribes of Ephraim, Benjamin and Judah. Dan’s territory extended to the coast of the Mediterranean, including the city of modern-day Joppa. (Josh. 19:40-48) Dan was engaged in commercial shipping, and doing some fishing there. He was so overcharged with his private business that Dan did not find time to respond to the call and send a contingent of fighters to join the army of Barak. He was there unlike the first disciples of Christ Jesus, who were also fishermen, and concerning whom it is written: “And he called them. And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him.” (Matt. 4: 21, 22) Likewise since 1918, when the Greater Barak came to the temple and thereafter sent forth his servants, many who have professed to be spiritual Israelites had permitted their business interests to so fully engross them that they have given commerce or business a greater place in their lives and have entirely neglected the more important privilege of serving the Kingdom. They have ignored the antitypical Deborah, the organization of the Lord, and have disregarded the call of the Greater Barak. They have failed to see that the service of the King and the Kingdom is the greatest privilege and opportunity anyone could have. Yet at the same time they have claimed to be consecrated to God. They have failed in this: that they have put business first and the Lord’s interests have been put on the side.
35	“Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches [creeks (margin)].” By means of creeks or small watercourses Asher could carry on some traffic or business with the Phoenicians and also do some business along the seashore. He lay down and did nothing to safeguard the interests of God’s covenant people. He acted that part of the picture prophetic of the present-day conditions into
which some who claim consecration find themselves. They are not disposed to separate themselves from the sea of humanity which has alienated them from God. On the contrary, they have continued a close association with the commercial and selfish business interests for selfish gain. When they learned of the Kingdom they were getting on in business profitably, and so reasoned: “Why should we put aside this profitable business and take a part in spiritual matters in the interest of the Kingdom!” Let someone else do that. Why should they jeopardize their business and their standing in the community by going right against religion and doing service and advertising The Theocracy! In this they missed the greatest opportunity that ever came to them.
” “Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field.” (Judg. 5:18) Other renderings of this text are enlightening and are as follows: “A people that exposed to reproach their lives unto the death.” (Marginal reading) “Zebulun is a people who exposed its soul to death, Naphtali also.” (Young's) “Zebulun—a people that scorned their souls unto death; and Naphtali.” (Rotherham) What a great contrast between those two tribes and the others who stayed at home and did nothing to defend the name of Jehovah and his covenant people. Zebulun and Naphtali put Almighty God first and counted not their lives of importance when compared with the honor and vindication of Jehovah’s name and the interest of his covenant people. They regarded the covenant of the nation with Jehovah as an obligation to be kept. They were first to volunteer: “And she said, I will surely go with thee; notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh. And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with ten thousand men at his feet; and Deborah went up with him.”—Judg. 4: 9,10.
37	Likewise in these days of peril, when the prophecy of Victory Song is being fulfilled; the faithful covenant people of God, pictured by Zebulun and Naphtali, go right out in the field where they can be seen and marked as a remnant of the people who are entirely for Jehovah and his Theocracy. They let it be known that they are against the abominable, demoniacal rule that is standing in the place where that desolating abomination has no right to stand. They thereby make themselves the target for the enemy and expose themselves to the assaults of mobs led by religious priests and supported by other fanatics under the influence of demons. They do not count their lives dear unto them when compared with their privilege of being witnesses to The Theocracy. The apostle Paul was one who led off in
106
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
this course of faithful devotion to the Kingdom, and hence under inspiration he wrote: “Save that the holy [spirit] witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.” (Acts 20: 23, 24) “Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart! for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”—Acts 21:13.
38	Today the faithful servants of Jehovah and his King have but one objective, and that is to do the will of Almighty God. They ask God to make them do his will, and they do not hesitate to take any place in the service to which they may be assigned. They count on the Lord to take care of them. They forget themselves. They are determined that nothing shall separate them from the love of Jehovah and his government under Christ: “For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”—Rom. 8: 38, 39.
89	Seeing that certain tribes of the typical people of Jehovah God missed their greatest opportunity by remaining inactive during an emergency, and that their action was of sufficient importance to have it recorded in the prophecy, every consecrated person today should ask himself, Why did Jehovah call attention to the derelictions of some! and why did he emphasize the course of action taken by others who joined in the Song of Victory! The answer is found
in these words recorded in the Scriptures: “Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.” (1 Cor. 10:11) “For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.”—Rom. 15:4.
40	God caused those things to be recorded to show the consecrated today their privilege of having a part in the vindication of his name and to emphasize the fact that all protection and salvation proceeds from God and none comes from any other source. The faithful servants of God today will take much comfort from these last above quoted texts, seeing also that the same thing was foreshadowed in the prophecy written long ago. The loving-kindness of the Lord is manifest at all times toward those who are diligent to do his will.
41	As shown by the prophecies and by the facts which God has now brought to pass in fulfillment thereof the battle of the great day of God Almighty is near. Demonized nations of the earth are spoiling for a fight, and they shall be accommodated. As Captain Sisera was surprised and overwhelmed, so those people whom Sisera pictured shall be surprised and overwhelmed at Armageddon. Then the song of everlasting praise to Jehovah will be heard throughout the earth. Now the people of God, having been favored by the light of the Mighty One, Christ Jesus, shining upon them, joyfully arise and shine forth the message of the Kingdom. Have you arisen, and is the light shining upon you, and are you using that light to the glory of The Theocracy!
(To be continued)
FINAL WARNING
• • EVEN” is a number symbolical of divine completeness. Pure water is a symbol of life-giving truths, whereas hail symbolizes hard and unbreakable truths that cut, bruise and kill. In the time of the prophet Moses when he was serving notice from Jehovah God upon the hard-hearted Pharaoh, the land of Egypt was visited by a rain of grievous hail such as never before was known. It was the seventh in a series of ten plagues from the hand of God. By bringing these plagues upon Egypt before the final destruction of all its firstborn of man and beast and the destruction of Pharaoh’s military forces Jehovah God furnished ample opportunity for Pharaoh to yield to His demands to let His people go free or to harden his heart and suffer destruction. Those plagues were typical, foreshadowing like plagues in these “last days”. By these latter plagues Jehovah gives notice and warning to Satan’s organization as pictured by Egypt and affords ample opportunity for Satan and his servants on earth to either willingly bow to Jehovah’s will or else suffer complete
destruction. All these plagues, antitypically, have to do with the proclamation of God’s message of truth; and this proclamation of truth, or this work of Jehovah’s witnesses, will not be completed on earth until these have proclaimed all of Jehovah’s warning messages of his vengeance against all iniquity and of the vindication of his holy name. This Jehovah’s witnesses must do before Armageddon.
When Pharaoh first refused to let the Israelites go, Jehovah might well have completely smitten Egypt, but it pleased him to cause further testimony to be delivered to Pharaoh and his royal house. Even so Jehovah might well have smitten Satan’s earthly organization when first the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, came to the temple in 1918 to judge the “house of God” and the nations of the world; but it pleased Jehovah to permit Satan to go on and to remain for a time, that further witness might be given on earth and that Jehovah’s power might be made more manifest, and that none of the world should have any reason to say they were taken unawares by the judgments of Jehovah.
April 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
107
Six plagues had now been upon Egypt, and this had served only to harden the heart of Pharaoh. The purpose of the plagues upon Egypt was to place plainly before the Egyptians the name and supremacy of Jehovah. Instead of completely destroying Pharaoh and his organization earlier in the controversy, Jehovah through Moses said to Pharaoh: “At this time I send all my plagues [ (marginal reading of the Bible) I send all my remaining plagues] against thy heart, and against thy servants, and against thy people; in order that thou mayest know that there is none like me on all the earth. For even now I might have stretched out my hand, and I might have smitten thee and thy people with the pestilence; and thou wouldst have been cut off from the earth; but for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.” (Exodus 9:14-16, Leeser’s translation) The remaining plagues that were to come upon Egypt, and which did come, were further notice and warning to Satan’s earthly organization. In modern times this notice of warning must be given and declared by Jehovah’s witnesses as members of his temple organization.
The act of God came. A great storm or downpour of hail accompanied by the fire of lightning smote the crops and men and beasts of Egypt. Jehovah had warned Pharaoh, but that warning went unheeded; and now God sent forth upon the Egyptians the seventh plague. “And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven; and the Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground: and the Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt. So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field.” (Ex. 9: 23-25) That great plague of hail came upon Egypt in the springtime, as shown by the record (verse 31) : “And the flax and the barley was smitten; for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was boiled.” Psalm 105 33 records: “He smote their vines also, and their fig trees, and brake the trees of their coasts.”
The antitypical fulfillment of that plague began to come upon Satan’s earthly organization in August, 1928. It was then that Jehovah caused his witnesses on earth, to whom had been committed the testimony of Jesus Christ, to declare his message against the “prince of the power of the air”, Satan, and his demon organization. (Rev. 16:17-21) The proclamation of a specific message was there begun, and was carried on throughout the earth, which message is designated ‘'Declaration against Satan and for Jehovah". This was first publicly declared, and simultaneously broadcast over a radio network of 107 stations, at a vast general assembly of Jehovah’s people in Detroit, Michigan. It was then, as foretold at Revelation 11:19, that the lightnings of truth flashed from the temple and the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses had their first clear vision of the great issue now joined between Satan and Jehovah. (Further on this see The Watchtower September 15, 1928; also Book One of Light, page 221.) Since that time in particular God has continued to rain down upon “Christendom” great chunks of strong and weighty truths, unparalleled in the history
of the world, and this because the time has arrived for the foretold ‘increase of knowledge’ of God’s purpose, and for the announcement to be made that the end of Satan's organization is at hand. (See Daniel 12:4 and Revelation 11:15,17.) It is the “day of Jehovah”, the day of his vengeance and vindication, and his message of vengeance must therefore be declared. Concerning what should follow that assembly in Detroit in 1928, Revelation 16:21 foretold in symbols: “And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.” That great hailstorm has continued to spoil “Christendom’s” religious fodder (pictured by the barley destroyed in Egypt), and her selfrighteousness (pictured by the linen flax in Egypt), and her self-conscious sweetness (pictured by the fig trees and their fruit in Egypt, which were spoiled). As foretold at Isaiah 28:2-17, Satan’s lies, which had found refuge in “Christendom”, there began to be swept away, and are being swept away, by the flood of truth. Therefore Jehovah is causing his witnesses on earth to bear his message of truth throughout the world to modern Egypt, calling attention to his own supreme power and that this power will be completely made manifest at the battle of Armageddon.
In Pharaoh’s realm in Egypt there were some who heard and gave heed to the warning given by Moses concerning the approaching storm; while others failed and refused to give any heed thereto, and they suffered as a result thereof Exodus 9: 20, 21 states: “He that feared the word of the Lord, among the servants of Pharaoh, made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses; and he that regarded not the word of the Lord left his servants and his cattle in the field.” Even so now some persons who are in the world but who are of good-will toward God are hearing the word of warning given by authority and power of the Lord in which his witnesses are used, and some of these seek refuge, while others disregard and scoff at the message. The great storm comes upon all of Egypt except Goshen; and likewise this great storm comes upon all the world except God’s chosen people. “Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.” (Ex. 9 26) Among God’s faithful people now on earth the truth, accompanied by flashes of lightning of spiritual enlightenment, brings great joy to the hearts of all such; hence there is no plague or hail for any of them. They dwell in the secret and protected place of the Most High and rejoice in the blessings that the Lord gives to them, even as he had long ago promised, saying : “And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places, when it shall hail, coming down on the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.” (Isa. 32:18,19) But the poor old “Jannes and Jambres” crowd are having a very grievous time. The hail and lightning blinds, bruises, plagues and torments them, and they continue to harden their hearts. More testimony is required.
Had Pharaoh yielded to the demand of the Lord through Moses and let the Israelites go and worship Jehovah, such would have been a public acknowledgment by Pharaoh that he was wrong; and hence his pride would not permit him to do so. So now, if Satan’s earthly agents should give heed to the message of Jehovah delivered through his witnesses,
108
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
such would be an acknowledgment that these faithful witnesses are telling the truth; and that would be a public admission on the part of Satan and his earthly agents in “Christendom” that the Devil and all of his organization are entirely wrong. It seems, however, that some persons in the Devil’s organization would be glad to give up the fight, because the truth is too much of a plague to them. Satan, however, has “Christendom” tightly tied, and his organization and all the members thereof continue to harden themselves against Jehovah God’s purposes.
The next plague, the eighth, was that of a great swarm of locusts. The key to the understanding of this plague appears in Revelation 9:1-12, concerning the symbolic locusts that came upon the world. (An explanation of this is found in Book One of Light, pages 136-155; and also in Religion, pages 172-202.) That these locusts should come from the east reminds us of the “kings of the east” that came against the Devil’s organization Babylon, and this gives a clue to what constitutes the antitypical plague, to wit, Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions advancing as a great swarm equipped with the message of his Theocratic Government and exposing religion as the snare of the Devil and doomed to destruction. The record, at Exodus 10:13,14, reads: “And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the Lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts. And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.” Psalm 105: 34, 35 adds: “He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpillars, and that without number, and did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground.”
In the recent past years, particularly since the London convention of Jehovah’s witnesses in 1926, the constant barrage of testimony of truth at and against “Christendom” has brought a great plague upon Satan’s visible organization Among the shots thus fired may be counted the booklets Uncovered, Cure, Warning, Face the Facts, Fascism or Freedom, Refugees, Government and Peace, Judge Rutherford Uncovers Fifth Column, and the books Enemies and Religion. The first organized mass attack of these symbolic locusts was made upon the religious community of Bergenfield, N. J., May 22, 1932, and the work of these witnesses of Jehovah has increased and prospered from that time forward, and this by the grace of the Lord. Even though there is some indication that some of these agents of Satan seemingly would be glad to yield, as foreshadowed at Exodus 10: 7-11, whatsoever repentance is shown by such servants of Satan, that repentance is not sincere from the heart, but entirely hypocritical. Jehovah’s witnesses must continue to serve notice and warning according to his commandment, that all may know that Jehovah is God, and particularly that those of good-will may have an opportunity to take their stand on Jehovah’s side. As the plague of locusts came upon Egypt, so not only has the antitypical plague begun, but this plague continues upon modern-day Egypt throughout all the land of “Christendom”.
The ninth plague upon Egypt was thick darkness over all the land of Egypt except that part of the land occupied by the Israelites, and there the Israelites had light in
their dwelling-place. Usually thick darkness strikes terror into the hearts of those who have no faith in God; and, since Pharaoh possessed a hard heart and had no faith, he was frightened and desired to be quit of the Israelites when this plague came upon him and his people: “And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt. And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days: they saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days; but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings. And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the Lord; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed ; let your little ones also go with you.”—Ex. 10: 21-24.
It is noted that in calling forth some of the preceding plagues Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, but in calling forth the ninth plague he “stretched forth his hand toward heaven". This seems to symbolically say that this message of notice and warning given by divine command pertains to heavenly things, which became totally dark to those making up the visible earthly part of Satan’s organization, and particularly those who form the religious or so-called “spiritual” elements of Satan’s organization In 1919 the League of Nations was set up as a substitute for the kingdom of God, which league the clergy that form the spiritual part of Satan’s visible organization hailed as “the political expression of the kingdom of God on earth”. Thus they disclosed the fact that they had no proper conception of God’s kingdom. In 1926 Jehovah’s witnesses made public a declaration at the earthly seat of the beastly powrer of Satan, which declaration set forth that the League of Nations is a child of the Devil and wholly in opposition to God’s kingdom. That declaration, which began at London, England, was a specific notice of warning and was addressed To the Rulers of the World and emphasized the fact that Satan had set up, by his earthly representatives, an abominable thing, to wit, the League of Nations, “that maketh desolate,” because it is a hypocritical substitute for the kingdom of God. (Matt. 24:14-16) Instead of giving heed to that warning the rulers of “Christendom” continued to scoff at the message, to harden their hearts, and to oppose God. The “transgression making desolate”, foretold at Daniel 8:13 (margin), dates from that time because they then and there had specific notice and warning that the League of Nations is in opposition to the Kingdom and is a great abomination to God; and from that time forward thick darkness has settled down upon “Christendom”. (See Book One of Light, page 137.)
Although given full opportunity to know the truth and to identify themselves with God’s kingdom, “Christendom’s” leaders have refused to give heed: “They know not, neither will they understand: they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.” (Ps. 82:5) That particularly marked it as the time spoken of by the prophet Isaiah, to wit: “For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee [my witness], and his glory shall be seen upon thee.” (Isa. 60:2) From that time onward all the opposers of the purposes of Jehovah God, and particularly the “man of sin” class, pictured by Jannes
April 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
109
and Jambres of Pharaoh’s court, had their “understanding darkened” because of their hardness of heart. (Eph. 4: 18) They received notice and warning that they were opposing God and his kingdom, and they refused to hear the message of warning, and to such the prophecy of God, at Psalm 69:22, 23, applies: “Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap. Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not; and make their loins continually to shake.”
Jehovah says: “I form the light, and create darkness.” (Isa. 45:7) At Nahum 1:8 it is written: “Darkness shall pursue his enemies.” It was Jehovah who caused the darkness in the land of Egypt; and now darkness by his command is upon Satan’s world. There is no part of “Christendom” today that has any light of and concerning the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus. As to the condition since 1926 Revelation 16:10,11 says in symbol : “And the fifth angel poured out his vial [God’s message of wrath] upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.” The effort of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to make 1933 a “holy year” brought no light whatsoever to “Christendom”, but even greater darkness, together with a totalitarian dictator in Germany. All light Jehovah has withdrawn from the world. The hypocritical howl of the clergy for “more religion” and for “God in government” brings no light of relief, but only darkness and disappointment. More keenly now than ever the political and commercial elements of the world, which have trusted and hoped that they would receive favor by the ministration of the religious clergy, have come to realize that God is not blessing the clergy nor any of their schemes. Even thousands of clergymen are now out of a job and have no opportunity of haranguing the people, by which they have heretofore been able to feed themselves. The three days of darkness coming upon Egypt symbolically means that the present-day darkness upon the world will continue and persist until Armageddon, when the whole of the Devil system will go down into the abyss of everlasting darkness.
Jehovah’s faithful witnesses are now in the temple, "the secret place of the Most High,” where they enjoy everlasting light from the glory of the Lord and from his King Christ Jesus. To the rulers and their supporters of this
"NOT LEFT
STUDENTS once looked upon certain scriptures as being entirely fulfilled in the life and work of John the Baptist and of Jesus in the flesh. Now it is seen that those fulfillments of prophecy were only partial, and what we call “miniature fulfillments”. The greater fulfillments come to pass during and after the beginning of the Kingdom of God, the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, to wit, from and after A.D. 1914. It is startling to come to a realization that there is a second and complete fulfillment of these prophecies and that the remnant of faithful Christian witnesses for Jehovah are involved in such fulfillment.
A striking instance of such second fulfillment is that of the sixteenth Psalm. To be sure, it has a direct reference
wicked world under Satan the temple of God is a place of darkness, because none of them can see into it. In the temple Christ Jesus enlightens his faithful remnant of witnesses and their companions and sends them forth to proclaim from the housetops the message of God’s vengeance and of his kingdom. (Matt. 10: 26, 27) Particularly since 1931 the worldly rulers have been served with notice of warning, and now the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions will do what they can for the people of good-will that they may hear the message and take their stand. While darkness covers the world, Jehovah continues to turn his light upon his faithful ones, giving them a more wonderful vision of his Word than they ever expected to have while on the earth. This strongly suggests that the battle of Armageddon is near.
Pharaoh expressed a willingness to let the Israelites go upon condition that they would leave behind them in Egypt all things of a commercial value. Likewise the world rulers now make some concessions to those who serve Jehovah God, but this upon conditions that would make Jehovah’s witnesses go empty-handed before the Lord and be deprived of all means of publicly witnessing for him and of thereby worshiping him with the “continual sacrifice” of praise. God’s faithful witnesses will not comply with any such condition, but they will obey Jehovah and not man or devil; and their attitude angers Satan’s representatives and calls down upon the heads of Jehovah’s witnesses the expression of wickedness and threats of destruction. This was foreshadowed by the anger expressed by Pharaoh: “And Pharaoh said unto [Moses, Jehovah’s witness], Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more [unless I send for you] : for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die ” Murder was in the heart of Pharaoh, and he threatened to kill Moses if he again appeared before him. With calmness and dignity Moses replied to the wicked Pharaoh: “Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.”— Ex. 10: 28, 29.
That was a final warning from Jehovah delivered to Pharaoh by Moses. Pharaoh threw down the challenge, and Moses, as the Lord’s representative, accepted it. The way was now clear for the final plague. It must have been a thrilling moment to Moses Likewise it must be a time of great joy to Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, now to see that the hour has arrived when he shall vindicate Jehovah’s name.
IN HELL”
to Jesus and to what came to pass at the time of his first appearing, when he became the great ransom sacrifice that obedient man might gain everlasting life in happiness. The psalm is also directly and definitely concerned with the company who constitute the “servant” of God, and which includes those who are the members of “the body of Christ”, his church. To such the apostle writes: “And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.”— 1 Cor. 12:12, 26,27.
For a long time Christian people made the “New Testament” supplant the “Old Testament”. Now in the light that God sheds upon his Word there is a readjustment, and the
110
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
people of God are getting a broader vision of the “Old Testament”. They see that the record thereof greatly magnifies Jehovah’s name, when understood, and furnishes a special guide for God’s anointed witnesses in this most difficult time. The sixteenth Psalm being one of these precious parts of the Bible, it is a message now due to be understood by the remnant of God’s witnesses, for their blessing and comfort.
The song opens with a prayer: ‘Preserve me, 0 God: for I have taken refuge in thee.’ The singer or speaker is one of importance, even though he cries for help. He is the one who has the privilege of acting as a priest, not of religion or some religious organization, but of Jehovah God, and he has hopes of the greatest things in God’s purposes. In the first instance these words could apply to none other than Jesus Christ in the flesh. He was engaged in his Father’s work and was surrounded by enemies, and he saw that death awaited him; but his confidence was in Jehovah that He would bring him through the difficulties and to complete deliverance. The cry, “Preserve me,” cannot be understood to mean to keep him from persecution or from death, because the words of the song show that complete preservation of God’s anointed servant is beyond the human life and is that which is enjoyed at the right hand of Jehovah. The confidence shown by Jesus is likewise that which is now shown by the anointed remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses, who now see that they must fight, being opposed by religious enemies, and that they must go down into death; but their confidence in God is complete, and they see that in due time they shall triumph by Jesus Christ in the first resurrection.
Members of God’s “servant” class, well knowing that they are in the secret place of the Most High and have God’s favor, and appreciating their happy relationship with him, sing: “Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory re-joiceth: my flesh also shall rest in hope [or, dwell confidently (marginal reading)].” (Ps. 16:9) Or, according to Rotherham’s translation: “Therefore doth my heart rejoice [in Jehovah] and my glory exulteth [in my God], even my flesh shall dwell securely.”
The affection of God’s “servant” is set upon Jehovah; therefore his heart rejoices in Jehovah. The servant’s rich treasure is Jehovah and his loving-kindness. He has a keen appreciation of the honorable place he has in God’s organization , and for that reason he exults, not in himself, but in his God. No human could ever be exalted to a position more honorable and blessed than that of being an ambassador of the great Creator and clothed with the splendor and fullness of the high office of bearing the name of the Most High to others and announcing his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. When Jesus was on earth he occupied that blessed and honorable position. Now the members of “the body of Christ” likewise occupy a position of honor and glory, because they stand forth as the only anointed witnesses of Jehovah on earth. Being of “The Christ”, they are ambassadors by whom God speaks, and they bear his message of reconciliation to men of good-will on earth.—2 Cor. 5:19, 20.
The flesh or physical organism of each one of his anointed remnant is weak, and each one realizes that he is surrounded by the enemy and his agencies, and that the
enemy would instantly destroy him; but appreciating the fact that he is one of God’s anointed sons, he knows he is safe and secure. With confidence, therefore, he says, in the language of the psalmist: ‘Even my flesh shall dwell in security.’ (Vs. 9) This verse is also a direct proof of a resurrection to life beyond the present existence in the earth. God’s “servant” sees that he must be “faithful unto death” and that his change must come and that such change will be from life on earth as a human to life divine as a spirit in the heavenly kingdom with Christ Jesus, who is Jehovah’s King in The Theocratic Government. For God’s spirit-begotten and anointed “servant” there must be an exodus or passing out of the church in death, but the faithful have confidence in an instantaneous resurrection to life in perfection. Hence the “servant” says (vs. 10):
“For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell [in Sheol (Hebrew)] ; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.” Most certainly this prophecy was fulfilled in Jesus. God’s beloved Son went into Sheol, the grave, but death could not hold him there. It was the will of God that he should be resurrected, and therefore God raised him out of death on the third day. Fifty days after his resurrection, at Pentecost, the spirit of the Lord came upon the apostle Peter, who spoke with authority, quoting this Psalm, and applied it to Jesus. He there made known that the psalmist David was then dead and in the tomb but that the words spoken by David were spoken prophetically concerning Jesus Christ and his resurrection: “Therefore [David] being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, [God] would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; he [David], seeing this before, spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell [in Hades (Greek)], neither his flesh did see corruption This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses” (Acts 2:30-32) Jesus was put to death; but it was not possible for death to hold him, since it was God’s purpose to raise him out of death: “whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death: because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.”—Acts 2 • 24
All that have died from Adam until now have gone to hell. But “hell” in the Bible does not mean a place of conscious torture eternally, else Jesus would never have gotten out of hell after three days. Wherever the word “hell” occurs in the Bible it means the condition of death Hell is not a place, but a condition. Hence those who go into the grave are not conscious there; but they have gone into the death condition. Their bodies decay and return to the dust. The word “hell” is translated from the Hebrew word Sheol in the writings before Christ, and from the Greek word Hades in the apostolic writings. This same word Sheol is translated 31 times “hell”, 31 times “the grave”, and 3 times “pit”. Likewise Hades is translated both “grave” and “hell”. Patient Job prayed that he might go to “hell” (Sheol). By that he meant that he might rest in the tomb, in the condition of death, until the resurrection. (Job 14:13,14) The patriarch Jacob said concerning Benjamin: “My son shall not go down with you [into Egypt] ; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave [hell; Sheol].” (Gen. 42: 38) His gray
April 1, 1941
SEe WATCHTOWER,
111
hairs could not last long in eternal fire. This proves that “hell” is not a place of conscious torment. Jesus was tormented, not after death, but when alive in the flesh on earth, at the hands of the religionists and their agents.
Some contend Psalm 16:10 proves that in the resurrection the soul and the body with which one died shall be reunited; but we know that there can be no existence without an organism and that in the heavenly kingdom of God a human organism cannot have a place. (See 1 Corinthians 15: 50.) The Scriptures also show that Jesus was raised out of death with a glorious spirit body. (1 Pet. 3:18, Am. Rev Ver.) Others have said that the text proves that the flesh body of Jesus is preserved somewhere. That would be equivalent to saying that the body of Jesus is a mummy somewhere. Satan has caused some of his servants to be embalmed and made mummies in Egypt and thereby preserved evidently for the purpose of disputing the effect of death and contradicting Jehovah’s decree of judgment against the sinner man. The more reasonable explanation of Psalm 16:10 is that God dissolved the body of Jesus into the dust and it was not permitted to take the course of decay common to dead bodies. While Jesus on earth was without sin, he must die in behalf of sinful humankind, and the judgment upon sinful man was: “Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.”—Gen. 3:19.
But how can Psalm 16:10 apply to the remnant of the members of “the body of Christ” now on earth? Christ Jesus is the great “servant” of Jehovah God. (See Isaiah 42: 1 and Matthew 12:15-21.) Those members of the “body of Christ” who died prior to his coming in his kingdom slept in death, in Sheol, until the day of resurrection; but there is a time when the faithful body members who die do not sleep in Sheol, and of that time and condition Paul the apostle wrote. The prophecies of the Scriptures and physical facts of history since A.D. 1914 prove that the divine Spirit, Christ Jesus, came to the spiritual temple of Jehovah God in A.D. 1918, to judge the “house of God” and also to judge the nations and separate them as sheep from goats. (1 Pet. 4: 17 ; Matt. 25: 31-46) Writes Paul: “I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick [the living] and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom.”—2 Tim. 4-1.
The words of Revelation 14:13 here seem to apply, to wit: “And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth : Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them.” This text must have its fulfillment while some of the members of “the body of Christ” are yet alive on earth in the flesh. The proof seems to establish that with the coming of the Lord to his temple in 1918 the faithful dead who had died in the Lord were raised out of death and made a part of The Christ in heavenly glory, and that those remaining on the earth and who continue faithful even unto the end of their earthly course must go into death as humans but are granted an instantaneous resurrection to life in the spirit. Psalm 16:10, according to Rotherham’s translation of the Psalms, reads: “For thou wilt not abandon my soul to hades [Sheol], neither wilt thou suffer thy man of kindness to see the pit.” Every member of God’s anointed “servant” class must reach the height of glory through death, but it is impossible for death to hold the faithful. The sixteenth Psalm seems to have been the basis of Paul’s inspired argument concerning the resurrection of the members of the “body of Christ”: “It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. Behold, I shew you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump : for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on m-corruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.”—1 Cor. 15: 44, 51-54.
The proof is furnished that when the full membership of the anointed “servant” class is made up Jehovah God preserves his “elect” servant, and even though some of that “servant” class on earth must go into death before the battle of Armageddon those remaining and faithful unto the end of their service on earth are guaranteed a resurrection to life in the spirit with Christ Jesus the King (1 Thess. 4:13-16) Those now of the anointed “servant” and who thus continue faithful shall not await in death, but shall be changed immediately, by death and the resurrection, into the glorious likeness of Jesus Christ, the Head of God’s “servant” and the King of The Theocratic Government, because He has come in his kingdom and is at the temple.
(Continued from page 98)
Christ Jesus, is Friday, April 11, 1941, after six p.m. Each Christian company should therefore assemble after six p.m. of April 11, and the anointed ones celebrate the Memorial, and their companions, the Jonadabs, be present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse just before the partaking of the emblems, the short article “Memorial” as published in the Watchtower issue of March 15, 1939, should be read instead. Since the breaking of the bread and the drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine, to follow the example of Jesus and his apostles, who used real red wine in symbol of his blood. A report of the celebration should be promptly made to the Society, showing total attendance and number of partakers. In preparation for this 1941 celebration the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
“GOD AND THE STATE”
A new booklet, by Judge Rutherford! The urgency of the rapidly tightening world situation has hastened the issuance of this timely booklet. Parents, children, and all lovers of righteousness will be grateful for the clearness, completeness and helpfulness of the author’s treatment of the supreme issue today, as presented m its 32 pages. A neat cover design makes it very presentable. Due to the growing need for just such information, a large circulation of this latest booklet is bound to follow. Get your copy now, at a contribution of 5c the copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 4: “Victory Song” (Part 3),
[[ 1-20 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1941.
Week of May 11: “Victory Song” (Part 3),
[[ 21-41 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1941.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEER TILT WITH OFFICER (ARIZONA)
“On the street. An officer: ‘Do you have a blue card! We don’t allow any soliciting without one? Pioneer: ‘No, I have no card, as my work is preaching the message of Jehovah’s kingdom, which is not in competition with any business, and it would be an insult to the Most High God to ask man for a permit to do what the Almighty has commanded must be done.’ ‘You will have to stop your work then, or I will have to lock you up, and that will be a painful task.’ ‘I should think it would be, since our Constitution guarantees one the right to worship as one sees fit, and locking Christians up for preaching the gospel is illegal yet in the U. S. The Supreme Court upholds the work of Jehovah’s witnesses.’ ‘Well, you will have to stay in jail till the Supreme Court makes a new decision then. How many are there of you working and where do you have your church!’ ‘I can only speak for myself, as I am not responsible for anyone else. We have no church, but study in people’s homes.’ ‘They are against you here and everywhere else, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation condemns you witnesses.’ ‘That is not true, as investigation by Edgar Hoover revealed we are not subversive and the Attorney General announced the Department of Justice will see that the rights of Jehovah’s witnesses are safeguarded in carrying on their work. We know who is back of the wicked persecution. I must obey God rather than man, even as the apostles did, and must be about my work.’ I continued without further disturbance. The following Tuesday, on a back-call, a witness met a person who had been in the police station that Saturday, when a Legionnaire came bustling in cursing and raving about those people being on the street again with their literature against the government. The desk sergeant said the chief was out and he could do nothing for him. The Legionnaire boasted of having helped beat up one of the witnesses last June and run them out of town, and he would be happy to do it again. After the above the chief of police returned to the station and stated there was nothing that could be done against Jehovah’s witnesses, as the Supreme Court and the FBI upheld them in their worship. The chief is a Roman Catholic.”
NOW HE IS A PIONEER (OREGON)
“I received a letter from a person in Astoria asking for booklets to distribute and enclosing a ten-dollar money order. He had figured the booklets at 5c each. We sent the booklets and explained he had more than enough money to cover them. Whereupon he sent back and had us send him all the literature he could get for that money ; also he would like to have a bag or something to carry them in and on which was written ‘Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom’. Last Tuesday at the Kingdom Hall in came a young man. He wanted to get in touch with the local company. Upon further questioning he said he wanted to spend all his time in this work. Asked what was his name he said he was the one that had sent for the booklets. He knew nothing about the way Jehovah’s witnesses operate. He was shown the territory department, the master map, advertising department, the hall upstairs with its activity chart, but, most important, a pioneer application blank along with an information letter. When seeing the quota of 150 hours for pioneers he answered that should be easy to make. He wanted to know if he could go to work right away or had
to wait for a reply from the Society. His pioneer application is now in the mail, and you should have it by the arrival of this letter. He is staying at the Kingdom Hall with two other young pioneers. It was two months ago that he read his first publication.”
THE PHONOGRAPH IN ZONE ONE, CUBA
“The lecture ‘Religion as a World Remedy’ was reproduced at a home where there were twelve persons in attendance. When the lecture was over, I called the attention of the people to the vast difference between religion and Christianity and asked if any of those present had any question on the subject: I would be glad to give the Scriptural answer. A woman jumped to her feet and said: ‘I have no question to ask you, sir. For a long time now I had believed religion was not in harmony with God’s will, and now I have proved it by what I have heard.’ Turning to the others present she said: ‘Ladies and gentlemen, what you have heard is the truth, and that was my reason for not going to church at your invitation. So know now that religion is a snare of the Devil and a racket.’ She then accepted the booklet Satisfied and promised to subscribe for The Watchtower as soon as she is able to.”
CONTRASTS AND INCONSISTENCIES
“In Belleville, Illinois, I was locked up in county jail for the ‘terrible’ offense of offering The Watchtower on the streets. My bond was placed at $2,500, although just several days before that a murderer was released on bond in the same jail for $2,000. This makes it all regular. That proves that a Jehovah’s witness in the hand is worth more than a man that just shot his wife. I was not allowed to use the phone, for fear I might ‘get away’ and tell some more truth and expose some more racketeers and show some more people of good-will about God’s Theocratic Government. I was locked up with alleged robbers. They proved themselves more gentlemanly than the officials. They were more courteous to me, which is more than I can say about the so-called 'law enforcement’ officials. After being locked up with these nine alleged robbers for three hours, we had quite an interesting discussion on the Bible, all nine listening and some of them asking questions. I could not obtain any literature in the cells, but I did my best without When I was released I promised to send up* a Watchtower, and they promised to read it. When I left the jail I asked the officer at the desk if I could send up a Watchtower. After looking it over he promised to take it up to them. That all shows how “goofy” the officials are, because they arrested me for offering to the public the very same Watchtower that this official promised to take up to the prisoners after he inspected it ”
ON A SIDEWALK OF SAULT STE. MARIE, MICH.
“Last Tuesday we went street witnessing as usual. There were seven magazine publishers out. I was approached by an elderly man, who took a Watchtower from me, and in payment drew out of his billfold five one-dollar bills and handed them to me, saying: TJse this for furthering your work. I have read all of Pastor Russell’s books and also Rutherford’s. I get the magazine Consolation. This sure is the truth.’ He did not reveal his name or address One Saturday there were 71 copies of The Watchtower and of Consolation placed on the street by the publishers. This was during a visit by the zone servant, who placed 44 of them.”
112
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isatah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the mac Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Eion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than these mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British.................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W„ Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translation* of this journal appear in several language*.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers; Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered a* second-class matter at the po*t office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“THE SIGN” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This Testimony Period, covering the month of April, is worldwide, and adds intensity to the four-month campaign with The Watchtower. Those looking for the early appearance of “the sign” for Armageddon to begin do not slack the hand in this third month of the campaign, but rather intensify their efforts, and unquestionably more Theocratic publishers are entering the field. Never have such had a finer offer to make to humankind in danger of Armageddon, to wit, a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, together with the book Religion and the two new booklets Theocracy and God and the State, all on a contribution of $1.00. By planning and preparing without delay you may now have part in this special Testimony Period. Write us if you need references to the local company organized for this service. Your report of work at the close of this Period will be appreciated.
“MODEL STUDY NO. S"
This new booklet, of 32 pages and bound in a durable cover, brings up to date the series of Model Study booklets, as it presents the study outline covering the latest recorded speeches by Judge Rutherford, to wit, “Religion as a World Remedy," and “The End”. This booklet is very valuable, even if you do not possess
the phonograph recordings of the speeches named, and with it anyone should be able to conduct a model study of the Bible in the home or in public. Order several for use of others whom you hope to have study with you. Model Study No. 3 will be sent you postpaid at a contribution of 5c a copy. Company servants should make up combination orders for all in the company wanting copies.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 18: “Victory Song” (Part 4), fl 1-20 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1941.
Week of May 25: “Victory Song” (Part 4), fl 21-43 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1941.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office m the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	April 15, 1941	No 8
PART 4
"Lol Jehovah emptying the earth and laying it waste; and he will overturn the face thereof, and scatter them who dwell therein . . . for Jehovah hath spoken this word.”—Isa. 24:1, 3, Rotherham.
JEHOVAH inspired his prophet to tell of a vision of Armageddon which he had, and which prophetic utterance is about due for fulfillment. The prophecy discloses what will be the result of Jehovah's “strange act” upon the earth. There can be no doubt that Jehovah will do exactly as his words announce by the prophet, because “Jehovah hath spoken this word”. His word cannot return to him void, but shall accomplish his announced purpose. “I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 55:11; 46:11) But who on earth now believes what Jehovah has announced? Only those who have taken their stand firmly on the side of The Theocracy and who joyfully support that kingdom. To them Jehovah has given full assurance, and this he has done for their comfort and hope.
2	Not only has Jehovah given his word and repeatedly by his prophets announced his purpose to wreck Satan’s entire organization, but he has also caused many prophetic pictures to be enacted illustrating the minute details of the doing of that great act. Among such prophetic and dramatic pictures is that recorded concerning Barak and Deborah, the meaning of which is now revealed to God’s faithful people, manifestly for the reason that Armageddon is about to be fought.
3	The haughty, austere, and cruel and arrogant now rule the nations of the earth, because they are under the power of the demons. Each hour their wicked oppression of Jehovah’s covenant people increases. The ruling powers frame mischief by law against Jehovah’s witnesses by searching them out and then enacting unrighteous laws and wrongfully applying and enforcing such laws against the innocent. The “earth” here mentioned in the prophecy (Isa. 24:1) means the ruling powers of the earth and all those who support those ruling powers, both visible and invisible. As Jabin continuously oppressed the typical covenant people of God, so now those powers in authority on earth continually oppress the servants of Jehovah who are his covenant ^people.
‘ There are those who have made a covenant to do the will of God and who later, because of fear of man, and particularly those who rule, have declined to take any part in his “strange work” and have withdrawn themselves from activity. Such fearful and negligent ones .will not receive any protection and blessing from the Lord. The faithful and obedient ones, who do not fear men but who fear God and joyfully obey his commandments, will receive protection and blessings of the Lord Jehovah and his King. The faithful “remnant” and their true “companions”, that is, the “other sheep” of the Lord, now read the prophecies and their explanations which God has provided for them, and, so doing, they rejoice that the evidence is clear that the day of deliverance from oppression is near at hand and the day of vindication of Jehovah’s name will be the result. They have faith that God will do exactly as he has promised, including that foretold in prophetic song sung by Barak and Deborah, the consideration of which we here continue.
5	“The kings came and fought; then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money.” (Judg. 5: 19) The kings that wrongfully held possession of the territory in Palestine gathered together to fight against Barak and his little army of ten thousand. In reality they gathered together to fight and did fight against the Lord God. Only one king is named in the record, and that is Jabin (Judg. 4: 2, 23, 24), and he represented the Devil, the chief amongst demons, and therefore stood as representative also of all the other allied kings. There were other kings, without doubt, that came and engaged in this fight with Jabin, and they pictured also the demons; and together these kings and armies with them represented all the enemies of Jehovah. That there were other kings in the land of Palestine is certain from the Scriptural record; for instance, it is written: “The king of Taanach, . . . the king of Megiddo,” and others named at Joshua 12:9-24. All those kings and all their soldiers were demon-worshipers, and hence all against the great Theocrat, Jehovah God. Jabin
115
116
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
alone had a great army under the command of his captain, Sisera. That army was equipped with 900 iron chariots, besides other war equipment. (Judg. 4:13) That division of the enemy crowd, together with the others that came, must have made up a tremendous host, all under the command of the demons and all pitted against Barak and his little army of ten thousand. The odds appeared to be overwhelming against Barak. Jehovah was with Barak and his little army, and Jehovah is irresistible. So shall it be at Armageddon.
6	Mark how well the corresponding activities that have come to pass at the present time constitute a fulfillment of this prophecy. The Lord foretold this in the prophecy of Revelation, to advise his people of the gathering of the worldly rulers to fight against his anointed on earth in order to prevent them from becoming a part of God’s royal organization. In this fulfillment the Devil, the chief of demons, is again in command, and the demon practitioners, that is, those who are controlled by religion or demonism, readily follow the lead of their invisible commander. Note the prophecy then relating to the present time: “And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.”—Rev. 16:13,14,16.
7	The prophetic song sung by Barak and Deborah gives an account of the battle at Megiddo, and which foretells the coming battle of Armageddon, and this is quite clear from the prophecies supporting the song as well as the physical facts. Armageddon means “mountain of Megiddo”, that is to say, “the mount of the assembly of troops.” The troops are those who are under the command of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater Barak, which the Lord assembles in the mountain. The ten thousand assembled with Barak in the mountain pictured all those who are faithfully and uncompromisingly supporting the Lord Jesus Christ, that is to say, who are following joyfully in his steps wheresoever he leads.
8	When Sisera received the information that Barak the son of Abinoam was going up to Mount Tabor with ten thousand troops Sisera immediately began to make preparation of his army and to gather them to Megiddo for battle. (Judg. 4:12,13) No doubt that preparation on the part of the enemy was a hurried one, to which a description later written concerning the city of Nineveh is properly applicable. That description foretells preparation for the battle of that great day of God Almighty, and reads:
“The chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against another in the broad ways; they shall seem like torches, they shall run like the lightnings.”—Nah. 2:4.
’ From the time of the temple judgment and the approval of the “remnant”, to whom Christ Jesus committed his earthly Kingdom interests called “his goods” and then sent them forth to serve, until the battle is in fact the time of preparation for the great and final conflict. (Matt. 24:45-47) Therefore in these modern times Jehovah commands this proclamation to be made throughout the land, to wit: “Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles [all nations against The Theocracy] ; Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up. Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruninghooks into spears; let the weak say, I am strong. Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about; thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, 0 Lord.” —Joel 3:9-11.
10	In keeping with this commandment the combined army of the enemy prepares for Armageddon and Jehovah’s mighty ones come down from heaven, and the fighting forces are made ready for the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”. From the physical facts now well known it is clearly seen that the time for the great and final conflict at Armageddon is very near. The hour and the day no man on earth knows, but, to be sure, the Lord knows, because he has fixed the time definitely, and that battle will begin at the time appointed.
11	The kings of Canaan came to fight, and they fought: “then fought the kings ... in Taanach.” There the kings started the fight and continued to fight until the Lord Jehovah performed his “strange act” by turning loose the guns of heaven upon them. Even so now the Hierarchy and their dupes and hangers-on fight against the faithful earthly representatives of The Theocracy. The demonized religionists have started the fight and are keeping it up, and will continue to do so until Jehovah opens up the heavenly forces against the enemy and performs his “strange act”. Now the covenant people of Jehovah have but one thing to do, and that is, to continuously proclaim the name and kingdom of Jehovah God, regardless of what fighting the enemy may do. This continuous service to Jehovah proclaiming his name and his kingdom must continue until the time for Jehovah to begin his “strange act”, and then there will be a real fight, which will be the last one. It will be much more than the enemy are expecting, and hence the enemy will know before it is done that it is the great Theocracy fighting by and through Christ Jesus, the King thereof, and that it is all under the command of Jehovah, the Almighty God.
THE WATCHTOWER
April 15,1941
Deliverance to the faithful servants of Jehovah will then be complete.
12	In the prophecy it is stated that the fighting was “in Taanach”. That name means “sandy soil”, and indicates that the territory was smooth and level and suitable for the use of mechanized war equipment. But when Jehovah opened the windows of heaven and threw down torrents of water and hail, the smooth, sandy land was not at all to the advantage of the mechanized war equipment. The city of Taanach was a Levite city. (Josh. 21:25,26) From its mention in the prophetic song Taanach must have been the headquarters of Sisera, which he had selected and where he maintained his base of supplies and operations. The Israelites had not driven the Canaanites out of Taanach (Judg. 1: 27, 28), and when Jabin the Second came into power he put the pressure on the Israelites and held them in subjection and oppressed them for a period of twenty years.
15	The minute description of the environment of the place of battle is important, otherwise the same would not have been mentioned in the prophetic song. Says the prophecy: They fought ‘Tay the waters of Megiddo”. The city of Megiddo lay on the south of the river Kishon and about four miles northwest of the town of Taanach. It was a position of strategic importance because it commanded the mountain pass from Sharon into the valley of Esdraelon. Water from the south hills and vicinity would flow past Megiddo and empty into the Kishon river. The armies of the combined kings, which constituted a great host, were encamped in the vicinity of Megiddo and between there and Taanach, and all were under the command of Captain Sisera. The upper part of the Kishon river bed is a dry wash during most of the year, but in the rainy season the river bed is flooded. It is miles below Megiddo where the water appears in that river during the entire year. Concerning this McClintock and Strong’s Cyclopaedia says: “Those who have visited Megiddo and traversed its plain in the spring, after a heavy fall of rain, have found the Kishon greatly swollen, its banks quagmires, and all the ordinary roads impassable.” It is reasonable to expect that the commander of the army would station his great army on the dry land, because it was in the dry season, and therefore the fact that Sisera had his army and chariots in the vicinity of Megiddo shows that they were located south of the river bed and further proves that the river bed at that point was dry at that season of the year. It would appear to Sisera that his army was in the best possible position for the attack on the army of Israel then stationed upon the heights of Mount Tabor. Sisera would have no thought that a great flood of water would come rushing down that dry bed of the river at that dry season
117
of the year. Sisera, being a religionist, had no faith in Jehovah God and would be utterly in the dark as to Jehovah’s purpose. While it is also true that Barak must have had no expectation of a great flood of water from heaven fighting in his behalf, yet he had faith in Jehovah God and he believed that God would fight the battle for his own people in his own good way and, having that faith, he went boldly forward. Deborah had full faith that God would deliver the enemy into the hands of Barak, and Deborah pictured God’s organization.
14	Well do these details foretell the present-day conditions. All the nations of earth today have forgotten God. All the nations are religious, having chosen to serve “other gods”. The nations, including particularly the rulers, political and religious leaders, have no faith in Almighty God and his great Theocratic Government. The leading religionists read the prophecies of God and have no faith in them, and concerning the “strange act” of Jehovah these great religious leaders say: ‘When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us.” (Isa. 28:15) This proves that they have no faith in the prophecy. The religious leaders and the political rulers now stand together, the political rulers relying upon the religious leaders and the demons to keep them informed by the signs and prognostications given by men under the influence of demons. For this reason “the earth”, meaning those who control it, and the inhabitants thereof who live under their rule, are in complete darkness as to what is God’s purpose in the near future. They are not anticipating any heavenly power to act in behalf of God’s faithful people. The great flood of waters that rushed down and filled the dry bed of the river Kishon was so unusual and unexpected that Sisera and his army would regard it as a very “strange act”. Even so when Jehovah’s great Field Marshal, Christ Jesus, and his host of heaven fall upon the enemy host, the leaders of that host and all under it will recognize the power against them as the “strange act” of God. They will know that God’s hand is upon them, and therefore, as the prophet Ezekiel says in sixty-four different places, “they shall know that I am Jehovah.” They will find no possible way to flee.
15	Jehovah had given his word to Barak, to wit: “I will draw unto thee, to the river Kishon, Sisera, the captain of Jabin’s army, with his chariots and his multitude.” (Judg. 4:7) Jehovah likewise performs his word. He did exactly as he had said to Barak. Even so Jehovah has said concerning the battle of Armageddon: “The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled; for the Lord hath spoken this word.”—Isa. 24: 3.
16	Deborah was in the mountain with Barak and his army, and at the proper moment the prophetess gave
118
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Barak the cue, God speaking through her, to wit: “And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the Lord hath delivered Sisera into thine hand; is not the Lord gone out before thee! So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.”—Judg. 4:14.
1	T Immediately Barak, with his army, began the march down the mountainside to meet the enemy. Sisera’s scouts would quickly report to their captain that Barak and his army were moving down the mountain. Sisera then would set his army in motion, moving his 900 chariots and his host down to the river bed, expecting to cross that dry bed and meet Barak and his little army of ten thousand on dry and level ground and crush them out. No doubt the enemy host under Sisera was shouting a victory song before the battle began, hoping thus to frighten the Israelites. They would conclude that that little army of ten thousand could offer very small resistance, and that it would within a short time be annihilated. Their lustful eyes would be fixed on the booty soon to be in their hands. In this they were disappointed, because, it is written in the Word of God, they took no booty, and that for a good reason:
is “They took no gain of money”; (Rotherham) “plunder of silver they took not away!” (Judg. 5:19) Sisera’s mother well pictures the Devil’s organization. She expected to have some share in the spoils that would be on hand when the battle was over; and this was shown by her language at Judges 5: 30. She was doomed to disappointment. Likewise Satan’s organization, including the many religious dupes that have fallen under the influence of the demons, expect to make a cleanup of God’s people and collect the spoils and get rid of those who are on the side of Jehovah. They also are doomed to disappointment. Jehovah made Sisera’s host a spoil to His covenant people, whom Jabin and his officers had oppressed for twenty years. In like manner God will make Satan’s entire organization a spoil at Armageddon. Those who are devoted to The Theocracy and continue faithful to the end, disregarding oppressors, “shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord God.” (Ezek. 39: 8-10) “For, behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants ; and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me.”—Zech. 2: 9.
” The battle of Armageddon, and the spoil, is also foretold in the prophecy of 2 Chronicles 20: 25. There will be a cleanup of the enemy at Armageddon. The religious, the political (including the Vatican, the official head of the religionists on earth), and the dictators now claim the right to rule the earth and are determined to take it by force. At Armageddon Jehovah will take away from them everything, and
never again shall they have anything to do with the earth or with anything else. Even the Devil himself shall consume away in due time, and, “never shalt thou be any more.”—Ezek. 28:19.
20	The prophecy records these many details concerning the battle and was written for the very purpose of giving aid, comfort and hope to the people of God now on earth who have full faith in Jehovah and who are waiting for the day of deliverance. Jehovah is certain to avenge his faithful covenant people, because he has given his word that he will do so. Jesus emphasized this great truth, and then added these words: “When the Son of man cometh, shall he find [such] faith on the earth!” (Luke 18: 8) This clearly indicates that a small number, comparatively, will have such faith. Those who practice religion do not have such faith. The “remnant” of Jehovah’s anointed people on earth do have such faith; the “other sheep” of the Lord, who shall form the “great multitude” but who are now being rapidly gathered unto the Lord, share with the remnant in that faith. These shall be avenged and, together, all these now by faith are singing the victory song and singing: “Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.” (Rev. 7: 9,10) They prove their faith by the course of action taken.
THE FIGHT
21	“They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.” (Judg. 5: 20) Barak had received the command from God delivered to him by God’s prophetess. To obey that command was his only course of action. Regardless of the great odds against him, he started his little army on foot down the mountainside to join battle with Sisera’s overwhelming host. That required great faith on the part of Barak; but we must have in mind that here he was performing a part of a great drama picturing Christ Jesus, who always delights to do the will of Almighty God, and who has absolute confidence that God’s Word shall be carried out.
22	Sisera was moving his army, chariots and all, across the dry wash of the river bed. Barak’s forces were drawing near and the clash was beginning, when suddenly the host of heaven entered into the conflict. God sent a raging storm with torrential rain and hail upon the enemy army, which evidently hid from Sisera’s view Barak’s approaching forces. That great storm caused floods of water to fill the gullies, the gorges, the canyons, and the creeks, and hence a great wall of water came rushing down the bed of the river Kishon, which was usually dry. That wall of water came with a mighty and irresistible force, which completely disorganized Sisera’s army, overturned his chariots of iron, disabled his forces, and incapacitated his army for fighting. That was the
April 15,1941
SfEe WATCHTOWER.
119
almighty power from heaven exercised in behalf of God’s typical covenant people who had remained faithful to him and under the leadership of Barak and Deborah. Thus is pictured that Jehovah will exercise his almighty power in behalf of his covenant people now on earth who maintain their integrity toward him and who are under the leadership of Christ Jesus and obedient to God’s organization instructions: “For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.”—2 Chron. 16: 9.
m “The stars jn their courses fought against Sisera.” “The stars from their highways fought with Sisera.” {Young) This might mean that in the prophetic fight there were showers of meteors falling from above and exploding with blazes of light about Sisera’s army. Probably Sisera was like the modernday dictators, who are stargazers, and had counted on the stars to guide him as to the time of mailing the assault. But they gave him no safe advice. Stargazers and astrologers are demon-controlled. When Jehovah’s “strange act” begins, all such stargazers will learn that they cannot depend upon the advice received from the demons. All such stargazers will become weary with such demon advice and counsel : “Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.”—Isa. 47:13.
24 It is written, however, that “the stars” mentioned in this prophecy had reference to the host of heaven, invisible to human eyes, but who really did the fighting in that battle at Meggido. In the prophecies the stars fighting pictured Christ Jesus and his heavenly army. Of himself Jesus says: T, Jesus, am the bright and morning star.’ (Rev. 22:16) He is the Star that shall rule the world with irresistible power. (Num. 24:17) The faithful followers of Christ Jesus, the apostles, and others since their day who have finished their earthly course faithful unto death and who have been given a part in the “first resurrection”, are now united with Christ Jesus and they also are spoken of as “stars”. (Rev. 20: 4, 6; 1 Thess. 4:13-18) The promise to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus who shall be in the Kingdom is: “He that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end ... I will give him the morning star.” (Rev. 2: 26, 28) “And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.” (Dan. 12: 3) “Praise him, all ye stars of light.” (Ps. 148:3) These scriptures show that “the stars” means the heavenly hosts under the command of the Greater Barak, Christ Jesus.
15 This part of the prophecy is further proof given by the Most High as to what shall take place at “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”. There Christ Jesus and his angels, and all his faithful servants, will fight against the enemy. The religious enemy, together with the other elements of Satan’s organization, will think the time has come when Jehovah’s servants have been completely put down, and will say, Now we are at “peace and safety”! Then, as shown by the prophecies, Christ Jesus and his glorious army will suddenly fall upon them and wipe them out, even as was done with King Jabin’s forces at Megiddo. All the influence and power of Gog and his host of Magog shall then be destroyed. Now Gog, the invisible representative of the Devil who is in command of the enemy’s forces both invisible and visible, is pushing all of his power to the destruction of The Theocracy. It is therefore certain that the hour is due when the prophecy of Jehovah shall be accomplished concerning that wicked host, as it is written: “And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord God; every man’s sword shall be against his brother. And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations; and they shall know that I am the Lord.”— Ezek. 38:21-23.
2’ As Deborah beheld the power of God exercised in behalf of her people and sung for joy, even so those of God’s organization on the earth, as well as in heaven, shall behold the power of the Lord against the enemy and shall sing for joy. “The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. 0 my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.” (Judg. 5:21) Before Sisera was able to get his army clear of the river bed, which was usually dry, a down-rushing of the waters upset his chariot and swept away his equipment. When Sisera began to move his army against Barak the results seemed certain in his favor. Likewise, as the Scriptures now inform God’s faithful people concerning the result at Armageddon, now it appears to the Hierarchy and allies that it will be an easy matter for them, when the due time arrives, to completely destroy God’s people. But in answer to their threats and brags it is written: “For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.” —1 Thess. 5: 3.
” Another rendering of a part of this text is: “The torrent of olden times, the torrent of Kishon I” {Rotherham) This rendering of the text appears to
120
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
mean that never before, from time within memory, had the river acted like this, and no one had ever witnessed such an unseasonable flood of waters rushing down its dry bed. It was indeed a “strange act”, and likewise at Armageddon the forces there will be indeed a “strange act” to all, and particularly to those who have no faith in God. Never within the memory of man has there been anything like it. Never has there been such a trouble on earth, and never will there be again; and concerning this Jesus says: “For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.”—Matt. 24: 21.
28 “The river Kishon.” These words in the prophetic song show that the river Kishon is a symbol of destruction against the enemies of The Theocracy. That river is a witness against the enemy. Another corroborative witness is the word of Jehovah, which appears as a prayer he puts in the mouth of his faithful servants now on the earth, to wit: “Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kison; which perished at En-dor; they became as dung for the earth. So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, 0 Lord. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish; that men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth.”—Ps. 83:9,10,15-18.
28 Barak and Deborah, faithful servants of God, were reminded of God’s power exercised in behalf of his people on another occasion, and so they sung to the praise of the Most High, to wit: “Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.” (Judg. 5:4) “The Christ” and all under his organization will forever sing the praises of Jehovah, having always in mind God’s great and loving kindness to those who are faithful to him.
so “0 my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.” (Judg. 5: 21) These words of the prophetic song are addressed to Jehovah’s organization under Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak. This part of the prophecy shows that at Armageddon Christ and his heavenly army will tread down under foot the strong and mighty that have spoiled the earth. All the enemies of God shall then be put under foot. The strong enemies are likened unto grapes of wickedness in the wine press: “And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.”-Isa. 63:6.
81 The faithful remnant on earth and their companions, who survive Armageddon, shall see the work of the Lord and will tread upon what at one
time was the strength of the enemy: “And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord of hosts.”—Alai. 4: 3.
” The faithful servants of Jehovah God now refuse to dishonor the Almighty God by bowing down to or saluting officials, emblems, or images, and for this they are persecuted. Jehovah’s people will remain true and steadfast in their devotion to him, and ere long the things that are now the strength of the enemy shall be trodden down. The faithful will continue to follow in the lead of Christ Jesus, their Lord and King. To them Jehovah and Christ are “the Higher Powers”, and they will give devotion to none other.
" “Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings [plungings], the pransings of their mighty ones.” (Judg. 5: 22) Those horses were drawing heavy chariots of iron. The terrific storm would greatly surprise and confuse the horses, causing them to stampede in terror and to plunge about in the mud and water, and which resulted in breaking their hoofs and their legs when they mired down. The horses became helpless as equipment for Sisera, although he had regarded them as great strength in his army, which would bring to him the victory. He was disappointed; and likewise the enemy shall be, because they depend on earthly power.
“ How about the war organizations of modern times? These are supported by the great religious institutions of the world, and upon their mechanized equipment they rely for certain victory. Religionists and other ruling elements think their equipment is irresistible. Those mighty ones scorn The Theocracy and boast of their ability to destroy everything that is faithful to Almighty God. The prophecies show they will be greatly dismayed when the Lord begins to fight against them. Their horses and their mechanized equipment will be of no value. Paralyzed with fear, they will be unable to offer effective resistance. The enemy will be thrown into great panic and will find no way of escape, but will be completely destroyed. Another prophecy, describing the confusion of the enemy, says: “At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of hands.”—Jer. 47:3.
” Jehovah has given his word that at Armageddon he will empty the earth of everything and every creature that is in opposition to The Theocracy. He causes these truths to be proclaimed now in advance that those who desire to hear may hear, and he causes his name to be heralded throughout the earth in order that those who have the desire to put themselves on the side of The Theocracy, seek righteous
April 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
121
ness and learn the way to life, may do so. He compels no one to take this course, but he leaves the way open to all who voluntarily and freely come out and make known that they are on the side of Jehovah and his government of righteousness. But how about those who hear the message and yet remain silent, indifferent, and negligent, concluding that they had better keep quiet in order to make the way of the present time easier for themselves? Can one who now hears the name of Jehovah, and understands that his final reckoning is near at hand, remain quiet, indifferent or negligent concerning the same and expect to receive protection from Jehovah? The prophetic song of Deborah and Barak gives answer to these questions: “Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the Lord; curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty.”—Judg. 5: 23.
” It appears that Meroz was a settlement of the Israelites. Under their covenant they were dutybound to obey the commandment given them and to support their brethren. The tribes of Reuben, Dan, Gad and Asher failed to answer the call to arms, and in this pictured all those in a covenant with God who have failed or neglected to do their duty. The title “Meroz” is of uncertain meaning. Here is the only place it is mentioned in the Bible. Seeing that a curse is pronounced upon Meroz, the word may properly apply to all in the tribes that failed or neglected or refused to do their duty under Barak. Only one example would be necessary to make known God’s rule concerning those who are negligent, indifferent and fearful. Note the words of Jehovah in another prophecy: “Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord deceitfully [(marginal reading) negligently], and cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.”—Jer. 48:10.
37	When a person enters into a covenant -with Jehovah he is bound to perform the terms of that covenant. All the tribes of Israel were bound by the terms of their covenant to perform their duty. Likewise all today who are in a covenant to do the will of God cannot with impunity fail or neglect to perform. As opportunity to perform is given that performance must be forthcoming. When there is difficulty between the nations of earth God’s people have no part therein and properly remain neutral; but when God commands his covenant people to do certain things they must perform their duty toward his covenant people. He has commanded all such to preach “this gospel of the kingdom”, to declare his name and his kingdom throughout the earth, and there is no excuse to fail or refuse to do so. The curse pronounced against Meroz, without doubt, refers to the iniquities and indifference of some of the consecrated at the present time.
“ Jehovah’s angel pronounced the curse in the name of Jehovah, which proves that Jehovah’s invisible representative was present and in command of the heavenly forces that fought the battle: “They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.” Doubtless that angel of the Lord who pronounced the curse on that occasion was the Lord Jesus in his prehuman existence, that is, ‘Michael, the great Prince which stands for the children of the people’ and who is in charge of the forces of Jehovah, and will be at the battle of Armageddon. (Dan. 12:1) The same angelic captain was in command of the battle of Jericho and said to Joshua: “Nay; but as captain of the host of [Jehovah] am I now come.” “And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my lord unto his servant?”—Josh. 5:14.
” “Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof.” (Judg. 5:23) Those upon whom the curse was pronounced were seeking their own salvation, ease and comfort, and avoiding service. They said in their hearts: ‘Let others do the work.’ By that course they will doubtless escape some persecution and hardship, but negligence in the performance of duty will bring upon them God’s curse. The rules, or law, of Jehovah change not. Therefore the conclusion is irresistible that if a person enters into a covenant to do the will of God he must, in order to receive God’s approval, perform that covenant obligation to the best of his ability.
40	“Because they came not to the help of the Lord . . . against the mighty.” (Judg. 5:23) Jehovah himself did not need any help; but his commissioned servants, Deborah and Barak, did need help against the mighty host of their oppressors who were defaming the name of the Almighty God. Help rendered unto Barak and Deborah was as rendered unto Jehovah, and in rendering such help the Israelites were bound to render the same thing, not as unto man, but as unto God. (Col. 3: 23, 24) Such is exactly the rule announced by Jesus as to the sheep and the goats. “Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.”—Matt. 25: 45, 41.
41	Today the foes of The Theocracy are mighty. This is a day in which the name of Jehovah must be declared throughout the earth and The Theocracy advertised. All persons who have made a covenant to do the will of God are obligated by the terms of that covenant to obey the commandments of the Lord. No one has been compelled to enter into that covenant, but, one having once entered in, performance is required. It will not do to wait until the foes have
122
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
been stripped of their power at Armageddon. The “strange work” of Jehovah has been in progress now for some time, and it appears the conclusion of that work is near. Now is the time when all the covenant people of God must present a solid front against the enemy and each and every one do his part in declaring the name and the kingdom of the Most High. When the actual battle of Armageddon begins there will be no need for volunteers or for faithful work in declaring Jehovah’s name. That work will be completed and the powers of heaven will do the real fighting; as Jehovah has stated: ‘For the battle is not yours, but God’s; and ye shall not need to fight in this battle; set yourselves, and stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you.’—2 Chron. 20:15-17.
42	In that fight Christ Jesus, the Captain of Jeho
vah’s host, will completely empty the earth of all opponents of The Theocracy, and while that great invisible army is doing the fighting the faithful of God’s organization on earth will be singing praises of the Most High and of his King.
4> Today the Lord is gathering his “other sheep” unto himself. Many are hearing the message and believing it to be the truth, and by word of mouth they declare themselves on the side of Jehovah and his King. From the prophecy it would appear that some of these will fail to fully appreciate and perform their duty, and will find themselves with the goats. All such as fail stand out in marked contrast with Jael’s conduct, which the Lord emphasizes in the prophetic song.
{To be continued)
WHO WILL BE
TODAY darkness as to understanding the purpose of the Supreme Ruler covers the rulers of this visible organization on earth, and gross darkness is upon the people subject to that organization. The darkness will persist until the battle of Armageddon.
Fifteen centuries before Christ a plague of literal darkness that could be felt covered the land of Egypt for three days, except where the oppressed Jews dwelt. It was the ninth in a series of sore, vexing plagues, which served as warning notice from Almighty God of coming destruction upon those who opposed his purpose and oppressed his covenant people. For the tenth time Moses, accompanied by Aaron his brother, appeared before Egypt’s ruler, Pharaoh. Selfishness had hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he defiantly refused to let the enslaved people of Jehovah God go forth into freedom. “And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die. And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.”—Exodus 10:27-29.
From the historical record it appears that while Moses was still in Pharaoh’s presence God spoke to Moses to give final warning to Pharaoh before he departed. “And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.” (Ex. 11:1) Moses withdrew from Pharaoh never again to communicate with or to see Pharaoh except upon the request of the latter. That request was made shortly. Fear had now seized upon Pharaoh and his official household, and they were anxious to be quit of God’s “messengers of misfortune”.—Ex. 12:31-33; Psalm 78:49, Rotherham.
At the present time it appears that warning notices upon “Christendom”, like those nine plagues upon ancient Egypt, have been served by Jehovah’s witnesses at his command and under his direction, which messages of truth are still continuing and are great plagues upon the religious and totalitarian rulers of the world and their supporters.
PASSED OVER?
These messages of notice and warning constitute a great plague like a nightmare to the official element of the world, Satan’s organization, which would be glad to be rid of these to them “pestiferous” witnesses of Jehovah. This is made manifest by the constant howls that go up from the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergymen, big radio preachers, and others of like stripe who cry for “more religion” and who demand that God’s messengers be forbidden an opportunity to use the facilities of the world for proclaiming the truth. Jehovah’s witnesses are now thoroughly hated by all such opposers, and they would find some apparently legal excuse to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses. There is still some witness work to be done amongst the people, and preparation is now being made for the final plague to be visited upon Satan’s organization at Armageddon.
Jehovah had previously told Moses that, when His due time came for the deliverance of the Israelites, “ye shall not go empty,” but that the Israelites who had served as slaves many years without pay should borrow from the Egyptians: “And ye shall spoil the Egyptians” (Ex. 3: 21, 22) Immediately following this ninth plague Jehovah spoke to Moses and said: “Speak now m the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.” “And the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, and in the sight of the people.” (Ex. 11:2,3) The borrowing of articles from the Egyptians was not merely for self-adornment, but for use in the service of the Lord by the Israelites. This seems to mean that today, when Jehovah’s witnesses are falsely accused of carrying on a commercial work because they accept small contributions from persons of good-will for the literature left with them, it is right and proper now for Jehovah’s witnesses to apply for and to use any and all of the facilities that the worldly rulers now control and to use such in order to further the witness work of the Kingdom. That means that Jehovah’s
April 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
123
witnesses are to use the enemy’s own means or instruments against them, such as radio stations, telephone lines, the facilities of the courts, the making of petitions and protests, the lawmaking bodies, the right to use which is guaranteed by the fundamental law of their own land, and thus by the use of any and all other means bring to the attention of the people the message of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. By thus doing they are not asking permission of Satan’s organization to do something, but they are serving notice upon his organization and demanding that this worldly organization shall cease interfering with the execution of God’s purposes.
The borrowing from the Egyptians would also include receiving by Jehovah’s witnesses of money in the way of contribution for the literature, and then using that money in the preparation and publication of more literature. Thus the Lord’s people are diverting some things from the Devil’s crowd into the Lord’s work and service. This is further and conclusive proof that Jehovah’s witnesses are not engaged in a commercial enterprise, such as hawking and peddling and bookselling, regardless of what the worldly tribunals may decide or determine, and certainly regardless of what the religious clergy and their crowd may say.
In Egypt preparation must be made and was made for the final plague, and at the same time for the protection of God’s people. Pharaoh and his official family had spurned and disregarded the notice of warning of the nine preceding plagues, and hence it would have been useless to give Egypt’s rulers any instruction concerning the passover protection; and none was given to them. It appears, however, from the record at Exodus 11: 5-10, that Moses plainly warned Pharaoh that all his firstborn should die, but not even a dog’s tongue would move against any of the Israelites, and this warning was given to Pharaoh before Moses withdrew from his presence.
Jehovah told Moses that the death of the firstborn would take place at midnight, this to mean, in the modern-day fulfillment, at a time of the world’s blackness or darkest period. The blackness of darkness is now upon the world, and must continue until Armageddon. At the command of Jehovah Moses prepared the Israelites by instructing them that each household should, on the tenth day of the first month. Nisan (corresponding to our April), take a lamb without spot or blemish and keep it up until the fourteenth day of that month, on which day, in the evening, the lamb should be killed and its blood sprinkled over the entrance into each house and all should go into the house and remain there during the night, roast the lamb whole without breaking a bone, and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, and while thus doing they should be fully equipped for travel, God saying to them: “It is Jehovah’s passover.” “For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the Lord. And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.” —Ex. 12:12,13.
The record then follows: “And [Jehovah] smote all the firstborn in Egypt; the chief of their strength in the taber
nacles of Ham." (Ps. 78: 51) “He smote also all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all their strength.” (Ps. 105: 36) “And it came to pass, that at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne, unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.”—Ex. 12: 29.
In the fulfillment of this prophetic drama in our time the final plague upon the world will be at Armageddon. Who constitutes the antitypical or modern-day firstborn? God’s law, at Deuteronomy 21:17, declares that the firstborn son “is the beginning of his strength”. The antitypical Pharaoh is the Devil, and he has children. Said Jesus: “The tares [religionists] are the children of the wicked one.” (Matt. 13:38) And to the religious leaders of that day Jesus said: “Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him.” (John 8:44) The firstborn of Egypt would therefore picture all of Satan’s children, that is, those of his earthly organization who are “the beginning of his strength”, namely, the chief of the strength of the organization, to wit, the leaders and chief ones in the religious, commercial and political branches of Satan’s visible organization. Back there, the firstborn of every portion of Satan’s organization was destroyed. This in the antitypical fulfillment means that religious crowd known as the “man of sin” and “the son of perdition”; also the so-called “strong-arm squad” which they use to do the violent work for them, such as the German gestapo; and also those who put forth their strength to carry forward Satan’s schemes, and also the counterfeit of God’s kingdom, namely, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy-Totalitarian combine and its “new world order”. In this day Satan makes war upon the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses, who are of the “church of the firstborn”, and would destroy them unless prevented from so doing by the power of the Lord God. The only protection that these faithful witnesses have is from the Lord, and this comes by reason of their obedience to Jehovah’s commandment given to them by the Greater Moses, who is Christ Jesus, according to Acts 3:22,23.
The slaying of the passover lamb, and the eating thereof by the Israelites, preceded the slaughter of Egypt’s firstborn. At 1 Corinthians 5: 7 it is written: “For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us.” As in the typical events in Egypt, even so the death of “Christ our passover” and the partaking of the merit of his sacrifice by his spirit-begotten followers precede the slaughter of Satan’s firstborn at Armageddon. As Israel’s firstborn were passed over and preserved on that fateful night, even so the faithful remnant of anointed witnesses, who are of Jehovah’s “firstborn”, will be passed over and preserved at the battle of the great day of God Almighty. They will survive Armageddon by virtue of Jehovah’s protection. With them a great number of “companions”, persons of good-will known as the Lord’s “other sheep”, will survive. These were pictured by the “strangers” among the Israelites who were circumcised in order that they might eat the passover with the Israelites, and who formed a “mixed multitude” that went up with the Israelites out of Egypt. (Ex. 12: 38, 44, 48, 49) This “great multitude” of “other sheep” will be passed over
124
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
at Armageddon because they abandon Satan’s worldly organization before Armageddon and associate themselves with the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses and with them take part in serving notice on Satan’s organization and in preaching the good news of The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. (John 10:16; Rev. 7:9-17) To them the prophecy (Zephaniah 2:3) now speaks: "Seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.”
The typical passover lamb was taken into the houses of the Israelites on the tenth day of Nisan. Fifteen hundred years later, on the tenth day of Nisan, A.D. 33, Jesus “the Lamb of God” rode into Jerusalem and offered himself as King to the Jews. This shows that now, since the parallel date of A.D. 1918, the Christian’s receiving of the Lamb into the house signifies far more than accepting Jesus merely as the ransom sacrifice or as “the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world”. (John 1:29) It now means in this present “day of Jehovah” since 1918 to receive the Lamb which was slain, receiving him as Jehovah’s King enthroned in office, and hence the receiving the Kingdom and undertaking the full responsibility of increasing the interests of the Kingdom. In this “day of Jehovah” the eating of the Lamb would include not only partaking of his sacrificial merit, which cleanses from sin, but also the having a share in the doing of the witness work which Jesus Christ was sent to earth to do, to wit, to bear testimony to the name of Jehovah, all to the vindication of his holy name. Furthermore, as pictured by the removal of all leaven at passover time, there must be no uncleanness among the people of God’s organization and resulting from coming in contact with the Devil’s organization or compromising with it. There must also be no “leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy”; meaning to profess to be a Christian and then fail or refuse to confess the Lord as Savior and reigning King before men. (See Exodus 12: 8,10,15-17; Luke 12:1; 2 Corinthians 6:16-18.) Jehovah’s witnesses and the “great multitude” of their companions must now be entirely separate from Satan’s organization.
The Israelites were required to be in haste as they ate the passover, with their loins girded, feet shod, and staff in hand, which antitypically means that, “as strangers and pilgrims,” Jehovah’s witnesses are not of this world nor subject to Satan’s organization and its demands against The Theocracy, but are subject to the Theocratic “Higher Powers”; and that they are on the trek and about to leave the antitypical Egypt, seeing that that wicked organization will shortly be destroyed at Armageddon. (Ex. 12:11) At the passover the Israelites must abide in the house, under the blood which was sprinkled on their doorposts and lintels, and until morning. Antitypically this means that Jehovah’s witnesses are now hidden and are kept “in the secret place of the Most High”, under the protection of Jehovah God and His Vindicator, Christ Jesus, and are thus protected “until the indignation be overpast”. By the Lord’s grace, they have entered there and have ‘shut the door behind them’.—See Exodus 12: 22; Psalm 91:1; and Isaiah 26: 20, 21.
The blood of the passover lamb was publicly sprinkled on the doorposts and lintels of the houses of the Israelites. Antitypically that not only means that one must make public confession of the blood of Christ Jesus as Jehovah’s
provided redemptive price for mankind, but also signifies to Jehovah’s witnesses that all of that class are spiritually Judeans, that is, praisers of Jehovah, and are subject to the orders of Jehovah’s Vindicator and Great High Priest, Christ Jesus, who is the Prophet greater than Moses. Further, that sprinkled blood on the doorposts and lintels signifies that the day of judgment or of the vengeance of God is here, which vengeance will shortly be expressed and exercised in the destruction of Satan’s firstborn at Armageddon. Therefore the blood was both a public declaration and a testimony of the approaching destruction upon Jehovah’s enemies. This truth Jehovah’s witnesses, who are His “firstborn”, of the “church of the firstborn”, and who are yet on earth, must declare, because it is an expression of his vengeance.
It is true that the blood sprinkled signifies that those under it say, “I accept Christ Jesus’ blood as my redemptive price.” But to the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses it means much more. Back in Egypt the blood of the passover Lamb validated or made operative the law covenant which Jehovah made with the Israelites through their mediator Moses. The blood of Christ Jesus validates the new testament or new covenant. Hence the blood on the doorposts picturing the blood of the Victim which validates this new covenant, it signifies that the remnant of God’s firstborn have entered into that new covenant. The primary purpose of that covenant is to bring forth or produce a people for Jehovah’s name and which will have a part in the vindication of that holy name. Upon this remnant The Most High God has bestowed a “new name”, to wit, “Jehovah’s witnesses,” thus showing them to be a “people for his name”. (Read Isaiah 62:2; Revelation 2:17; and Acts 15:14.) The blood on the door entrances would therefore picture that the new covenant has been inaugurated toward the remnant and that hence they must be faithful to the “new name” which Jehovah has given them, and hence must continue to faithfully bear testimony to his name.
April 11,1941, is the anniversary of the night that Jesus celebrated the last passover with his disciples and thereafter took bread and wine and set up the Memorial of his own death; and that date marks the celebration publicly of the Lord’s supper by Jehovah’s witnesses. We are now in the day of Jehovah, when the plagues which of old came upon Egypt are being antitypically fulfilled upon Satan’s world. Now the celebration of the Memorial means much more than it did prior to the coming of the Lord to the temple in 1918 to judge his followers and to divide the nations as sheep and goats prior to Armageddon. Those who now properly partake of or celebrate the Lord’s supper as a memorial to the name of Jehovah and to his sacrificed Lamb must have an active personal part in the performance of the ten antitypical plagues upon antitypical Egypt, that is, upon Satan’s organization. By this is meant that each one must participate in proclaiming the message of Jehovah God in connection with these plagues. The plagues are now in operation, advancing to the great climax of destruction of Satan’s firstborn at Armageddon. To partake worthily of the Memorial one must have a part in declaring these truths as Christ has commanded. It was Moses and his brother Aaron who declared God’s word to the Egyptians, which resulted in the plagues. Moses was a type of Christ
April 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
125
Jesus Aaron, associated with Moses as his spokesman, represented the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses now on earth, declaring the message of God’s vengeance and bearing testimony of his kingdom, The Theocratic Government.
Jehovah’s witnesses at the temple of judgment are instructed by the Lord Jesus and then sent forth to declare the message of truth pertaining to the antitypical plagues. It follows, then, that those who worthily partake of the Memorial must be “in Christ” as members of “his body” and hence be of the heavenly capital organization of Jehovah They must be “living stones” in the temple of which Christ Jesus is the Chief Comer Stone. They must be wholly devoted to God and be engaged in proclaiming the mighty name and works of the Most High, for the reason that, as written in Psalm 29: 9, “in his temple doth every one speak of his glory.” The Lord’s “other sheep”, who become the “great multitude”, may engage in proclaiming the message of the kingdom of God, but it is those who partake of the death of Christ Jesu^ as members of “his body” who are the ones that ultimately live with him in heavenly glory. Those who also suffer the reproaches that reproached him by reason of his being Jehovah’s “faithful and true witness”, even unto the end, are the ones that will ultimately reign with him in the kingdom of heaven. (2 Tim. 2:11,12) The “great multitude” of the Lord’s “other sheep” will abide on earth and will dwell forever in peace and happiness under The Theocratic Government. To Jesus Jehovah gave the privilege and honor of being his vindicator at the cost of his human life. All who are with Him in that vindication must likewise die sacrificially, as Jesus stated, faithful unto the end. All such of Jehovah’s capital organization are “one bread and one body”, and the breaking of the bread and the drinking of the cup show forth that all who do so properly are one with Christ Jesus, that is to say, in unity with him as members of his body and therefore in the temple. (Read 1 Corinthians 10:16,17.) Such, therefore, properly partake of the emblems of the Memorial.
The primary purpose of Jehovah is the vindication of his own holy name which has been pushed aside and misrepresented and reproached by Satan the Devil and his organization, including “Christendom”. That is why God sent Moses to Egypt. For that same reason he sends Jesus to the world. All things else are incidental to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. The “day of Jehovah”, beginning in A.D. 1914 when the Times of the Gentiles ended, marks the time when Christ Jesus was placed upon his throne and sent forth to rule amid his enemies in heaven and earth. Three and one-half years thereafter, corresponding to the three and one-half years of the earthly ministry of Jesus in the flesh, to wit, in A.D. 1918, the Lord Jesus comes to the temple for judgment and judgment begins, first with his consecrated followers and then with professing “Christendom”. Then follows the antitypical fulfillment of the plagues upon Egypt, which plagues are completed at Armageddon in the destruction of Satan’s firstborn. The Scriptures seem clearly to show that the firstborn of Egypt represent the visible part of Satan’s organization, which will be destroyed at the battle of Armageddon, and that the invisible part of his organization, the wicked demons, including Satan himself, will shortly thereafter be destroyed, when Satan shall be cast into the pit of destruction. (Compare Revelation 19:19-21 and 20:1-3.)
It is the remnant of those who are in Christ as members of “his body”, and also their “companions”, the “great multitude”, who are the ones passed over at Armageddon. These are passed over upon condition that they are faithful to Jehovah and to Christ Jesus, the King of His Theocratic Government, and are obeying God’s commandments This means that they must perform the service of bearing testimony before the world rulers and before the people of and concerning The Theocratic Government and also declaring the vengeance of our God against Satan’s organization. When this declaration is completed, then will follow the execution of the tenth and final plague at Armageddon.
WOUNDED HEAD HEALED
THE head is the member that directs the course of action of the body, and hence refers to the ruling part. Thus the head is symbolically used to represent a world power. The Bible calls attention to seven world powers. The history of the world shows seven separate and distinct world powers which have in their respective order held a place of supremacy on the earth. These world powers are, to wit, Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, Rome and Anglo-American imperialism. Such world powers have adopted the emblems of wild, voracious animals as symbols of their strength and fierceness, and of their power to destroy the opposers. These world powers have frequently fought against one another. The prophetic book of Revelation, chapter thirteen, symbolically describes such a fight. Jehovah God gave the visions of that book with the purpose that those who love righteousness should understand Revelation at some time. The time has come for them to understand it.
The eye-witness writes: “And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven
heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon [the god of this world] gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority. And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast. . . . the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live.” —Rev. 13:1-3,14.
The “sword”, which is an implement of war, clearly refers to the World War beginning in A.D. 1914. The physical facts of history make it rather easy to locate this head that appeared to be wounded unto death. Revelation does not state who inflicted the wound, but the presumption must be indulged that it was inflicted by another head or world power of the “wild beast”, since that beast is represented as having seven heads.
The sixth world power, to wit, the Roman, had survived up to A.D. 1914, with Germany for some years prior to
126
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that date as the chief one in that empire. Originally Rome was pagan. Later it became papal and was misnamed “Christian”, and also misnamed “The Holy Roman Empire”. The dominant race in the “Holy Roman Empire” was Teutonic or German. This is particularly shown in the fact that the title given to the empire was “Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation”. (See The Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 12, page 511.) Germany was the head or pre-eminent part of the Teutonic peoples, and therefore the controlling part of the sixth head of the “beast”, and particularly so in 1914. Germany created and became the head of the alliance, the Dreibund, composed of Germany, Austria and Italy, and thus the sixth world power continued, with Germany as the head.
Britain became the seventh dominant world power, with England as the head thereof. Both these world powers and “heads” were in existence in 1914, and are still in existence, and both form part of the “wild beast” that came up out of the symbolic “sea” of mankind alienated from Jehovah God. Such was the exact condition that existed in 1914 at the beginning of the World War.
Says The Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 12, page 521: “Europe was, for many years before the actual eruption of 1914, practically divided into two hostile camps, with France, England and Russia on the one side and the Dreibund on the other, thus paralyzing all efforts of the nations to live in hearty concord, a thoroughly unhealthy state of things, one breeding all around distrust and hatred and rendering impossible harmony. Of course, there had been many seeing eyes in Germany herself which discerned clearly the abnormal features in the above, features threatening perpetually the peace of the world.”
In 1914 the “beast” which did “rise up out of the sea” got into a fight, its heads fighting each other. Germany the head on the one side and Britain the head on the other side led the fight. Every nation involved in that war was and is a part of the “beast”. That World War resulted in a terrible punishment to Germany and her allies, and it looked for some time as though Germany was completely done for. This harmonizes with the apostle John’s statement: “And I saw one of his [the beast’s] heads, as it were wounded to death.”
The John or servant class of the Lord on earth who witnessed the fulfillment of this prophecy thought for some time that it was literally true that Germany was done for. To many it seemed impossible for Germany ever to recover. Then, in the same connection, John says: “And his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.”—Rev. 13: 3.
Germany in particular was a very sick nation. She continued to linger and her people suffered; and lingering, she did live. The Devil’s own organization, after the war, began to put forth efforts to clean off the wounded head and bind it up and heal it. A real financial effort to heal this condition began at the Geneva Conference in the spring of 1922. Later the plan was submitted which provided that a loan of two hundred million dollars be made to Germany by the other nations forming a part of the symbolic “wild beast”. The British quota for this loan was oversubscribed in three hours, and the American bankers sold their portion in fifteen minutes. An encouraging survey of the first two
years of the operation of this plan and of conditions in republican Germany was published in Current History of March, 1927, under the title “Germany’s Restoration”.
Says The Encyclopedia Ajnericana, Vol. 28, page 645: “A day of happy promise dawned on 10 Sept. 1926 when Germany was received into the League of Nations ‘amid scenes of European reconciliation, which in their fire of enthusiasm have been unexampled since the Armistice Germany and France, through their Foreign Ministers, Dr. Gustav Stresemann and Aristide Briand, committed themselves to perpetual peace, and solemnly engaged the honor of their nations henceforth never to draw the sword, but to settle disputes by arbitration or compromise’.” The 1934 Annual of The Americana (pages 270,272) adds “Momentous social and political changes characterized the year 1933 in Germany. On 30 January, Adolf Hitler, fiery leader of the National Socialists (Nazis) became Chancellor. His first cabinet included ex-chancellor von Papen as Vicechancellor and many of the most conservative and largest capitalist elements in Germany. . . . Late in June von Papen visited the Pope seeking a new concordat for the whole of Germany and bespeaking the influence of the Pope to have the German Catholics abandon their political organizations and place themselves in line with the new Germany.” On October 14, 1933, Hitler, for Germany, quit the League of Nations and the Disarmament Conference. On March 16, 1935, he proclaimed the renewal of military conscription in Germany.
The prophetic Scriptures declared, and Jehovah’s witnesses particularly since 1930 called attention thereto, that the vanquished side would come back, with the head healed, and that all the nations would be astounded. Germany was for many years the chief support of Papal Rome, and the dominant people in the “Holy Roman Empire”. The Roman Catholic “Hierarchy of Authority”, operating from Rome, is admittedly in the lead of all religious organizations on the earth and carries forward what it calls “Catholic Action”, operating always for a wicked purpose The present pope is undoubtedly the most astute politician that has occupied the papal office in many centuries. He was secretary of state during the administration of Pius XI, when Hitler came to power. The purpose of the Vatican in its movement called “Catholic Action” is to gain control and rule the world, and, to do that, it demands the re-establishment of the old “Holy Roman Empire”. The totalitarian dictators accede to his demand and proceed in the establishment of Rome on its old basis. Catholic Action began in Germany to bring about the healing of that German head that was wounded. The nations and the people are now advised of the result. Hitler was put in power as dictator by the connivance and allied action of the religious politicians of various nations of the earth, many of whom were members of the League of Nations. The religious, political, commercial elements furnished the brains and the money to put Hitler into office, but the whole scheme originated with and was directed by Satan himself. Much of the support to put Hitler in power came from the United States. Now the work of re-establishing the old “Holy Roman Empire” is well under way. Now the dictators, backed up by the Vatican, spread out over the earth and are grabbing everything on the earth. The head of that “beast” that re
April 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
127
ceived the deadly wound was healed, and the Papacy is riding on the back of that beast. So completely does the Vatican control that beast, aligned with the politicians and commercial leaders, that the newspapers and other publications of the world, even in lands yet called “democratic”, refuse to speak out and tell the people that the real enemy that is destroying liberty and all freedom of thought and action is that religious organization operating from Vatican City in Italy.
The ruling factors of the beastly organization boast that according to their own pattern they will establish everlasting peace on earth. Long ago the Lord God directed John to describe this condition, at Revelation 13:4: “And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast: and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him?” The course of the ruling factors, and particularly the religious clergy, is a defiant challenge to Almighty God and to Christ Jesus, the King of his Theocratic Government. They raise the issue, Who is supreme ? and how will the world be ruled ? God’s anointed witnesses on earth are telling the people that God’s kingdom is here and is the complete relief for humankind. Satan’s visible organization on earth now says: ‘We will establish the world, and none can war with us.’ Thus they induce the people to worship the Devil and the “beast”, which is Satan’s visible organization. Seemingly they are totally blind to the fact that they are marching on to Armageddon and destruction.
Verse 5 reads: “And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.” Satan is the arch blasphemer against Jehovah God. He is the great deceiver of the people. The religious clergy in particular proclaim their doctrines that turn the people away from Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ, and these are Satan’s mouthpieces. They now misrepresent God’s Word and claim that the “wild beast” will make lasting peace, whereas the Scriptures show that there can be no peace until the “wild beast” is completely destroyed, at Armageddon by Jehovah God.
Verses 6 and 7 add: “And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.” This is further proof that the “wild beast” includes all the nations of the earth, and particularly ‘•Christendom”. During the World War (1914-1918) and since have the ruling factors blasphemed God and those who faithfully hold to the Word of God. God’s “tabernacle” or tent is among his covenant people, his witnesses, and he dwells there; and those ill-using his witnesses because they testify concerning God’s kingdom do thereby reproach and blaspheme God’s holy name. To be sure, Jehovah could prevent this; but he does not, doubtless withdrawing his restraining power for a time to give the religious clergy and their allies a full opportunity to demonstrate to what extent they would go in beastliness.
“And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him [the beast], whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.” (Rev.
13:8) The line of demarkation is clearly drawn between Jehovah’s Theocratic organization and that of the enemy, and this before the end of Satan’s organization comes Faith in the blood of Christ, the Lamb of God, and in the Theocratic Government of which he is King, is the only way that man can ever get life everlasting. All the people that dwell upon the earth and that do not trust in the sacrificial blood of Christ Jesus and in Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ will be lined up on the side of Satan and his organization before the final end at Armageddon The Lord God is causing the message of his kingdom to be widely proclaimed for the manifest purpose of informing mankind of God’s purpose to grant life to those who devote themselves to the Lord; and those who do not take their stand on the Lord’s side and give him the honor and glory due, do by their contrary course give honor and worship to the “beast”, or Satan’s organization.
Hence verse 9 adds: “If any man have an ear, let him hear.” This is clearly a warning to all who have made a consecration of themselves to God to do his will, and indicates a test to all “that hear the words of this prophecy”. (Rev. 1:3) Who will be on the Lord’s side? The words “let him hear” also show an obligation resting upon Jehovah’s anointed witnesses to carry this message to those who are held as virtual prisoners by the beastly organization of the Devil, particularly by the religious organizations on earth, that thus such ones may have no excuse for not taking their stand on the side of Jehovah God and his King Christ Jesus. Let those who love the Lord God stand firm on his side and faithfully and earnestly proceed with the proclamation of the message of his Theocratic Government
In A.D. 70 the “wild beast” that came up “out of the sea” used the armies of Rome to destroy Jerusalem and led the Jews, who were God’s typical people, into the captivity of the nations, as Jesus had foretold at Luke 21 24 In 1918 the same “wild beast” led Jehovah’s people, the spiritual Israelites, into captivity to the powers of this world and killed the witness work they were carrying on From and after 1919 Jehovah began to deliver his witnesses from this captivity. The same beast still holds in captivity many persons of good-will toward Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government. At Revelation 13, verse ten, the Lord prescribes the punishment upon those of Satan’s organization ■ “He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.” The one that shall lead the “beast” into captivity is Jehovah’s great Priest and Executive Officer, Christ Jesus.
The “wild beast”, acting through its head the Roman Empire, “killed with the sword” James the brother of the apostle John. In A.D. 70 that “beast” caused the Jews to fall by the sword, and in 1918 by the sword of the World War it killed the witness work of Jehovah’s people Hence that beast “must be killed with the sword” at Armageddon
In 1918 a great trial came upon God’s people Ever since it has been a trial of patience and faith, even as Jesus had foretold, at Matthew 24: 9,13. It means that Jehovah’s witnesses and their devoted companions must continue in patience and faith and love even unto the end. Complete devotion to God and faithfully giving witness to his name and kingdom according to his commandments are required. Victory will be given to the faithful.—Rev 2 10
FIELD EXPERIENCES
SIDEWALK MAGAZINE-WORK EPISODES
Omak, Washington: “Last Saturday afternoon two pioneers and a publisher from Okanogan went on the street with the magazines. As it was quite cold we planned on staying just one hour. After a few minutes there one of the dupes of the Hierarchy asked if we would salute the flag. We asked, Upon whose authority do you ask this question! He quickly turned away with an angry retort, 1’11 show you whose authority!’ He busied himself up and down both sides of the street going in to all the stores inviting the people to come out and look at Jehovah’s witnesses who would not salute the flag. In a few minutes down comes the constable, asking, ‘Will you salute the American flag!’ ‘No!’ was the reply. Constable: ‘I will give you ten minutes to get out of town!’ Troublemaker, standing behind the constable, after these words says: 'That’s the way to tell them, officer.’ We held down our corners and a few minutes before it was time to leave the mayor himself came up and said we had better leave, as the town was getting very angry. We told him we had work to do and were staying on the street for the hour we had planned. He stated there was an ordinance against this sort of work here. I asked if I could have a copy of it, and he said, ‘Yes, get it at the City Hall.’ We still serve the Lord and believe in the American Constitution, which guarantees freedom of worship according to the dictates of your conscience. We will be back with the magazines next Saturday afternoon in Omak, by the Lord’s grace.”
Pontiac, Michigan: ‘‘Last Saturday I stood on the street with The Watchtower and Consolation, and a man came up to me and said: ‘Do you people know that there are many Catholics who are thinking about what Jehovah’s witnesses have told them and are wondering if you people are right!’ ”
St. Petersburg, Florida: “A man in the business district called me to his office and advised me to stop this work because someone would surely kill me. This furnished me an opportunity to give him further witness: ‘Many people misunderstand the real mission of Jehovah’s witnesses. Their privilege is to preach of the Kingdom for which the people have been praying for the past nineteen centuries, and now that kingdom is here. Instead of accepting that for which you have prayed, you defy the message and persecute the messengers of that kingdom. The Kingdom is the only salvation of the world.’ A few days ago he called me again to his office and apologized for his former threats and asked for all the literature. I told him he will have to advertise the Kingdom also if he expects life, and he says he is willing to do so. Many Catholics that previously have hoped to frighten me now have their eyes open and discern the deception of religion. After all this opposition, thanks to Jehovah! as I have distributed over 2,000 booklets during December.”
A MODEL STUDY ON WHEELS
“A witness who drives a school bus suggested we gather the interested in the bus. After those near by were gathered we drove to another home several miles away, where the entire family are interested, and invited them to take their places in the bus, where ample seats, lights, and heat aided in carrying on a delightful model study. There were seventeen in attendance.”
FIRMNESS FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS
“We had our zone assembly, but had to move to Lockney, Texas, sixteen miles east in Floyd county, because the officials of Plainview refused to grant us the use of the courthouse, there being an American Legion meeting in the town on the anmdates. I was not surprised, knowing there was to be a Legion assembly. The county judge refused on the grounds that he could not be responsible for what might happen, unless the Commissioners Court would take the responsibility. We at once tried to get space in the city auditorium and other buildings, but found the mayor had everything under his control. The mayor, John DuBose, is also a Legionnaire; therefore the town was closed to us. We drove over to Lockney. The postmaster and commander of the local American Legion post referred us to the city council and assisted us in other ways to secure the city auditorium. The city mayor and wife attended the public lecture and seemed to enjoy it very much. We were very thankful to Jehovah for this wonderful opportunity to serve, this being the largest and best assembly we have ever held in this zone. On the street the police chief approached me in this manner: ‘My name is Curry. I am the chief of police.’ Said I: ‘My name is Champagne. How are you, Chief!’ Said he: ‘You will have to get these people off the streets.’ (We had about one hundred on the street in the magazine work.) I asked: ‘Why! What have these sheep done !’ Said he: ‘They have done nothing, but you will have to get them off the street.’ This I refused to do, stating we must obey God rather than men, and this we will do, by His grace. Said he: We have a Legion meeting in town, and they are raising hell down at the auditorium.’ I said: Well, that is the place you should go and stop them. We are doing nothing wrong.’ Said he: ‘I have told you once.’ I replied: ‘I heard you the first time.’ Then he said: ‘I’d d----soon take them off.’ I replied: ‘Well, why don’t you
start right now!’ All had a good laugh, whereupon he turned and left. Like all cowards, I have not seen him since. The company secretary of Lubbock, Texas, was also picked up by the deputy sheriff, who took her to the sheriff’s office. Asked what she was doing, she replied: ‘Preaching the gospel as God has commanded.’ The sheriff remarked: ‘It’s a damn strange work you people are doing.’ She replied: ‘Oh, haven’t you read in the Bible that God is carrying on a “strange work”!’ The sheriff replied: ‘If it’s in the Bible it is sure being fulfilled.’ Then he told the deputy to take her back to the street, for she was doing a good work, and let her alone. She went back, rejoicing.”
A DAY’S WORK IN A VIRGINIA TOWN
“Entering a furniture store I greeted three men with a cheery ‘Good morning!’ Unfolding a copy of The Watchtower and holding it so all could see its beauty I stated: We are extending you an invitation to subscribe for The Watchtower.’ Says one man: Why is it I can never hear Judge Rutherford on the air anymore!’ ‘Because the Lord has a better way. Listen to his recording “Instruction”.’ Results: Two subscriptions, two bound books, six booklets, six sound attendance. Using the same method all day, I counted up at the end and had four subscriptions, nine bound books, 21 booklets, 41 sound attendance, and nine copies of The Watchtower and Consolation placed.”
128
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
oteicebs
J. F. Rutherford, President____W. E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ In glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.60; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Ovtices
British _____________________ 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ..................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 6, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7 Beresford Boad, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African _________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The 'Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1379.
“THEOCRATIC AMBASSADORS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
June, for the entire month, is the Period here named. Are you a Theocratic ambassadorf You can be, if you take your stand on the side of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and then engage in announcing that government to others. The June Period affords you the opportunity to exercise your ambassadorship. The means provided by the great Theocrat, who sends you forth, is his published Kingdom message, and, durmg June only, you may offer to the public, on a mere contribution of 35c, a combination of any three bound books published by the Society, excluding the latest books, Religion and Salvation. Prompt advance preparation will be necessary to your most effective part in this Testimony. Any needed references to the local company organized for this service we shall gladly furnish you. May you be able at the end of June to fill out a good report of work.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 1: “Victory Song” (Part 5), fl 1-15 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1941.
Week of June 8: “Victory Song” (Part 5), fl 16-29 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1941.
Week of June 15: “Victory Song” (Part 5), fl 30-48 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1941.
"MODEL STUDY NO. 3”
This new booklet, of 32 pages and bound in a durable cover, brings up to date the series of Model Study booklets, as it presents the study outline covering the latest recorded speeches by Judge Rutherford, to wit, “Religion as a World Remedy,” and “The End”. This booklet is very valuable, even if you do not possess the phonograph recordings of the speeches named, and with it anyone should be able to conduct a model study of the Bible m the home or m public. Order several for use of others whom you hope to have study with you. Model Study No. 3 will be sent you postpaid at a contribution of 5c a copy. Company servants should make up combination orders for all in the company wanting copies.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	May 1, 1941	No. 9
VICTORY SONG
PART 5
and his ears towards their cry for help: the face of Jeho-the earth their memory.”—Ps. 34:15,16, Rotherham.
must quickly turn about and take the right course, and, doing so, he will be forgiven. When a man learns of Jehovah and his gracious goodness manifested through Christ Jesus and then treats that great truth with indifference or with willfulness, his wrong course is not forgivable. He thus sins against light or against the holy spirit, which is light. The blood of Christ Jesus is the price that purchased mankind, and is not a common thing. Therefore when a man sees and understands that his hope of life is by faith and obedience unto Jehovah God and Christ and he then spurns or disregards that favor, the wrath of God remains upon him and his end is with all others of the wicked class.
5 At the present day Satan’s world has come to an end, and within a short time the Lord will completely destroy Satan’s power. The King, Christ Jesus, has begun his reign, and in obedience to the will of Jehovah God the name of the Most High must be and has been for some time declared throughout the earth, and this proclamation of the name and the kingdom of Jehovah must continue until God’s “strange act” is performed. This is the day of enlightenment for all who desire righteousness and life. It is the time when the people on earth are being separated into two classes, one class being those of the righteous by reason of their faith and obedience to the Lord, and the other the unrighteous or wicked ones. This separation precedes the great and final conflict at Armageddon, which takes place when the separating work is completed. The day of enlightenment and separation began from and after the appearing of Christ Jesus at the temple in 1918. Thereafter the Lord no longer passes by unnoticed the conduct of men towards The Theocracy, which conduct or course of action is intelligently taken. In the judgment and division of the nations now taking place each one must in due time be for The Theocracy or against The Theocracy. Now the greater number of the people are against The Theocracy, due chiefly to the influence of the demons. At the same time there are a goodly number who sincerely desire righteous-131
"The eyes of Jehovah are towards the righteous, vah is against such as do wickedness, to cut off from
T EHOVAH announces his unchangeable law conI cerning the righteous and the wicked. He beholds
J the righteous in distress, hears their cry for help, and delivers them. He deals exactly in an opposite manner with the wicked, and the memory of them shall perish from the earth. No man is righteous of himself, because all are born in sin by reason of the disobedience of the first man. A man becomes righteous only by faith in Jehovah God and in Christ Jesus’ shed blood as his redemptive price, and by full consecration and obedience to God and Christ. Before man can be made righteous he must show his faith in God and in Christ Jesus by willingly making a covenant to do the will of the Most High, and then he must maintain his righteousness which he has received through Christ Jesus by faithfully performing and keeping the terms of that covenant. He must be entirely for Jehovah and his kingdom and not compromise in any manner whatsoever with the enemy.
s A man who enters into a covenant to do the will of God, and hence to follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ, and who then through negligence, indifference, fear, willfulness or other cause does not keep and perform his covenant, thereby puts himself in the class of the wicked. He becomes responsible for his own destiny. It is not all in making the covenant, but faithfully keeping and performing the covenant is that which is of the greatest importance. It is written that “the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom”, and that fear of God and the full devotion to him must be kept and maintained henceforth; otherwise one fails to have that wisdom which comes down from above.
3 The wicked include all persons who are against The Theocracy and who therefore, directly or indirectly, oppose the kingdom by Christ Jesus. The Lord Jesus emphasized that rule when he said: “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gath-ereth not with me scattereth.”—Luke 11: 23.
*	A man may be ignorantly against The Theocracy and the King thereof, but when he is enlightened he
132
THE WATCHTOWER
ness and are seeking after God and his King and kingdom, and such sincere ones hearing the message from the Lord God quickly take their stand on the side of the great Theocrat and his King and serve him with joyful heart.
•	The faithful spiritual class knows that the “remnant” of God’s organization yet on the earth are righteous by reason of being of the “body of Christ”. (1 Cor. 12: 27; Rom. 11: 5) Continuing faithful unto death, such faithful ones enter into everlasting glory with the Lord. On the earth are the Lord’s “other sheep”, called “Jonadabs”, who are the “companions” of the remnant. (John 10:16; 2 Ki. 10:15-23; Jer. 35:19) These have fled for refuge to Christ Jesus, found refuge under his organization, and, there remaining faithfully devoted to The Theocracy and to the King thereof, they have the promise of protection during the time of the “great tribulation”. By reason of their faithful devotion and obedience they receive such protection from the great Shepherd, Christ Jesus. Continuing thus faithful until the end of Armageddon and ever thereafter, they shall fully enter into righteousness and life; but if any of the remnant or of the Jonadabs become unfaithful to Jehovah and his King, such put themselves in the class of the wicked and their end is destruction.
’ Sometime after the temple judgment began the Lord revealed to his anointed that those who would be forever with Christ Jesus in his kingdom must bear the name which Jehovah gave to them, that is to say, witnesses of Jehovah. (Isa. 43:10-12; 62:1, 2) These constitute the remnant of the “body of Christ”, and they must continue to be faithfully obedient unto God and his King and bear testimony to the name of the Most High and to his kingdom. Then, some time later, God revealed to his people that his “other sheep”, that will form the “great multitude” (Rev. 7:9-17), are an earthly class that shall live forever on the earth and carry out the divine mandate to fill the earth with a righteous people; that such were pictured by Jonadab and by other prophetic pictures recorded in the Scriptures; that in order for these “other sheep" to ultimately become members of the “great multitude” they must be wholly devoted to The Theocracy and must remain within the bounds of the “city of refuge", that is to say, God’s organization under Christ, and there faithfully perform their assigned duties until the end of Armageddon.
*	The announcement of these truths by The Watchtower was seized upon by some of the spirit-begotten ones as an excuse to turn away from God’s earthly organization and become opponents of those who advertise The Theocracy, and hence they became enemies of The Theocracy. Not being for the King
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and his kingdom, by their course of action they become opponents and scatter abroad. Some others have become offended and have withdrawn from the Lord’s organization and put themselves in open opposition to The Theocracy. Some of these by their words claimed to have faith in God and in Christ, but their actions completely deny their words. Claiming to have faith is not at all sufficient, because faith without works, that is, without activity in support of Jehovah’s announced purpose, is dead. (Jas. 2:17, 20) One must prove his faith by obediently carrying out the commandments of God. Failing or refusing to do so puts such a one in the class of the wicked. A person who claims to be serving God, and yet who does what he can to hinder the progress of the proclamation of the Theocratic message, is an enemy of God, and hence wicked.
*	The Lord judges men not by their words alone, but his judgment is by reason of the heart devotion. (1 Sam. 16:7) The Lord knows the secret intent of every person. The eyes of the Lord seek out those who devote themselves to him unselfishly, and he shows his strength in behalf of such. (2 Chron. 16:9) Those who become righteous by reason of faith in Christ Jesus and Jehovah, and in full obedience to the Lord, must because of their faithfulness to God suffer much at the hands of the enemy, and this suffering experienced enables them to prove their integrity toward God. In their distress they cry unto God, and he hears their cry because of their sincere heart devotion to him: “The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.”—Ps. 34:15.
10	Those who do evil in God’s sight and against God’s people who are faithfully proclaiming God’s name are wicked, and hence are against the great Theocrat and his King; and the judgment against these is pronounced by the Lord Jesus at Matthew 25:41-45. God turns his face away from such, as he states in the text above quoted, at Psalm 34:16, and then God further expresses himself concerning such in these words: “Misfortune shall be the death of the lawless one, and the haters of the righteous man shall be held guilty.” (Ps. 34:21, Rotherham) The criterion by which a man should examine himself is not his physical and mental shortcomings or imperfections, but according to his sincere, honest heart devotion. God judges that way, and that is the right way. Concerning this it is written in the Scriptures: “Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves.” (2 Cor. 13:5) “For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.” —1 Cor. 11:31.
11	It is not sufficient for one to say, “I am a Christian; I love the Lord"; but in judging himself he must ask himself: “Am I proving my faith and de
May 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
133
votion by joyfully and enthusiastically obeying the commandments of Jehovah and his King? Am I giving my entire and undivided devotion to The Theocracy? If I am not wholly and entirely for The Theocracy I am against The Theocracy.” To that effect is the official announcement made by Christ Jesus, and thus the true condition is expressed. One cannot be negligent or indifferent to the commandments of God concerning The Theocratic Government and expect to receive God’s approval. This point is particularly emphasized in the Victory Song written long ago (Judg. 5:1-31), the meaning of which is now revealed to God’s covenant people on the earth to enable them to see what is their present duty and privilege. Jael, one of the characters in that prophetic drama, was put to the test, and she without hesitation put herself entirely on the side of Jehovah and on the side of his typical covenant people, who there remained faithful to God. Jael pictured a faithful, obedient class of people who shall receive the everlasting blessings of Jehovah and his King.
11	“Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be; blessed shall she be above women in the tent.” (Judg. 5:24) These are the words uttered by Deborah the prophetess of Jehovah, and therefore they operate as words of Jehovah’s organization uttered by his authority. Because she uttered those prophetic words concerning Jael is no reason why any person should worship Jael as the Catholic Hierarchy teaches others to worship Mary. The angel of the Lord appeared unto Mary and informed her she was to give birth to the babe Jesus, and said to her: “Blessed art thou among women.” (Luke 1:28) That was not a command to worship Mary, but an announcement of her blessing because of her faith and obedience unto the promises of God. The angel further said to Mary: “Thou hast found favour with God.” (Vs. 30) Then the angel informed Mary that she would be the mother of Jesus, the Son of the Most High. Mary showed her faith and obedience, and replied: “Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word.” (Vs. 38) Later Elizabeth said to Mary: “Blessed is she that believed”; and Mary said: “My soul doth magnify the Lord.” Thus Mary and Elizabeth both showed their faith and devotion to Jehovah, and there is nothing in the Scriptures to authorize any creatures to worship Mary. Their worship belongs to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, and to none other. The commandments of Jehovah fix that limitation. (Heb. 1:6; Ex. 34:14; Rev. 19:10) No doubt many Catholics ignorantly worship Mary because they have been thus taught; but in doing so they do contrary to God’s specific commandment.
18 Jael was blessed because of her faith and obedience ; and therefore she pictured a class of persons
on earth following the beginning of the temple judgment, which persons hear the message of The Theocracy, believe in God and in Christ, and covenant to do the will of God, and who then prove their faith by being obedient to God’s commandments. Jael is mentioned in the prophecy in strict contrast to the indifferent and negligent and unfaithful, which are pictured in the curse pronounced upon Meroz. (Judg. 5: 23) Jael pictured those “other sheep” of the Lord, who shall compose the “great multitude”. She was a weaker vessel when compared with the men of Meroz; yet she showed her faith and devotion, where the unfaithful men failed. God pronounced his curse upon Meroz, which curse proclaims that the class of persons who are against The Theocracy, and who fail, either by negligence or willful disobedience, to render service to The Theocracy, are in the wicked class.
14 Just how Jael herself was “blessed” is not stated in the prophecy, nor is that necessary, because she played a part in the prophetic drama picturing a class that the Lord is now gathering unto himself. Her blessings may properly be inferred, however, to wit: Her life was spared from Jehovah’s executioner, Barak, who found Sisera in her tent. Her life was spared although she was the wife of one who maintained friendly relations with Jabin the enemy. She was given favorable mention in God’s Word, and also in making the picture concerning the “other sheep” of the Lord, that shall form the “great multitude” and that shall survive Armageddon and fill the earth according to the divine mandate. Furthermore, she was “blessed” according to the Divine Record, as it appears that she had no children prior to the Megiddo battle but doubtless was blessed with children thereafter, and her family line was thereby preserved. Such appears to be God’s manner of dealing with those whom he favors, because of their faithfulness: “Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord; and the fruit of the womb is his reward.” (Ps. 127:3) “Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house; thy children like olive plants round about thy table.”—Ps. 128: 3.
18 God likewise favored the Shunammite woman who showed kindness to his servant Elisha. (2 Ki. 4: 8-17) Mary was ‘"blessed” of God in that she was privileged to bear the child Jesus. The “great multitude”, whom Jael pictured, are greatly favored of Jehovah by being permitted to bear children after Armageddon and to thereby “fill the earth” with a righteous race. Heber the Kenite does not figure in the prophetic picture at all, and no blessing is pronounced upon him. Jael’s marriage to him, however, served to identify her as a non-Israelite and as a relative of the prophet Moses, one of the princes who shall rule in the earth; and hence she is a fitting sym
134
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
bol of the “great multitude”, now the active “companions” of the spiritual Israelites, and which multitude shall be for ever with the princes.
16 “Blessed shall she be above [among] women in the tent.” (Judg. 5: 24) Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel and Leah were all women dwelling in tents and, as such, sojourners like Abraham. “By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles [tents] with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise; for he looked for a city [The Theocracy] which hath [everlasting] foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised.” (Heb. 11:9-11) Thus was Jael classified among the “blessed” who shall, together with the “princes”, live forever on the earth. She was a worthy example to her tribal relatives, the Jonadabs, the sons of Rechab, who dwelt in tents. (Jer. 35:6-19) The blessing of Jael makes her correspond with the “other sheep” of the Lord, to whom Christ Jesus says: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom [The Theocracy] prepared for you from the foundation of the world.”—Matt. 25: 34.
1	T “He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish.” (Judg. 5: 25) Jael responded to the request of Sisera for water, not as an act of giving aid to the enemy of Jehovah’s people, but she gave him milk to put him to sleep and thereby to disarm him that she might carry out her purpose in favor of The Theocracy. (Judg. 4:18,19) It is well known that milk, especially when it is warm, or buttermilk, has a tendency to put to sleep one who is tired. Likewise the Jonadabs hand to the enemy the ‘milk of God’s Word’ as set forth in the Scriptures and the Scriptural explanation, and which “milk of the Word” confounds the enemy and disarms them and puts them to sleep mentally. When one is accosted and taken to task by an ultrareligionist, and that person hands the simple word of God in reply to that religionist, the religionist is so confused that he cannot answer; hence he is mentally asleep. Jael pictured this by her serving Sisera with milk, and she brought it forth “in a lordly dish"; and so the witnesses of the Lord today bring forth his Word in the Lord’s dish.
12	“She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen’s hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera; she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.” (Judg. 5:26) The rendering of this verse of the song, according to Rotherham, is: “Her hand to the tent-pin put she forth, and her right hand to the toilers’ mallet, then smote she Sisera, she shattered his head, yea she split open and pierced through his temples.”
Thus by her works she proved that she was for Jehovah and against the persecutor of God’s covenant people. Likewise the Jonadabs today, by their course of action in fully supporting God's people, the “remnant”, as their “companions”, joyfully engage with them in the service and show their entire devotion to The Theocracy.
12	In fulfillment of that part of the prophecy we see that particularly since 1937 the Jonadabs, pictured by Jael, have made bold to strike for liberty and against the Hierarchy, the head of the great religious system that has so long deceived and oppressed God’s faithful people. This they have done and do by arming themselves with and using the Word of God, thereby killing religious traditions and imaginations brought forth by the religious leaders, who oppose and persecute the covenant people of Jehovah who are advertising The Theocracy. These faithful Jonadabs, by their knowledge and the use of the truth of God’s Word, are engaging with their companions in "casting down imaginations”: “(For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.” (2 Cor. 10:4,5) “Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth; and thy judgments are as the light that goeth forth.” (Hos. 6: 5) The antitypical Jael class now boldly and publicly proclaim the message of the great Theocracy, thereby pointing out that God’s kingdom, and not religion, is the only hope of humankind. By thus doing they are putting to death religion.
20	“At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down; at her feet he bowed, he fell; where he bowed there he fell down dead.” (Judg. 5: 27) The language of this text appears to warrant the conclusion that at the blow upon Sisera’s head first delivered he raised himself up and offered what resistance he could under the conditions and then fell down dead. Whereupon Jael, with the tent pin, fastened his head to the ground. In like manner the Jonadabs abandon and shun religion and use the hammer of the Scriptures upon the religious rulers, and which causes such religionists to writhe in agony and to rise up and attempt to resist and to howl in agony and to take all possible action against the Theocratic message, and then in the end they fall down and die. According to the Revised Version the text reads (margin): “He fell down overpowered.” The Kingdom message completely overpowers the religionists, and they are not able to answer today.
21	Jael did not keep her vigorous act against Sisera a secret, but she went right out and related to Barak,
fEe WATCHTOWER
May 1,1941
God’s servant, what she had done. (Judg. 4:21,22) Likewise the Jael class today boldly go out in the name of the Lord and publish amongst their brethren and companions and all who will hear, the great truth that religion is a dead thing, and that the leaders and teachers of religion are dead factors in their lives, and that all religion and religious institutions are doomed to complete destruction at the hand of Jehovah’s great Vindicator, the Greater Barak, Christ Jesus.
22	“The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots?” (Judg. 5:28) The covetous and avaricious spirit of those under the power of demons is shown by this part of the prophetic song. The mother of Sisera pictures the organization of Satan, the chief of demons, and hence she pictures all who are under the influence and power of demons at the present time. For this reason Jesus Christ, addressing the clergy, the leaders amongst religion, employed these words: “Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.” (John 8:44) The Devil’s woman, here pictured by Sisera’s mother, here represents the demon organization under Satan, the chief of demons, who is the head thereof and the father of lies and wickedness.
22	^Looked out of the window5; that is to say, Sisera’s mother looked out of the window anxious to see her victorious son return with the spoils. She remained in her abiding place and there waited the news of the battle, which she expected to be only favorable news. She relied upon the superiority of the number and equipment of Sisera’s organization. Likewise today the devils or demon organization, both invisible and visible, are watching the presentday “strange work” of the Lord, in which Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions are having a part. All who are of the world are under the influence of religion or demonism and therefore watching the progress of the battle, and expecting shortly that battle will result in the complete annihilation of those who are the representatives of The Theocracy on earth. (1 Cor. 4:9) Truly, as the apostle states in this last cited text, every faithful servant of God on earth is now a “spectacle unto the world”, both men and angels. Every apparent gain of the totalitarian power in suppressing the organized work of Jehovah’s witnesses is looked upon by the enemy as another step toward complete victory and a full dividing of the spoils. Like Sisera’s mother they are just waiting to feed fat their hatred upon the complete destruction of God’s faithful servants. The continuous personal witnessing of Jehovah’s witnesses, who, without fear of man or devil, go forth in the strength of the Lord proclaiming the name of the Most High and his kingdom, is very disturbing to
135
the organization of the enemy. The spoils have not been picked up as quickly as they expected. Sisera’s mother was so cock-sure of seeing her son march home in triumph that she was disturbed by the delay, and because of the delay she cried out with apprehension and fretfulness. It is even so with the religionists today. They are galled and piqued and disturbed and cry out because Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions are permitted to go on in their work.
24	“Why is his chariot so long in coming?” Thus remarked the old lady concerning her son Sisera. Likewise the religious leaders expected complete victory and the division of the spoils before 1940 and a complete cleanup of everything in their favor in 1940; yet Jehovah’s “strange work” is still going on in some parts of the earth. The religionists therefore cry out, “Why the delay?”
25	In the remaining so-called “democratic” nations the religious elements are apprehensive and impatient about the silencing of Jehovah’s witnesses. While Great Britain continues to show some kindness to Jehovah’s witnesses, many of the countries of the British Commonwealth have closed down the active service of Jehovah’s servants. The religious or demon-controlled nations feverishly work to speed up action and to hurry the political and judicial departments to ride Jehovah’s witnesses down under their iron chariot wheels. These expect to set up a “Peace and safety” slogan soon, and are anxious to divide the spoils. That “social justice” spokesman for the Vatican, recently, in a public radio address, said: “If the Catholics in America would rise up and organize, they could destroy Jehovah’s witnesses in twenty-four hours.” In line with such sentiments, Priest O’Brien, another of the Hierarchy’s, declared: ‘We will change or blot out the Constitution and put faithful Catholics in office in 1940.’ It appears that their expectations are somewhat delayed. Note that the prophecy shows that Sisera’s chariot never creaked back from Megiddo to celebrate the victory over Jehovah’s typical covenant people. Does not that appear to say that Satan’s religious organization will never come back out of the battle of Armageddon? That gang is going down to stay down forever, and even their memory shall perish, as stated in the Lord’s Word.—Prov. 10:7.
29 “Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself.” (Judg. 5:29) “The wise ladies, her princesses.” (Rotherham) Those princesses that attended upon Sisera’s mother pictured the principal official elements, both political and commercial, who today womanly pamper the Devil’s organization in its religious activity. Such have gone out of their way in flagrantly violating their oaths of office to shield and protect the religious organizations and religious leaders from being shown up by the mes
136
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
sage of Jehovah. Such are wise in the wisdom of this world, but the Lord will show up their wisdom as foolishness in his sight. “Where is the wise! where is the scribe! where is the disputer of this world! hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world !” —1 Cor. 1:20.
,f The mother did not wait for her wise counselors to answer, but she answered herself and her attendants could do nothing but repeat her chatter. She had no knowledge of Jehovah’s great act that had overthrown Sisera, his chariots and his army, and she did not know that Jael had done her work upon Sisera. She kept on talking to herself to control herself, even like those in the antitypical organization today.
” “Have they not sped! have they not divided the prey [Is it not they keep finding—dividing spoil! (Rotherham)]; to every man a damsel or two! to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil!” (Judg. 5:30) This is typically old ladies’ talk, filled with greed and avarice. Evidently she reasoned that the booty was so great that her son was continuously finding more and more, and was delayed in dividing up. She tried to console herself with such thoughts. Likewise the religious leaders have had high hopes of carrying off much booty of victory in their operation against Jehovah’s witnesses, which would result in gain to them, much to their satisfaction. Like old Haman, they continue to look forward to the hour when the scaffold, which they have builded, will be put to use and the modernday Mordecai will hang on it. But the Lord says they will get snagged themselves.
” The old lady repeated to herself the kind and the many spoils that would come her way; among these, maids for her household work, and some to gratify the lust of her distinguished and bloodthirsty son. Likewise those whom she pictured expect to destroy the work and the organization of Jehovah’s witnesses and put the members thereof to a menial service where they cannot bear testimony that exposes demonism. Mark the open and wicked discrimination against God’s faithful ministers at the present time, and, while marking it, let those who are unjustly and wrongfully treated remember how God in the past foretold the manner of showing his favor to those who love him and remain faithful to him. The wicked may prosper for a time, but that time is short.
,0 The Hierarchy are confident of victory and expect to glorify themselves. Thereby they hope to curry great favor with the general public, extend their operations and their oppressions of the people, and keep their racket going and, together with their allies, political, commercial and others, rule the entire earth. The Hierarchy have a great ambition to
appear before the general public as the sole defenders of Christianity and the preservers of civilization, the maintainers of peace, and the rulers of the earth. They wish to act as shepherds for all the people and be uninterrupted in their gathering in the graft. The Hierarchy, therefore, call their organization “the bulwark against ungodliness and indecency”. Thus the Hierarchy deceive multitudes of people and continue to hold them in darkness. Jehovah has clothed his servants now on the earth with the glory of the Kingdom service. He has given them a favor never before enjoyed by human creatures. The religionists, and the clergy particularly, would now strip them, if possible, of that glory and put it on themselves, that they might appear before the people as the legitimate representatives of the Lord. This is indicated by the words of the prophecy which are attributed to Sisera’s mother speaking of the division of the spoil: “To Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework . . . meet for the necks of them that take the spoil.” Religionists expect all the glory for themselves and to gratify themselves; but mark well what is shown by the prophetic picture.
•* The prophecy shows that self-assurances of Sisera’s mother and those of her head advisers soon turned to shrieks and howls when they learned the truth. Barak, with his invincible army, under the command of Jehovah, went on conquering and to conquer, and marched right into the city where Sisera’s mother was cooped up and consoling herself about the spoils she was to enjoy. (Judg. 4: 24, margin) When Armageddon begins and the Lord Jesus Christ sends his forces against the Devil’s organization, the religious leaders will be the first to go down, and then the other elements or sections of Satan’s organization will behold the smoke of religion’s destruction, and, like Sisera’s mother and her princesses, they will wail and howl because of the loss of their religious ally. Then the allies of the great religious organization that now oppresses the earth will realize that it is the hand of Almighty God applying his wrath upon Satan’s organization, and these allies will know that they are next in line to receive their just and everlasting punishment. Up to that time the political, commercial, judicial, military rulers, as shown by the prophecy, have consorted with religion and religionists and have, in the meaning of the Scriptures, “committed fornication with her”; and concerning this it is declared by the Lord, and recorded in his Word, that they shall weep and howl, and with great trembling and fear, waiting for their own destruction. (Revelation 18:9-19) In the text last cited in Revelation the Lord gives a vivid description of the howling and weeping and wailing of those who have thus employed religion to perse
m*y i, 1941	JTHE WATCHTOWER.	137
cute and oppress the faithful servants of Almighty God. Mark the further emphatic statement of the prophetic song: “So let all thine enemies perish, 0 Lord.”—Judg. 5:31.
“ As in the typical battle of Megiddo, so shall it be in the antitypical “battle of that great day of God Almighty”, called “Armageddon”. This word “So” in the prophecy shows that the battle of Megiddo is a type or prophecy of what shall come to pass upon the enemies of God at the battle of Armageddon. Deborah’s statement here in the song is exactly in line with another prophecy: “Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kison; which perished at En-dor: they became as dung for the earth. So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish: that men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth.”—Ps. 83: 9,10,15,17,18.
" Modern religious practitioners seem to have forgotten that ancient battle of Megiddo, even if they ever gave any consideration to it whatsoever. To them the Bible account is merely fiction or history in which they have no real interest. They are too wise in their own learning to give any heed to what the Lord has said. Jehovah makes it certain that the battle of Megiddo was a prophetic picture of his “strange act”, the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”, in which the Lord will annihilate all his enemies. Other prophecies of the Bible fully corroborate this: “For, lo, thine enemies, 0 Lord, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.”—Ps. 92: 9.
84	Jehovah will not permit his enemies, that have so willfully and ruthlessly and without cause or excuse persecuted his faithful servants, to go down to death in peace or by a peaceful means. Those enemies shall perish at the hand of his Executioner under great violence, and they shall know that the Lord God, by his Executive Officer, Christ Jesus, executes them. Concerning this it is written: “But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs; they shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away. I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.” “Yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not; yea, I sought him, but he could not be found. But the transgressors shall be destroyed together; the end of the wicked shall be cut off.”—Ps. 37:20, 25,36,38.
THEY “THAT LOVE HIM”
“ “But let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might.” (Judg. 5:31) Here the words of the prophetic song bring comfort and hope
to those who give their full devotion to The Theocracy and who continue to maintain their integrity unto Jehovah to the end. Who is included in the word here used, namely, “them”! Barak, and Deborah, and the faithful and valiant ten thousand soldiers, and Jael are specifically mentioned as those picturing the ones who shall be recipients of Jehovah’s favor, and who shall shine forth. Barak had the great honor of picturing Christ Jesus and his faithful body members, who shall share with him in his great victory. Barak is specifically mentioned at Hebrews 11:32 as one who shall shine as an earthly representative of The Theocracy. Deborah pictured Jehovah’s organization, which shall forever be in the favor of Jehovah God, and doubtless Deborah will be amongst those who are the “princes” in the earth, because the Scriptures include all of the prophets faithful to God. The faithful men of old who sealed their testimony with their lifeblood shall be of the favored ones of the Most High. The “great multitude” pictured by Jael shall forever shine to the glory of Jehovah. Above all and next to Jehovah, Christ Jesus shall shine forever. When Jesus was transfigured upon the high mountain, “his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.”—Matt. 17: 2.
” This is “the day of Jehovah”, and the revelation of his prophecy now shows beyond all doubt that the final reckoning is very near. “In that day” Christ Jesus goes forth as “the sun of righteousness”, the mighty warrior of Jehovah, to engage the enemy in battle and to vindicate Jehovah’s name. A symbolic picture is given of the glorious Lord leading that fight to Armageddon, to wit: “And he had in his right hand seven stars; and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword, and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength.”—Rev. 1:16.
"At Armageddon Christ Jesus goes forth in his strength, leading the heavenly host. Truly then “the heavens declare the glory of God. ... In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun; which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.” (Ps. 19:1-6) The fight led by Barak, as also the fight led by Gideon, foretells the glorious fight and victory of the Lord Jesus Christ against the enemies of Jehovah.
“ They “that love him”, that is, that love Jehovah, the great Theocrat, and his kingdom by Christ Jesus, and who maintain their integrity faithfully unto death, these shall “shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father”. The faithful “remnant” and the faithful Jonadabs shall have their share. The final work amongst the Kingdom class is now in progress, and has been, particularly since 1918. The Lord has
138
5He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
been gathering out all those that offend and that act lawlessly. This is exactly as Jesus foretold: “So shall it be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.”—Matt. 13:40-43.
” None of those who will maintain their integrity will now hesitate or show indifference toward the Kingdom. They will follow the example of the “Sun of righteousness” and will in this hour of gross darkness upon the world let their light shine concerning the Theocratic government and will let that light be so used as to make manifest the hidden things of darkness. (Eph. 5:13) Nothing now shall stop them. They will come forth as willing volunteers for The Theocracy and will boldly let their light shine as does the sun, giving their all in complete, loving devotion to the Most High and his King: “And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.”—Dan. 12: 3.
40	All who love him shall sing his praises now, regardless of violent opposition leveled against them. “Praise ye him, sun and moon.”—Ps. 148: 3.
41	Because the covenant people of Jehovah God praise his name and make known his government of righteousness they are now “hated of all nations”, even as Jesus foretold. That extreme hatred is expressed in violence heaped upon those who love Jehovah. The faithful servants of God, in obedience to his commandments, now teach their children the Word of God and “bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord”, and for this they are hated and persecuted. The children, because of their devotion to Jehovah, are expelled from schools and denied the right and privilege of a free education provided by the law of the land. The present ruling powers, true to the prophecy, now oppress and violently abuse God’s covenant people. Jehovah takes full account of the persecution that is now inflicted upon his people. Soon he will avenge his faithful covenant people and will vindicate his own great name; and this he will accomplish as stated by the prophet: “The Lord preserveth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.”—Ps. 145: 20.
42	Armageddon will be the complete end of Satan’s organization; 'never shall the wicked arise again.’ (Nah. 1:9) What shall be the lot of Jehovah’s covenant people following Armageddon was also foretold in the prophetic song of Barak and Deborah.
““And the land had rest forty years.” (Judg. 5:31) Four times ten are forty, and a symbol of the
entire reign of Christ. That will be a time of peace and joy. The government by Christ will be righteous: “When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice.” (Prov. 29: 2) “Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end.” (Isa. 9:7) “His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before him.”—Ps. 89: 36.
44	The faithful remnant are now enduring the great fight of affliction. Together with their companions the Jonadabs they are continually persecuted, but these shall soon be delivered and the faithful remnant shall be in the Kingdom glory for ever with the glorious King. Then the Jonadabs who now suffer for righteousness’ sake will suffer no more, but will be for ever in the favor of the Lord and receive his blessings. The King of glory will feed them and lead them by the refreshing waters and give them life everlasting, and they and their children shall dwell forever on the earth in peace. Now they are poor and oppressed, but the Lord shall soon make them rich beyond description of words: “He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor. They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all generations.”—Ps. 72: 4, 5.
“ True, the covenant people of God now suffer many hardships, which the Devil brings upon them. Many are the woes which he inflicts upon them, and in this he uses the religionists to make their burdens greater. Their suffering shall not continue long, and those who suffer because of their faithfulness to Jehovah now with joy hear the words of Jesus, to wit: Ue that endureth to the end shall be saved.’ (Matt. 24:13) The flesh of all of God’s servants is weak and inclined to fret because of the great amount of injustice done and heaped upon them by the religionists. They see this injustice daily growing and wickedness on the increase. The Lord knew that such would be the conditions now, and for the comfort of his faithful covenant people he caused his prophet to make this record of his Word, to wit: “Fret not thyself because of evildoers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him; fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass.”—Ps. 37:1, 7.
44	The judgment from heaven will be executed against the wicked, and then those who defile the earth shall cease for ever: “Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still, when God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.”—Ps. 76: 8, 9.
4T	The battle of the great day of God Almighty is near, and all survivors will then, in the language of the prophet, say: “The Lord hath broken the staff
May 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
139
of the wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers. The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth into singing.”—Isa. 14: 5, 7.
48	Jehovah’s faithful people now on the earth with joy sing because they know that the day of deliverance is near; and following Armageddon that song will resound throughout the whole universe and everything that breathes will continue to sing the
praises of the Most High. These prophecies were recorded and are now revealed for the comfort and hope of God’s people. Everyone who loves Jehovah, therefore, should be strengthened by the revelation of these prophecies and should now by faith rejoice, knowing full well that his joy will be complete in the near future and that the praises of Almighty God and his King shall fill the whole earth.
KINGDOM WORK
ATCHTOWER readers now appreciate the fact that The Theocratic Government is functioning in the earth in so far as those who are consecrated to Jehovah are concerned. Both the anointed remnant and the Jonadabs have the privilege, by the Lord’s grace, of participating in bearing the legitimate expenses for carrying forward the Kingdom work. Their contributions made direct to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, at 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y., is assurance to them that the money will be used to the best advantage in advancing the Kingdom interests.
This notice is not a solicitation of money, but a reminder to all who have a desire to support Jehovah’s kingdom that it is well to make advance provision to participate in the work and do so by laying aside a specific sum each week according to the manner in which the Lord prospers them financially. The work of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society is to use the money contributed in the most economical way to make known Jehovah’s name and his kingdom. If informed in advance as to the probable amount that will be contributed during the year by those who are interested, that makes it possible to outline the work and the expense connected therewith accordingly. It is therefore suggested that upon receipt of this issue of The Watchtower you ad
dress a post card to the Society and keep a copy thereof as a reminder to yourself as to the amount you have promised and post that to the Society immediately. Write nothing upon the card except the following:
By the Lord’s grace I hope to be able to contribute to the work of announcing the kingdom of Jehovah during the ensuing year the amount of $......., which I will remit in such amounts
and at such time as I can find it convenient as the Lord prospers me.
Signed.............................................
Address your card to
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society Treasurer’s Office 124 Columbia Heights Brooklyn, New York.
Those residing outside of the United States and who desire to participate in contributing to the necessary expense will please address your letters or cards to the Society’s office in the respective country in which you live.
Have in mind our need for guidance by the Lord and present the matter before the throne of heavenly grace that the money contributed may be used to the best advantage to announce the Kingdom.
ORDER OF RESURRECTION
CC TOEHOLD, I shew you a mystery: We shall not all Ij sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.” In these words, at 1 Corinthians 15: 51, 52, the apostle discusses the first resurrection. In Revelation 20:6 it is called “the first resurrection” because it is the resurrection of “The Christ”, both Jesus Christ the Head and the church, the members of “the body of Christ”. No one can have a part in that first resurrection except Christ Jesus and his body members, his anointed followers. None other will ever receive immortality and be immune from the “second death”. This resurrection, therefore, is “first” in that it is of primary importance, and “first” in that it is the earliest in time. The inspired apostle limits that resurrection to The Christ, when he says: “This mortal must put on immortality.” (1 Cor. 15:54) This refers to that class of Christians anointed with God’s spirit and who “by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality”, and who are faithful even unto death.—See Romans 2:7; Revelation 2:10.
Not all the members of the “body of Christ” will be resurrected at the same time. The text first above quoted shows two separate divisions of the same class: one part that participate in the first resurrection and are awakened out of the “sleep” of death, and another part or division that have part in the first resurrection and that do not sleep in death but are at death changed instantly from human to spirit creatures, divine.
The apostle indicates that those who have slept in death shall be raised first, and that thereafter comes the change of those who are on the earth at the time of the second presence of the Lord. In 1 Corinthians chapter 15 the apostle shows that the resurrection of the sleeping saints does not take place until the coming of the Lord as King to destroy the rule of wickedness and to bless the obedient of mankind. The presence of Christ Jesus in spirit has been difficult to explain and to clearly understand. Many have labored under the impression that the Lord Jesus must be bodily in the very vicinity of the earth in order to be present. Such a conclusion is unreasonable. Distance is no hindrance to the Lord. He could be at the “right hand of God”
140
5THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and at the same time direct the affairs of the earth as well as he could if he were on the immediate surface of the earth.
When he had finished his sacrifice and ascended on high, Jesus Christ sat down on the right hand of Jehovah God, and from that time forward waited until the time when the enemy should be made his footstool, as declared at Psalm 110:1 and Hebrews 10:12,13. From the time of his resurrection from the dead the world belonged to the Lord Jesus Christ, but the time for him to take possession was then a long time in the future. He must wait until God’s due time, and that due time would be at the end of the “Times of the Gentiles”, or “end of the world”, to wit, in A.D. 1914, when Satan’s rule without interruption from Jehovah God ended. That was when Christ Jesus began to give his attention to the things of earth. While doing this he is still at the right hand of Jehovah God, and at the same time he is present in the earth, because directing the things of his kingdom on the earth as above stated.
The Scriptures leave no doubt concerning the order of the resurrection. At the beginning of the presence of Christ Jesus in the spirit the saints that died prior thereto are asleep in Christ Jesus, while the last members of the “body of Christ” remain alive on the earth. The sleeping or dead ones must be resurrected first, and then thereafter those who remain on the earth will be changed instantly at death into the likeness of the Lord. The apostle’s words at 1 Thessalonians 4:15-17 make it clear that this is the order of the resurrection, when he wrote: “For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent [precede] them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the elouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.” Here the word “descend” would not necessarily mean that Christ Jesus must take a flight from heaven to earth. The word is used figuratively here, as meaning that at this particular time mentioned the Lord specially directs his actions to things on the earth, which is below heaven, and at the same time he himself may remain in heaven.
Without a question of doubt there is a lapse of time between the resurrection of the sleeping saints and the change of those who remain alive in the flesh on the earth and who constitute “the remnant”. Within that period of time, to wit, after the resurrection of the sleeping saints and until the completion of the first resurrection, all those of this “remnant” who die faithful experience their change from mortality to immortality, “in a moment,” and do not sleep in death. This is the mystery or secret about which the apostle speaks when he says: “We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed.”
What could be the purpose of the Lord in awakening the sleeping saints and then some time thereafter giving the “remnant” their resurrection change? Manifestly the purpose is that during the time that elapses between the awakening of the sleeping saints and the change of the remnant God would have a special witness given to his name amongst the nations of the earth, and the remnant must give that witness to his name and his Theocratic Government by Christ.
The faithful Christians, anointed with the spirit of God as his commissioned witnesses, constitute the spiritual temple of God. To them it is written: “Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you! If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.” (1 Cor. 3:16,17; also 2 Cor. 6:16; Eph. 2:18-22; 1 Pet. 2:5) Such ones, of course, include both the sleeping saints and the faithful ones alive at Christ’s coming and who afterwards have their instantaneous change. When Christ Jesus was about to be taken away he said to his disciples: “If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.”—John 14: 3.
Jesus went to heaven to the right hand of God to prepare a place for his faithful footstep followers, his saints. It would seem reasonable that the Lord would complete such preparation before he would come in the spirit for those who would make up the temple class. The sleeping saints are a part of the temple class. Surely the preparation would include the clearing of the Devil out from heaven and the casting of him down to the earth, since Christ Jesus begins his reign by taking possession of heaven and ousting the Devil therefrom. (See Revelation 12: 7-12.) In view of the language of the Master to his disciples, it would hardly seem that he would awaken the sleeping saints until this preparatory work was completed.
If that reasoning is correct, then the resurrection of the sleeping saints to life in the spirit, invisible to human eyes, would not take place until after the Devil is expelled from heaven. Through his holy prophet (Malachi 3:1) God declared that his beloved One as “the Messenger of the covenant” should do a preparatory work, and that then he shall suddenly come to his temple. If this preparatory work spoken of includes the expelling of Satan from heaven, then it would be reasonable to conclude also that the next step would be to awaken the sleeping saints in order that the temple might be established.
From time to time in these columns the Scriptural proof has been submitted showing that the Lord came to his temple in 1918. His coming then was like a thief, and the fact of his coming then was not known to the “remnant” of Jehovah’s witnesses on earth until some time thereafter, not till 1922. Seeing now that the temple of the Lord is made up of the saints, including those who slept and those of the remnant who do not sleep in death; seeing also that the Lord came to his temple in 1918, would not the fact of his coming to the temple at that date fix approximately the time of the resurrection of the sleeping saints! The Lord Jesus comes to his temple before the great witness on earth to Jehovah’s name is given by the remnant. It follows, then, that the temple of God was brought together in 1918, and that that marks the time of the resurrection of the sleeping saints.
It is written: <rWhen the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.” (Ps. 102:16) Zion is Jehovah’s capital organization, of which Christ Jesus is the Head and in which the members of “his body”, the temple class, are associated with him. The building up of Zion undoubtedly means the Lord’s coming to the temple. That marks the time of his glorious appearing. On this consider the apostle’s
May 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
141
words to Titus (2:13): “Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.” Neither Jehovah nor Jesus is on the earth, yet the apostle says that he is looking for their glorious appearing. The word “appearing” (Greek: epiphania) means the glorious shining forth or manifestation of the Lord’s presence. The blessed hope of the apostle was that he might have a part in “the first resurrection”, because, at Philip-pians 3:11, he so says. In his statement in the epistle to Titus he seems to fix the time when that hope would be realized, to wit, at the glorious appearing of the Lord, which takes place at the time the Lord comes to his temple, in 1918.—Ps. 50:2.
The Scriptural authority, such as at Malachi 3:1-3 and Matthew 25:19, 21, is conclusive that the Lord comes to his temple for the purpose of judgment. According to 1 Peter 4:17 such judgment must begin at the house of God, the temple. In A.D. 1914 the Lord took his power to begin his reign, and the nations were angry. According to Revelation 11:17,18 it is after the time when “the nations were angry”, in a great world war, that the time comes for “the dead, that they should be judged”. With this thought in mind note the words of the apostle Paul, at 2 Timothy 4:1: “The Lord Jesus Christ . . . shall judge the quick [the living] and the dead at his appearing.” The word here rendered “appearing” does not mean his coming; but it means that while the Lord is present in the spirit, and at the time of his shining forth or clearer manifestation of his presence, that judgment begins.
The sleeping saints must be first raised. Their raising up constitutes their final judgment, because it is the awarding to them of the prize for which the apostle Paul declared he was running also. It is the time of the realization of the “blessed hope” spoken of by the apostle, because it marks the time when the sleeping saints (including the apostle) come into their everlasting portion. Back in A.D. 33 the Lord Jesus rode triumphantly into Jerusalem offering himself as King and then came to the temple there and cleansed it, and his own resurrection from the dead followed six days later. If the Lord came to the spiritual temple in A.D. 1918, as foretold at Malachi 3:1, and came for the purpose of judgment and began the judgment of the saints first, that would be a strong and persuasive argument that the awakening of the sleeping saints took place in 1918, which is the parallel date of A.D. 33.
Another text bearing upon the time of the resurrection reads: “And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them.” (Rev. 14:13) This scripture says: “Blessed are the dead which die.” How is it possible for one who is dead to die!
To aid in the answering of the question, we shall, for example, name one Faithful. When Faithful learned of God’s provision for salvation through Christ he made a full and complete consecration to do the will of God. Then God justified him. That justification gave Faithful the right to live as a man, which right Adam had forfeited by reason of his disobedience in Eden. God justified Faithful in order to make him acceptable, and then accepted him as a part of the sacrifice of His beloved Son, Christ Jesus. At the
same time Jehovah begot Faithful with His spirit to spiritual life. From the time that Faithful was justified he had the right to live as a man; but when he was accepted as a part of the sacrifice of Jesus and begotten to life in the spirit, his right to live as a man ceased; therefore as a man he was dead. Concerning this it is written to the Christians • “For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.” —Col. 3:3.
Faithful is now a new creature, but he must actually go into death in order to have part in the first resurrection. Then the instantaneous change will constitute the death of the human and the immediate life of the divine. As a new creature Faithful is “in Christ”, being a member of the “body of Christ”, and if he continues loyal and obedient unto death he dies in Christ. All faithful Christians who died between the time of the spirit’s outpouring at Pentecost of A.D. 33 and the beginning of the resurrection during the presence of the Lord in spirit must sleep in death. But the Scriptures, in Revelation 14:13, state that a time would come when some sanctified ones or saints who die in the Lord would be “blessed”. When that time is reached, then would be true the saying: “From henceforth” “blessed are the dead which die in the Lord”. The reason why they are called “blessed” is that they do not sleep in death but receive their change instantaneously, “in the twinkling of an eye.”—1 Cor. 15: 52.
At that time all the faithful ones on earth will be working and will continue to work until the time of their glorious change from human to spirit. That change, being instantaneous at the death of the human creature, will not stop them from working; but their work will no longer be laborious. While in the flesh the true saints who do service in the name of the Lord work and become fatigued and grow weary. But when changed to glorious divine creatures in heaven, nevermore could they again know fatigue or weariness. As they work their work is a constant and everlasting joy.
What marks the beginning of that blessed time! That time could not begin until the sleeping saints are resurrected ; and since the evidence shows that the Lord Jesus came to his temple in 1918 and that the resurrection of the sleeping saints took place approximately at that time, it follows that from and after that time those anointed witnesses of Jehovah who die in the Lord will be blessed, because they would have an instantaneous change from mortality to immortality.
As foretold by Christ Jesus in the parable concerning the talents or Kingdom interests committed to his footstep followers (Matthew 25:14-30), when the Lord came to his temple and found some faithful ones he said to them: ‘You have been faithful over a few things, I will make you ruler over many. Enter into the joy of your Lord.’ (Vs. 21) These faithful ones here received the evidence that they were identified with the saved ones and commissioned to serve officially as witnesses of Jehovah; and this is figuratively pictured in the prophecy at Isaiah 61:10 as their being clothed with the “garments of salvation” and being brought under the “robe of righteousness”. This brings to them great rejoicing.
It follows, then, that at the time the Lord came to his temple in 1918 those alive on earth whom he approved at
142
THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that time and who thereafter continued faithful unto death received the crown of life. Since this would be by an instantaneous change from mortality to immortality the scripture would apply to such, to wit: “Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth.” From that time forward the faithful ones dying of the “remnant” of Jehovah’s witnesses entered instantly into their glorious heavenly reward.
Thus the sleeping saints were first resurrected, and they, together with those who yet remained on earth being brought under the “robe of righteousness”, constituted the spiritual temple class, in which Jehovah God dwells by his spirit. The resurrected saints must have something to do beyond the veil of death. Of more concern to us, however, is what the temple class this side the veil must do. As commanded at Matthew 24:14 and Revelation 14: 6, this class must give a special witness; and that witness is to tell every nation, kindred, tongue and people on the earth the good news that Jehovah has set his King Christ Jesus upon his throne and that the time for the Kingdom and the deliverance of believing and obedient persons of good-will is at hand. These anointed witnesses of Jehovah must now call
upon the people to honor Jehovah God and give him glory, because the time for his judgment upon the nations is come. All the temple class will be able to see and appreciate this marvelous time in which we are living, and will lift up their heads and rejoice and sing.
At Armageddon the Lord God will cause all nations and peoples to know that He is Jehovah, and all the ends of the earth shall then see the salvation of God in behalf of His anointed witnesses and the “great multitude” of their faithful companions on earth. Before this takes place, however, the temple class must give the witness, while the resurrected saints on the other side of the veil are performing the duties assigned to them. What a blessed and marvelous combination, and what a sweet relationship! Those on this side the veil having on the “garments of salvation” and being under the “robe of righteousness” are working together with their resurrected brethren in Christ, knowing that shortly their own individual dissolution means an immediate transfer from earth to heaven. It means the glorious change into the likeness of our Lord and to be for ever with him.
RULER OUT OF BETHLEHEM
THE place where the babe Jesus should be born Jehovah caused his prophet to name seven hundred years beforehand, in these words: “But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.” (Micah 5:2) That the birthplace of Jesus at Bethlehem was in accord with the prophecy of Micah even the Jewish counselors of the murderous King Herod saw, according to Matthew 2:4-6. From the birth of Jesus to the end of his ministry he fulfilled on a miniature scale the aforementioned prophecy. There must be a greater and complete fulfillment thereof, and that comes to pass when Christ Jesus comes out of the Greater Bethlehem and becomes the Governor of the world. The fulfillment in completion has its beginning at the time when God places his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, upon his “holy hill of Zion”, symbolizing The Theocratic Government, and says to him: “Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” And further: “I shall give thee the heathen [the nations] for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.” So it is prophesied at Psalm 2: 6, 8 and Psalm 110:2.
The shepherd and king, David, whose name means “Beloved”, was a type or prophetic pattern of Jesus, the “Beloved” Son of Jehovah God. David was born at Bethlehem. Jesus was born at the same city. The name “Beth-lehem” means “The house of bread”. “Ephratah” means “fruitful region”. Concerning himself Jesus said: ‘I am the bread of life that came down from heaven.’ (John 6: 50, 51) Upon that bread all must feed who will get life. David as king brought the people of Israel up to a state of prosperity. Not only had he the desire to feed the people, but he possessed the ability and did so. Jesus Christ is clothed with all power and authority, and wholly devoted to his Father,
and is carrying out his Father’s purposes to bring all obedient ones of mankind into a state of prosperity. David was the hope of “Israel after the flesh”. Jesus became the hope of Israel according to the spirit, and through His house he is the hope of all the people of the nations of the earth.
Bethlehem-Ephratah was a place of fruitfulness It was a city in which were centered the promises of God. It was small among other cities of the tribe of Judah, but it was of great importance because out of it must come the Ruler. The identification of the Ruler is made certain by the words of the prophet Micah, to wit, “whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.” He who is the active agent of Jehovah in the creation of all other things and whose name was The Word or Logos and later Jesus, even he is the one who must come out of the Greater Bethlehem and of whom David was a type. When Jesus was born in Bethlehem the prophecy there had a measure of fulfillment. Other matters mentioned in Micah’s prophecy aside from the birth of Jesus did not have a fulfillment then, and surely it could not be said that the prophecy had a complete fulfillment at the time of his birth. At that time there was no invasion of the Assyrians, as foretold by the prophet. Furthermore, in the vision Micah saw the war carried into political Assyria and that land wasted. Nothing of that kind occurred at Jesus’ birth. This fact would indicate that in the complete fulfillment the part of the prophecy relating to the totalitarian political element foreshadowed by the Assyrian would be fulfilled. At chapter four, verse eight, the prophecy of Micah says: “And thou, 0 tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.”
There is no difficulty in identifying “the tower of the flock”, and “the strong hold of the daughter of Zion”.
May 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
143
Jesus Christ is the great Stronghold of the flock of God. He is the mighty One of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, Zion, to whom the nations of earth are given as an inheritance. He is the Lion of the tribe of Judah. He is the Tower of the flock. He comes into possession and control of all things when God places him upon his throne, sends him forth out of Zion into action, and says to him: “Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” Then it is that those who are called to the heavenly kingdom as members of “the body of Christ” and described by Mieah as the “daughter of Zion” are brought into the temple condition and begin to share with him his kingdom and therefore begin their inheritance as his joint-heirs, the remnant of such ones yet on earth having entrusted to them the Kingdom interests which they must advance and increase. (Rom. 8:16,17) Christ Jesus is given the dominion of greatest importance, therefore “even the first dominion”. Those who are of the remnant class, and who continue faithful till their resurrection change into the complete likeness of their heavenly Lord, will share with him in that glorious dominion.
When Jesus was on earth he fed his disciples upon the word of life. But even his disciples did not fully appreciate the food received at his gracious hands until after Jesus ascended into heaven and the holy spirit was poured out on them on the day of Pentecost. There is a long interval of time between this miniature fulfillment and the fulfillment in completion of Micah’s prophecy concerning the Ruler out of Bethlehem. That time is indicated in the words: “Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which travaileth hath brought forth.” (Mic. 5:3) After the birth of The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus in A.D. 1914 and the later bringing forth of the “children of Zion” as approved ones in line for that Kingdom, then the Lord began to feed his people and they appreciated it more than at any time prior thereto. Micah 5: 4 adds: “And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God; and they shall abide; for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.” This does not mean that he stands and feeds himself. Clearly it means that after coming to his temple for examination and judgment of his people he feeds his own people. Undoubtedly the prophecy refers to the same time Jesus mentioned : “Blessed are those servants, whom the lord, when he cometh, shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.”—Luke 12: 37.
The Ruler, having come out of Bethlehem-Ephratah (“The House of Bread” and “Place of Fruitfulness”), girds himself and causes the faithful ones to sit down, that is to say, to rest in peace, while they receive the gracious provisions made for them. As Ruler of Zion, Christ Jesus as a Shepherd stands up and feeds the members of the household, who compose the “faithful servant” class of the Lord; and he feeds them upon that spiritual “food convenient for me”. (Prov. 30:8) This means they are fed upon that which builds them up in faith and devotion. This part of the prophecy has been marvelously fulfilled since the year 1922, as the publication since then of The Watchtower and other literature, such as books, booklets, Kingdom News, etc., show and as many of the faithful can joyfully testify. It is since that date that the Lord Jesus, the Head of Zion and
the perpetual Ruler of Zion, has fed his household of faith bountifully upon present truth.
Concerning the faithful who joyfully receive food at the hands of the great Master, the prophet (Micah 5:4) says: “And they shall abide.” That means that they are in security. They have entered into “the secret place of the Most High" in that the Lord has brought them into his temple, his Theocratic Organization, and Jehovah God is their fortress and they look to him for food and strength by and through his beloved Son, the Ruler out of Bethlehem. There in the “secret place” they are safe from all harm; and continuing faithful, they shall abide in that condition and no evil shall befall them, as assured at Psalm 91:1-10. As they continue to feed upon the food furnished them by the great Ruler out of Bethlehem the remnant of anointed witnesses of Jehovah and their faithful earthly companions of good-will do not grow weak and faint, but they grow “strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might”. (Eph. 6:10) They do not browse about, like unruly sheep, looking for food in various places. They know that their food comes from the Lord. “The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib.” (Isa. 1:3) And God’s remnant and their devoted companions well know that they get their food from the table of Jehovah by and through his appointed way. It is not man’s food of truth, and no man has given any of it. It is Jehovah’s truth which he provides and serves to his people through Christ Jesus, who stands forth “in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God” and feeds his people upon the food provided
Micah 5:4 adds: “For now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.” The Ruler out of Bethlehem is now great in the minds and hearts of God’s remnant and their companions. He comes forth in great power and in the majesty of Jehovah. He is proclaimed by those of Zion as the great Ruler and executive Officer whom Jehovah God has placed upon his throne. Soon his greatness will extend throughout the earth. That is the time of the Ruler’s triumph to Jehovah’s glory.
“And this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into our land; and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men. And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders.” (Mic. 5: 5, 6) Undoubtedly “the Assyrian” is one of the names of Satan’s organization While the enemy is making an assault upon the anointed witnesses and their companions, the great Ruler out of Bethlehem is the peace of such ones. He is the great “Prince of Peace”, upon whose shoulder the new government rests. (Isa. 9: 6, 7) He comes as Jehovah’s Executive Officer to establish peace, but first he must make war and overthrow the enemy. The “Assyrian”, the Devil and his agencies, attempts to invade the citadel of God’s organized people and to destroy and break down the members thereof. In the attempt to destroy Jehovah’s servants the enemy meets up with real opposition. The great Ruler out of Bethlehem continues to feed and strengthen his faithful followers, and with full confidence these witnesses of Jehovah go on in God’s service.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
THE LONDON BRANCH SERVANT WRITES:
"You will greatly rejoice with us in having the following report. In my letter to you of the 14th instant I reported that we had lost the entire shipment of 13,200 discs which was on barge in the Thames. Last week-end the dock authorities went through the debris and found that our shipment had been unloaded safely from the barge before it was sunk in the air raid; that the goods had been stored in a warehouse which also was hit that same night and put on fire.' It was found that most of our cartons were untouched and were dug out of the debris and wreckage. Many of the cartons were water-soaked and charred. Out of the 13,200 recordings sent us, 11,754 are in perfect condition and now here at the Branch ready for reshipment. Of the total of 85,000 magazines our loss is only 2,500 copies. Surely the Lord preserved these supplies, enabling us to carry forward for a still further brief spell. The best combinations of sets that we can make are 500 out of the 720 sets sent us. This is not too bad, considering that all of one disc might have been destroyed and thus spoiled all the sets. It is expected to be able to collect from our compulsory government commodity insurance for the loss incurred.”
NOT IMPEDING GOD’S WORK (NEW YORK)
"We started to another street to make another call. A police car followed us two or three blocks, then stopped us. The officer said: Tjet me see your license, please!’ Glancing at the license, he said: ‘What are you doing! selling something!’ No, we are Jehovah’s witnesses, engaged in a Christian educational work. He said: ‘That’s all right; that religion is O.K. You want to be careful to whom you talk, though; you know you have been stopped before. They want to know if you have a permit or license to peddle.’ I told him I knew some had been stopped at different times. He started to leave, then said: ‘Mind you, I’m not giving you permission to go ahead, but as far as I’m concerned, that is the only religion that is not a racket.’ As he started around his car, I asked him where ----- Road was. He
told us to follow him and he would lead us over there. He did, and when we got there, he smiled, waved and drove off.”
THE PHONOGRAPH IN THE HEART OF THE EARTH
"Near the town of Cimarron, New Mexico, we called at a small coal mine. The man in charge listened very attentively to the lecture record. He was more than eager to receive the book (Enemies in Spanish), stating the record was surely the truth. After placing the book with him he wanted us to call on his partner in the mine shaft. He had us get into a small coal wagon pulled by a burro. We went back into the mountain nearly two-thirds of a mile. In many places the ceiling of the mine was so low we would have to kneel in the wagon to keep our heads from being scraped against the ceiling. Upon arriving where the old man was, we set up the phonograph and proceeded to take the varnish from religion. The old gentleman was very interested, and took the book Religion, and we arranged for a back-call upon him. On going into the mine we found it to be very dark and dense, which brought to mind the condition the religionists are in today.”
WHY NOT ON “DECORATION DAY“T
“We took the sound-car and about twenty publishers and parked outside the graveyards. At three different ones we ran programs over the loudspeaker: first, the Watchtower quartet, then a five-minute lecture, ‘Where Are the Dead!’ then another quartet, then the lecture ‘Hereafter’, then a music record, then the lecture ‘Soul’. We stayed for about forty-five minutes at each of the graveyards, and the witnesses were out in the graveyard talking to the people and offering them the booklets. They placed 12 or 15 booklets, and several different groups of people told them that our program was the most appropriate they had ever heard. At the last place we were about half through our program when two deputy sheriffs parked their car just in front of the sound-car. Both got out. When one saw me in the car he stopped the other cop and they talked a little, then went the other way out in the graveyard and talked with two or three different publishers, and asked what they were doing. Why were the deputies there! They said some religionists had made complaint and they had to do something. When they went away they waved their hand and smiled at me. Next day, at another small town, a publisher had just left one house and was at another, when one of those cops came to the house just left. The publisher heard the cop say: ‘Oh, that is one of them Jehovah’s witnesses. We had to drive them out of the graveyard at Sedro Wooley [Washington] yesterday.’ ”
DOES HE RESENT THE BILL OF RIGHTS!
“A pioneer placed the booklet Conspiracy Against Democracy with the commander of the American Legion post at Mt. View, Missouri. A few minutes later he came to her car, all wrought up over the quotation from past National Commander Owsley: ‘Do not forget that the Fascisti are to Italy what the American Legion is to the United States.’ He stated he was going to investigate this, and let us know! The pioneers gave him their address upon his request, but failing to hear from him they made a back-call upon him later. He then stated that ‘the way the Constitution was now’ they could not do anything but let us go ahead with this work. Then he stated that they had a drive on for new members, but ‘on account of “this work you people are doing” we can’t get any new members’.”
CHILD COULD NOT ANSWER FOR PARENTS
“The house stood back. A young girl came out to the car to keep the dogs away. She did not care to hear the lecture record nor even to look at the literature, and three times said she didn’t think her parents cared anything about it. I told her we could not answer for one another, each had to have opportunity to hear and decide for oneself, and if another stood in the way he would have to answer to Almighty God for the other. Then she pulled the dogs to her and said, ‘You can go in and see, if you want to.’ I had no more than stepped inside the door than her father said: ‘I want you to tell me something! Sit right down here. Tell me all about religion, what is right and what is wrong.’ When company came into the house he said: ‘Come on out here and we can talk.’ I did not get away for over two hours, and have a model study for next trip, and left magazines and booklets.”
144
I'i '
No 10
151
158
160
146
. . 146
. 146
146
. 14 /
147
... 148
. 148
. . 149
149
150
-Exekiel 3515.
Vol. LXH
Semimonthly
MAY 15, 1941
CONTENTS
Noah’s Day .. ..
Blind Indifference
State of Affairs
v lolence . .
Why Recorded
Shun What?
Do What ?
Work .. ..
vV hat Body Is Raised1’
The Ideal Government
Field Experiences
“Theocratic Ambassadors
Testimony Period
“Watchtower” Studies
“Model Study No. 3”
Use Renewal Subscription Blank


They shall know that lam Jehovah.”
His Day
Moral Delinquency
Safety Now

”Y£AKEMYWiTNE55£5/5AirH JEHOWt^HAT

THE WATCHTOWER-
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth" with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures,
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England Canadian -_______________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian..........7 Beresford Road, Stratbfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African ________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“THEOCRATIC AMBASSADORS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
June, for the entire month, is the Period here named. Are you a Theocratic ambassador? You can be, if you take your stand on the side of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and then engage in announcing that government to others. The June Period affords you the opportunity to exercise your ambassadorship. The means provided by the great Theocrat, who sends you forth, is his published Kingdom message, and, during June only, you may offer to the public, on a mere contribution of 35c, a combination of any three bound books published by the Society, excluding the latest books, Religion and Salvation. Prompt advance preparation will be necessary to your most effective part in this Testimony. Any needed references to the local company organized for this service we shall gladly furnish you. May you be able at the end of June to fill out a good report of work.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of June 22: “Noah’s Day,” fl 1-29 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1941.
Week of June 29: “Noah’s Day,”
fl 30-62 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1941.
“MODEL STUDY NO. 3"
This new booklet, of 32 pages and bound in a durable cover, brings up to date the series of Model Study booklets, as it presents the study outline covering the latest recorded speeches by Judge Rutherford, to wit, “Religion as a World Remedy,” and “The End”. This booklet is very valuable, even if you do not possess the phonograph recordings of the speeches named, and with it anyone should be able to conduct a model study of the Bible in the home or in public. Order several for use of others whom you hope to have study with you. Model Study No. 3 will be sent you postpaid at a contribution of 5c a copy. Company servants should make up combination orders for all in the company wanting copies.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the tune of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	May 15, 1941	No. 10
NOAH’S DAY
"But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord."—Gen. 6:8.
JEHOVAH has set Noah before men as an example for those to follow who have faith in God and in his kingdom and who would be faithful. When God puts his approval on a man, others who come afterwards do well to give consideration as to why God marks that man with approval. God never changes, and when he approves one man we may be sure that his approval will be placed upon other men who likewise do well before him. God is no respecter of persons. What is required of one to merit God’s approval he likewise requires of all others who receive his approval.
2	The Scriptures disclose the reason why God approved Noah. He was just, was blameless in his conduct, maintained his integrity, was a man of faith, and was faithful under the test. It is written: “Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God.” (Gen. 6: 9) The word “perfect” used in the foregoing text is defined by the best Biblical authorities as “blameless, sound, sincere, undefiled and upright, one of integrity and a bearer of the truth”. Noah was a man of faith, and he was faithfully obedient to God. He ascertained God’s commandment and rendered himself in obedience thereto. It follows, therefore, that every other who may expect and hope to receive God’s approval must be just, sincere, pure in thought and action, a bearer of the truth, and one who maintains his integrity toward God. He must have faith in God and be faithfully obedient to the will or commandment of God.
3	The scripture further emphasizes the necessity for and the importance of faith and why this record of Noah was made. “But without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.”—Heb. 11: 6.
‘ Furthermore the Scriptures speak of Noah as “a preacher of righteousness” at a time when the earth was filled with violence. Undoubtedly Noah maintained his integrity toward God under great adversity and shunned not to declare the truth under all circumstances, which truth he received from God.
5	Says the scripture: “Noah was . . . perfect in his generations.” That means that he had employed his organism in the right way. His God-given equip
ment he used in a right way. He had in no wise defiled himself with other creatures. He was blameless before the Lord. His children were conceived and brought forth without fault on his part. Being an offspring of Adam, he was by nature under condemnation, and that was not the fault of Noah. His children were born in the proper manner, and aside from Noah there were no others on the earth perfect in generation as he was, but all others aside from him and his family were defiled. Noah stood out in contrast to all others on the earth. God was pleased with him. He is therefore a proper example.
6	Noah was a type of Christ Jesus and was used by Jehovah to make a prophetic drama foretelling the Lord Jesus and some of his work. Because the members of his family held steadfastly with Noah to the course of righteousness they were used by the Lord God to foretell the Lord’s “other sheep”, or Jonadabs, who will form the “great multitude”. (Rev. 7:9-17) Noah busied himself with preaching the name of Jehovah God, and no doubt the members of his family worked with him, and hence they were, in fact, companions to him.
7	Jesus says: “As it was in the days of No'e, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.” (Luke 17: 26) These words not only are a confirmation of the record written long before concerning Noah, the ark and the flood, but show that Noah’s testimony and his work were so important in the carrying out of Jehovah’s purposes that God used him to foretell what must come to pass at the time of setting up of the kingdom under Christ Jesus, the King. The ark, which Noah builded at the command of Jehovah, pictured the organization builded by the Most High by and through Christ Jesus, and which is God’s capital organization, with Christ Jesus as the Head thereof. The saving and carrying over the flood of the eight persons pictured the survivors of Armageddon that the Lord will carry over to the new and righteous world.
BLIND INDIFFERENCE
8	The people that were on earth in Noah’s day heard the sound of Noah’s voice warning of the coming flood, but they gave no heed to that warning. They knew Noah was building the ark, or great boat,
147
148
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
which was a testimony of Noah’s faith in God, but the people who saw it regarded it as of no importance and as evidence of Noah’s “weakness of mind”. No doubt they often derided Noah and made much sport of him. What the people really did was to satisfy and glorify their own desires; as the apostle puts it, they made their belly their god and ignored everything that tends to righteousness: “They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that No'e entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.” (Luke 17: 27) “For as in the days that were before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that No'e entered into the ark, and knew not, until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.”—Matt. 24: 38, 39.
8	It thus appears from these scriptures that the people were entirely indifferent to what Noah told them about the approaching disaster. They indulged in eating, drinking and marrying, and everything that would satisfy their beastly desires. Eating, drinking and marrying in the proper way are according to God’s provision for man; but manifestly the conduct of the people in Noah’s time, and which is mentioned in the Genesis account as in using these things in an improper way, is called to attention in the Scriptures to show that they were using proper things in a wrongful manner. Since Jesus says that which existed in Noah’s day constitutes a type of what comes to pass in the day when Christ Jesus comes to set up his kingdom, it is certain that the Bible account of the prevailing state of affairs in Noah’s day, which is set forth in the sixth chapter of Genesis, was typical and foretells the prevailing state of affairs or like conditions on earth at and during the time of the setting up of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ.
STATE OF AFFAIRS
10	The state of affairs that existed in Noah’s day included more than marrying, giving in marriage, eating and drinking. Manifestly these were mentioned specifically by Jesus and the faithful servants of the Lord to further compare what did exist in Noah’s day with what exists at the present time. The state of affairs in Noah’s day summed up in brief, as set forth in the Scriptures, was this: Satan, chief of demons, was desperately working to make good his wicked challenge that no man would be faithful to God when put to the test. Satan’s endeavor was to turn all men against Jehovah. Associated with him were then and still are a company of demons, called “Nephilim”, bullies or tyrants, all bent on defeating God and turning all creation against God. (Gen. 6: 4, Am. Rev. Ver.) The acts and conduct of those de
mons and those connected with them foretold a like condition or state of affairs on earth at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. In Noah’s day there were angels, called “sons of God”, which had power to materialize in human form. The sly, subtle, wily foe Satan tricked those angels into marrying the offspring of Adam, with the result that there were brought forth on the earth human creatures who were given over entirely to wickedness: “And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.”—Gen. 6: 5.
11	Since Satan’s rebellion all who follow him in that rebellion are wicked and have been and are blind as to Jehovah’s purposes. Being wicked, they have no faith and hence cannot understand or appreciate the goodness of God. Those wicked ones opposed God in all things. It is written concerning Satan that he, as the invisible ruler of the -wicked world, blinds others to God’s purposes. “In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.”—2 Cor. 4: 4.
12	It follows, then, that all who give themselves over to the demons are mentally and morally and spiritually blind. Satan has continued in that course of wickedness even till now because he is totally depraved. The religious leaders amongst the Jews were denounced by Jesus as “blind guides” for the reason that they had forgotten God and yielded to the power and influence of the demons. Not only were they blind themselves, but they led’the people into blindness. In Noah’s day blindness as to God’s purpose was a part of the state of affairs, foretelling a like state at the time of the presence of the Lord.
VIOLENCE
19	Another prevailing state of affairs was that of violence. Undoubtedly all manner of debauchery and violence were indulged in and none had any regard for the rights and privileges of others, but all were bent on doing mischief. That state of affairs existed immediately preceding the time of the flood. “And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.”—Gen. 6:13.
14	The Nephilim, bullies or tyrants, and their associates in violence, such as wicked men, doubtless would have killed Noah and his family had not Almighty God prevented them from so doing. God preserved Noah and his family for his own purpose and for his own name’s sake.
16	Sexual immorality must have been terrible in Noah’s day, and that was a part of the state of affairs existing. The people, under the influence and power
May 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
149
of the demons, were given over to looseness, lewd and lascivious conduct. They indulged in all manner of debauchery, the result of which was to turn all men’s thoughts from Almighty God: ‘And every imagination of the thoughts of their heart was evil continually.’—Gen. 6: 5.
16	All of such was an abomination in the sight of God: “And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.”—Gen. 6:12.
17	The only exception to the terrible debauchery and wicked state of affairs that prevailed upon earth then was Noah and the members of his family. Because of their faith and obedience they found grace or favor in the eyes of the Lord and were saved by him. Thus they pictured a class of people who find grace in the eyes of the Lord in this day and who are saved from the deluge of fire at Armageddon.
WHY RECORDED
18	Why would Almighty God cause a record to be made and kept of such wickedness as that described in the Genesis account? The Scriptures answer that the same was recorded as a warning foretelling what shall come to pass at the end of the world. (1 Cor. 10:11; Rom. 15:4) There could be no occasion or necessity to give such warning unless a like and terrible state of affairs was anticipated to come to the earth at a later time. That warning is further given for the express benefit of persons now on the earth that they, being warned, may escape the pitfall set by the demons and find a place of safety under the direction of the Lord.
HIS DAY
19	The present time is “his day”, that is, the day of the Son of man, Christ Jesus the Lord and King. When on earth Jesus gave warning that a state of affairs like that which existed in Noah’s day would exist and persist in the day of the coming of the Lord and the setting up of his kingdom. It is true that the peoples of the earth today ‘eat, drink, marry5 and seek personal selfish gratification, and show indifference to the message of the Kingdom, and will continue to do so until Armageddon sweeps them away. To the warning they give no heed. They are blind to Jehovah’s purpose, and they continue in that way until the wrath of God is expressed at Armageddon. And why are they blind and understand not and have no interest in the Kingdom? Because of the seductive influence of Satan and his associate demons. There has been a world-wide witness to the name and kingdom of God during the past twenty-five years, and the net result is that only a small number of persons have heard and given heed to that warning and some have fled and more are fleeing to the Lord. All the others are blind and continue in
blindness. The blindness and indifference to God's message today are similar to what prevailed in Noah’s day. Are such things all that are similar or alike of the two periods of time? No, there are others. In Noah’s day there were bullies browbeating and overrunning the people of the world. Also there prevailed in Noah’s time a state of lawlessness or moral wickedness resulting in debauchery of all human creatures aside from Noah and his family. In all the nations of earth today there prevails a state of affairs of violence similar to that of Noah’s day. All of this is the result of the influence of the demons under the leadership of Satan.
20	That Satan and his associate host of demons continued to operate after the crucifixion of the Lord Jesus, and still operate at the present time, there cannot be the slightest doubt. Those same demons performed their wicked deeds amongst the people when Jesus was in the flesh. The blind religionists carried out the orders of Satan, they also being entirely blind to God’s purpose. To the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, who are looking to and are in the way for the Kingdom, these words of admonition are addressed: “Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.” (Eph. 6:10-12) This is proof that in the present time the demons are operating.
21	What is the purpose of the conflict between the demons and the Lord’s devoted people? On the part of Satan the purpose is to carry out his original challenge to Jehovah and to bring about the destruction of all those who have made a covenant to do the will of God. As to Jehovah and his purpose, He permits the Devil and his associate demons to beset His covenant people in order to give Satan full opportunity to carry out his wicked challenge and at the same time to afford an opportunity for those who have made a covenant with God to obey Him and maintain their integrity toward him. It is the time of crucial testing. The same rules of the Lord apply to those who are Jonadabs and who have hope to be of the “great multitude” as apply to others who have made a covenant to do the Lord’s will. Let this be kept in mind: that the demons now direct their wicked action chiefly against God’s covenant people, both of the “remnant” and of the Jonadabs, because the demons have control over all the others of this wicked world.
22	The prevailing state of affairs in the nations of earth today is such that the rights of the people are ignored and the bullies, visible and invisible, browbeat, oppress and rule the people in a harsh and
150
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
cruel way. There is no righteous rule, and for that reason the people mourn. Religious and political dictators and commercial giants together destroy the liberties of the people. Wickedness prevails, and the wicked are in control. “The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God; God is not in all his thoughts.” (Ps. 10:4) This prevailing state of affairs is the result of the influence and power of the demons.
VIOLENCE
23	As it was in Noah’s day so it is at the present time, where now ‘the earth is filled with violence’. In every nation violence is directed especially against those who are in a covenant to do the will of God and who are diligent to keep faithfully that covenant. The faithful followers of Christ Jesus are violently ‘hated for his name’s sake’, even as Jesus foretold. (Matt. 24:9) During the year last past violence against Jehovah’s witnesses has been shown particularly throughout that part of the earth known as “Christendom”. Mobs, led by religious preachers, have wickedly and violently assaulted and beaten and otherwise ill-used the true followers of Christ Jesus.
2‘	Political officers, sworn to uphold the law and order of the land, acting together with the religious preachers, wholly disregard all law and rules of righteousness and indulge in violent assaults upon the followers of Christ Jesus, treat them cruelly and imprison them. It is certain that all of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions today would be slain by the violent ones were it not for the protection the Lord provides for them. The rights of the people and the freedom which at one time they enjoyed are no longer given consideration by many of the ruling element. For instance, when Christian citizens appeared before the legislative committee of the State of Connecticut in March, 1941, to express opposition to the Bill pending before that legislature, which, if enacted into law, would destroy the Constitutional rights of citizens to preach the truth, members of the legislative committee brazenly and violently replied to such protest: “We are not interested in your Constitutional rights.” Thus men elected by the people to safeguard the people’s interests have no interest in the rights of the people. Religion, politics, commerce, and their agencies have united in their efforts to heap violence upon all those who boldly declare the name of and the kingdom of Jehovah. Freedom of worship of Almighty God has disappeared from the earth, and only Jehovah and his King give protection to those who love righteousness. Violence is bad enough, but there is a more subtle way in which the demons now attempt to wreck the world and to destroy those who have made a covenant to do the will of God.
MORAL DELINQUENCY
25	“Seduction” is the act of leading aside or astray from the path of rectitude, virtue and duty, and into paths of evil, to corrupt men. “Debauchery^ means to degrade and corrupt, and is usually the result of seduction. In Noah’s day and up to the time of the flood Satan and his associate demons seduced angels and human creatures, leading them away from the path of duty, rectitude and virtue and into the paths of degradation. The “sons of God” of the angelic order materialized and by the demons were induced to take human women for wives and therefore to take a course contrary to God’s fixed law. These indulged sexually with women, and the result was that both were debauched and the offspring of that action were morally delinquent to the extreme; as it is written: “For all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.” (Gen. 6:12) There was a clear line of demarcation or distinction between “all flesh . . . upon the earth” and the eight persons of Noah’s family, these being the exception. That was in Noah’s day, and, says Jesus, “so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.”
26	The present is the day of the Son of man. And what are the facts as related to the prophecy uttered by Jesus as above? In 1914 Christ Jesus was enthroned and sent forth to rule, while the wicked ones still operated. The “war in heaven” followed, and the demons were defeated and cast down to earth. (Rev. 12:1-12) From 1914 onward the moral standard upon earth has continued to be lowered. Religion has become more outwardly degrading. In the name of the Lord the people are invited to religious meetings, there to indulge in bingo games and other gambling games and in other practices that are far from righteous. Religion is used as a shield to carry on many other immoral and wicked schemes. Politics has moved to a far lower standard. Commerce and commercial operations have lowered their standard and become more cruel and heartless. Morality has greatly lowered its standard in regard to the relationship between the sexes. Less than half a century ago few women indulged in intoxicating drinks to excess, and few, if any, indulged at all in the use of tobacco. Today almost all women indulge in both to great excess and their moral and mental state and standard are greatly lowered. The relationship between the sexes has become deplorable. Both the rulers and the ruled find themselves today on the toboggan slide hurrying madly on their downward way.
21	Why this marked change for the worse since 1914? The Lord gives the answer, which now sounds the warning: “Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.”—Rev. 12:12.
May 15, 1941
WATCHTOWER
151
28	Like the torrential waters of the swollen Jordan river, the population of the world is madly and heedlessly rushing downward to the antitypical sea of death. And that is not all. Against whom in particular is the seductive campaign of the demons directed? All who are of the world and who hold onto the world are already under the wicked one. (1 John 5:19) Against whom, then, is the assault now being made particularly? The subtle and seductive shafts of the demons are now specifically directed against the covenant people of God. The demons in their wicked activities endeavor to cause God’s covenant people to violate their covenant and to join the world in destruction.
29	Subtly the demons endeavor to cause the covenant people of God to become careless and to let down the proper bars between the sexes, so that moral and sexual delinquency is the result. Those who are watching the developments of present-day affairs see the evidence of a retrograde movement to moral delinquency. Undue familiarity, at first intended to be innocent and appearing as such, often opens the gate to greater dangers. Seductive methods are at work, and debauchery is certain to result unless those wrongful methods are strongly resisted. The demons set snares, and the careless are led into such snares and, once in them, find it difficult to extricate themselves. Carelessness and loose conduct tighten the snare about them. This is one of the great dangers today to the covenant people of God. The Lord sounds the warning saying: As it was in Noah’s day, so shall it be also in the day of the Son of man.’ The covenant people of God must take warning and give heed to the Lord’s warning if they would safeguard themselves from the assaults of the demons.
80	Sodom and Gomorrah are also set forth as examples of the state of affairs that would come to pass at the present time : “Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.” (Jude 7) “Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed.”—Luke 17: 28-30.
81	What led to the seduction and debauchery of the people of Sodom and Gomorrah by the demons? Pride, idleness, fullness of bread, and sexual abominations : “Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they were haughty, and committed abomination
before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good.”—Ezek. 16: 49, 50.
82	Noah and his family were saved from the assaults of the demons by reason of their faithful obedience to the commandments of Almighty God. Lot and the faithful members of his family likewise were saved from destruction because of their faith and obedience to the Lord’s commandments. God’s rules do not change.
SAFETY NOW
88	There is one, and only one, place of safety for God’s covenant people. “The name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.” (Prov. 18:10) Only those who love Jehovah and his kingdom can remain in that place of safety. To love the Lord means to keep his commandments. For such the following scripture was written: “I will love thee, 0 Lord, my strength. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies.” (Ps. 18:1-3) “For thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy.”—Ps. 61: 3.
84	These are “the last days” and therefore are days of great peril. (2 Tim. 3:1) These are like Noah’s day and even worse. That the warfare today of God’s people is with the demons there cannot be the slightest doubt, because this admonition is given : “Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.”—Eph. 6:10-12.
85	The rules laid down in the Scriptures for the benefit of the spiritual class of God's covenant people likewise apply to the Lord’s “other sheep”. God changes not, nor do his rules change. (Mal. 3:6) God is no respecter of persons. (Acts 10: 34) All who live must come under the same rules.
SHUN WHAT?
86	What shall the people of God shun? Everything that tends to corrupt the mind and body must be shunned and avoided. Uncleanness, fornication, lasciviousness, and suchlike. (2 Cor. 12: 21) The “works of the flesh”, specially enumerated by the apostle at Galatians 5:17-21, must be shunned. The way that is traveled by the peoples of the world who are not in a covenant with God must be shunned by those who are in a covenant with him. The ways of darkness and death must be shunned: “And take the helmet of sal
152
THE WATCHTOWER
vation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God: praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints; and for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel.”—Eph. 6:17-19.
37	Unclean thoughts and meditations must be shunned. (Mark 7:15-22) Idleness and slothfulness lead to disaster. The mind and the hands must be occupied in things that are profitable and works that are righteous in order to avoid the pitfalls set by Satan and his emissaries. Idleness contributed to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. The demons see to it that the idle brain is filled with improper thoughts and leads to improper action.
DO WHAT 7
38	What must God’s covenant people do ? The remnant must obey the commandments of God. The “other sheep” of the Lord must do likewise. The “other sheep” find protection within the “city of refuge”, that is to say, under the organization of the Lord, and they must stay within bounds and obey the rules and commandments of the Lord’s organization which he gives. The first great commandment is to love God; as it is written: “Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”—Matt. 22:37-39.
39	To show one’s love for God means to be diligent to obey God’s commandment. The “neighbor” of the consecrated is everyone who is in a covenant to do the will of God; and to ‘love one’s neighbor’ means to look out well for the interest of that consecrated person, even as you would for your own interest. The vital interest of both is the Kingdom interest; therefore to love one’s neighbor means to help him to advance the Kingdom interest and hence to do the will of God.
40	Thoughts and actions must be clean, and the body must be kept clean. The rules primarily given to the spiritual company of the Lord’s sheep apply in the present time to his “other sheep”, amongst which rules is the following: “Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.”—2 Cor. 7:1.
41	The body of flesh must be kept clean because it is the organism devoted to the service of the Lord. The mind of the creature must be kept clean by filling it with thoughts pertaining to The Theocracy. Everything pertaining to The Theocratic Government is clean, and those who receive the benefits of
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that government must be in full harmony with the great Theocrat and his King.
42	As to what is proper thinking, the following admonition applies to both remnant and Jonadabs: “Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.”—Phil. 4: 8.
43	Obeying this rule one must have his mind free from improper, unclean thoughts and his mind filled with thoughts concerning The Theocracy and what he may do to advance the interest thereof. Doing thus he could have no time to indulge in loose, lewd, or improper thoughts or conduct. One whose mind is constantly filled with thoughts concerning the great Theocracy and his own relationship thereto will thus be keeping up the barrier against the demons.
44	If one who has made a covenant to obey God and who has fled to the Lord for refuge becomes careless in his thoughts and actions and permits his mind to dwell on lewd, lascivious, selfish or improper things, he thereby lets down the bars or guards that have been erected against the demons, and therefore the demons invade his mind. Attending and participating in social parties and thus wasting time and energy that might be properly employed in the Lord’s service is a very dangerous course of action, because the barriers to the intrusion of the demons are thus let down.
43	Study classes and service meetings are regularly held amongst the Lord’s people for the purpose of enabling them to keep in mind the proper things and their mind fixed upon the righteous things of the Lord. Every one of God’s covenant people should attend such meetings when it is reasonably possible and take an active part therein. One who is negligent and not attending such study classes is failing to seek righteousness and meekness, which the Lord requires of all whom he approves.
WORK
48	Said Jesus: “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” (John 5:17) That text announces the rule that everyone should work. One who has covenanted to serve God and his kingdom must do works of righteousness. With him the Kingdom interests are all-important at all times. He will not content himself by devoting seven to ten hours per day to doing work in the office or factory of the Lord’s organization, or by going from house to house telling the people of the Kingdom. He will not divide his time and his energy between such service work and other things out of harmony with the Kingdom. He will devote himself wholly and entirely to matters pertaining to the Kingdom; as it is written: “And what
May 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
153
soever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men.”—Col. 3: 23.
47	The work in which the Christian engages is not for the benefit of or profit to the Lord, but the Lord affords his covenant people the opportunity to work that they might prove their unqualified devotion to Jehovah and his kingdom. It will therefore not do to say, “I will perform my assigned task and then I will spend the rest of the time jazzing about attending social gatherings and indulging in that which gratifies the imperfect human desires.” A man who is in a covenant to serve Jehovah is the bond servant of the Lord and must see to it that he gives his all to the service of the Lord and Master. God has given his covenant people the opportunity to prove their integrity toward him and to receive life everlasting. Therefore he admonishes his people, “Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling [fearing lest one fail to please God] : for it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Do all things without murmurings and disputings; that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world.”—Phil. 2:12-15.
48	Satan and other demons are arrayed in battle against all who have taken their positive stand for Jehovah and his King. Why give advantage to the enemy by having fellowship with the works of wickedness and the works of iniquity? To associate with the workers of iniquity or wickedness is to open the door to the demons, inviting them to come in and assault you, and is therefore equivalent to laying down the weapons of defense which the Lord has provided for his people. The conflict today is a real one between the demons and the covenant people of God. There could be no compromise and nothing in common between them. Those who receive God’s protection and final approval must seek righteousness and do what is right at all times, and not merely a part of the time. Both mind and hands must be employed in works of righteousness all the time in order to successfully withstand the assaults of the enemy. The people of God must have on the armor which the Lord has provided for them, and must use it at all times. That armor is specifically described at Ephesians 6:13-18 and shows that the one who has that armor must be a faithful servant of the Lord at all times. The Scriptures are provided by the Lord for his covenant people that they may be fully equipped for every good work. (2 Tim. 3:16,17) One who neglects to study the Scriptures and to be guided by the advice and admonition there given cannot have the approval of the Lord. We must study his Word and do his works, that we may receive his approval. —2 Tim. 2:15,16.
48	All who seek refuge under the Lord’s organization, the antitypical “city of refuge”, must be obedient to the rules of the Lord’s organization, one of which announced is the following scripture, which applies both to the remnant and the “other sheep” of the Lord: “See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the spirit.”—Eph. 5:15-18.
80 Walking circumspectly, within the meaning of the foregoing scripture, means to keep one’s eyes open and looking about and seeing to it that one makes straight paths for his feet to avoid the snares of the enemy. Excess in everything should be avoided. To keep covenant with the Lord means to diligently obey His commandments; and once learning them, one must obey them: “All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. For thy name’s sake, 0 Lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great. What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth.”—Ps. 25:10-13.
51 Both the remnant and the Jonadabs must now “gird up the loins of your mind, be sober”. (1 Peter 1:13) Be watchful and faithful in the performance of duty, and at the same time avoid the “beggarly elements” of this wicked world, and bend all efforts and all energy to the service of The Theocratic Government and its King.
82 The Devil is the great waster, and with his host of wicked ones is attempting to waste all things of righteousness. Any person today who has made a covenant to do the will of God and who then becomes indifferent and slothful concerning the work and service for The Theocracy or any other proper work to which he is assigned is thereby opening the way for the demons to completely control him. “He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster.” (Prov. 18:9) “The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to labour.” —Prov. 21: 25.
88 It is observed that at the present time there are those amongst the consecrated who have children, and who have failed to put their children to work and who fail to even encourage them to work. They proceed upon the theory that the children must be left to their own desires for idleness and play. In this the parents are doing a great injury to the children and to their own selves. For the protection and betterment of the child every child should be taught the Word of God and righteousness and the necessity to obey God’s commandments. That child should also be assigned to a daily task or duty, and the parents
154
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
should see to it that the child is diligent to perform the assigned task or duty. If the parents fail to do this they are doing great injury to their own children as well as to themselves. The children should be taught to keep themselves clean in body and clean in mind and to indulge only in that which is pure and righteous. The Jonadabs must now see to it that both they and their children keep themselves busily engaged in the work of righteousness and keep their place of abode and themselves in a cleanly manner and be diligent at all times to ascertain and to do the will of God. Keep in mind the admonition which Jehovah has given to such: “Seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.”—Zeph. 2: 3.
54	Concerning those who will compose the “great multitude” it is written that they serve the Lord and his kingdom “day and night”, that is to say, all the time. Let none of them now think it is sufficient and in fulfillment of their covenant to spend part of the hours distributing literature or manufacturing the same, and then to employ the remainder of their time in foolish things, such as social parties or “jazzing about”. Some time is required for study and meditation and careful planning the work that is to be done. The time is brief, and there is much to do.
85	Let everyone now on the earth who is in a covenant to do the will of God have in mind at all times these things, to wit: We have taken our position on the side of The Theocracy and openly declared ourselves for Jehovah and his King. The demons, led by Satan their chief, together with all of the organization of that wicked one, are arrayed against us and seek our destruction. We desire to win. We must win, and there is only one way to win, and that is, by the grace and strength of the Lord. We must give heed to and obey his commandments, else we fail. We must constantly study to know his will and what he would have us do that we may have his approval, protection and blessings. And what shall we do f
88	'He hath shewed thee, 0 man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God !” (Mic. 6:8) That scripture contains the answer for both the remnant and the “other sheep” of the Lord.
87	“To do justly” means to do that which is right, that which is just and righteous. The command of the Lord is to “seek righteousness”; and seeking
righteousness, one must do that which is right and righteous. One must be entirely for Jehovah and his kingdom, with no deviation from that course. God says: “Be ye holy; for I am holy.” (1 Pet. 1:16; Lev. 11:44) That rule applies to all who have declared for The Theocracy.
88	It means to hate everything that Jehovah God hates. “The fear of the Lord is to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate.” (Prov. 8:13; 6:17) We must love what God loves. “For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness ; his countenance doth behold the upright.” —Ps. 11: 7.
88	God bestows his favor upon those who love righteousness and hate iniquity, lawlessness, impurity and all uncleanness. (Ps. 45:7) Therefore the person who is in the way of life must put aside everything that is displeasing to God and diligently pursue a course of purity and righteousness.
80	“Love mercy.” If your fellow traveler falls into error, let the Lord judge him, because every servant stands or falls to his own master. (Rom. 14:4) If the Lord shows mercy to the erring one we should be merciful toward that one and delight therein. Do what you can consistently to help your neighbor even as you would desire to be helped.
81	“Walk humbly with thy God.” That means to walk with fear and trembling, fearing that we might displease the Lord and come short of the proper performance of some assigned duty. Avoid everything that the Lord tells you to avoid. Do everything that the Lord commands you to do. The proper course the Lord has pointed out in the Scriptures. Let the Scriptures be the lamp that guides you and, walking in that light, make straight paths for your feet. Learn the commandments of the Lord, and obey them; which means to walk humbly with, that is, obediently with, thy God.
82	It is now as it was in the days of Noah. Those who were saved in the ark prophetically foretell those who shall be saved today by the grace of the Lord, which grace will be shown toward those who are diligently seeking to obey the commandments that the Lord has given to his people. “The Lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I am helped; therefore my heart greatly rejoic-eth, and with my song will I praise him.”—Ps. 28: 7.
JEHOVAH sitteth as king for ever: he hath prepared his throne for judgment; and he will judge the world in righteousness, he will minister judgment to the peoples in uprightness. Jehovah also will be a high tower for the oppressed, a high tower in times of trouble; and they that know thy name will put their trust in thee; for thou, Jehovah, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.
—Psalm 9:7-10, A.R.V.
WHAT BODY IS RAISED?
ASK a so-called “orthodox” clergyman about this and he will answer to this effect: “When death occurs the soul, which is immortal, departs and goes back to God, and the body is put into the tomb. When the resurrection trump is sounded the soul is brought back, and the same body which that soul once possessed will be resurrected, and the soul and body will again be united.’ That theory is so completely out of harmony with the Scriptures, of course, that it is hardly worth considering; but many have believed that theory regardless of how unreasonable and unscriptural it is.
In discussing the resurrection of the dead in the graves the inspired apostle Paul said, among other things: “But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body.” (1 Cor. 15: 38) Then he adds, at verse 44: “It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.” The question at once arises, What did the apostle mean by the word “it” 1
According to the Scriptural definition of “soul”, the creation of which is described at Genesis 2:7, no soul can exist without a body. Man’s body of flesh was first made from the elements of the earth, and then the breath of life was breathed into it; and by this union a moving, sentient creature or “soul” came into existence. That soul, like all other human souls, consisted of a will, mind, heart and bodily organism. A soul could no more exist without a body than it could without the breath of life. That being true, when a man dies it is the soul that dies; hence there is no soul to which a body could be resurrected. When the soul or creature is resurrected that soul or creature must be made up of will, mind, heart and body, with the breath of life causing the organs of the body to function; and therefore there could be no occasion to say that the soul or creature is brought forth and given a body. By the inspired Scriptures we know to a certainty that the dead are dead, unconscious and completely out of existence until God’s due time to awaken them in the resurrection. We speak of death as “sleep” because of God’s purpose to awaken the dead that are in the graves.
The first one resurrected from the dead was Jesus Christ. “And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead , that m all things he might have the pre-eminence.” (Col. 1:18) “The Christ” is composed of Jesus the Head and the church, which is “his body” and being composed finally of 144,000 members. (See Revelation 7:4-8 and 14:1-3.) It is not unusual for the Scriptures to refer to The Christ collectively, or as one. In his prayer on the night preceding his being nailed to the tree Jesus prayed in behalf of his disciples who had been faithful, and also in behalf of those others who should come into a like precious relationship with him. His prayer, as recorded in John, chapter 17, was that these all might be made one. (Vs. 21) That this thought was in the mind of the apostle Paul is clearly proved by his words when he refers to all anointed Christians as “one body”, meaning The Christ.—See 1 Corinthians 10:17; Ephesians 4: 4, 25.
Taking the entire chapter fifteen of his first letter to the Corinthians together, what is the paramount question for determination? It is this: Was Christ raised from the dead? Satan, acting through his visible representatives on
earth, had tried to destroy all the evidence concerning the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The Jewish priests and other clergymen bribed witnesses to lie concerning his resurrection. Of course, Satan was using every possible means to destroy men’s faith in the resurrection of Christ. (See Matthew 26:63-65; 28:11-15.) An examination of the entire chapter (1 Corinthians 15) discloses these cardinal points, to wit: (1) That the resurrection of Christ is the paramount question at issue. (2) That this resurrection includes the body members of The Christ with the Head thereof, and that all constitute one. And (3) that the “it” mentioned in verse 44 and other places in this same chapter does not mean the soul, the new creature, the ego, the character, entity or identity, and has no reference to an individual, but that the “it” means The Christ, the anointed of God, “Christ” meaning “anointed”.
At verses 35-38 the apostle’s argument is, in substance : T have shown you that Christ was raised from the dead and that the resurrection of all others depends upon that great fact. But opponents of the truth of the resurrection will raise some captious questions. Some among them who deny the resurrection will say, How can the dead be raised ? With what body do they come? Those are foolish questions. I will give you an illustration: When you sow a seed no life springs from it except it first die. If you sow wheat, that grain of wheat dies and a body comes forth. If you sow some other grain, that grain dies and a body comes forth. The same body or grain that you put into the ground does not come forth. God has provided a body, and will provide a body for every seed according to its kind. If it is wheat seed a body of that kind will come forth, or if some other seed a body that is suitable.’
At verses 39-41 the argument is, in substance: ‘As a further illustration: All flesh is not the same. There are human flesh and cattle and birds and fishes, all of different flesh. Bodies are not all the same. You look above you, and see the heavenly bodies; and you look about you, and you see earthly bodies. They are different in glory. That is the way it will be in the resurrection; there will be some heavenly bodies and some earthly, and they will be different in glory.’
At verses 42-44 the argument is, in substance ‘But now I am writing you Christians concerning the resurrection of Christ, which is disputed by our opponents The all-important question is his resurrection, because without his resurrection all other resurrection is impossible. In this same letter I have shown you that although The Christ is made up of many members, yet they form one body; The Christ is one. By one spirit all of us Christians are baptized into one body. [“Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.”—1 Cor. 12:12-27] The body of Christ, consisting of the members in particular on this earth, is a dying body. It is a body of humiliation. It is weak and dishonorable in the sight of men. Christ Jesus, the Head of The Christ, went into death dishonored of men; and all the members of the body of Christ must follow the same course.
‘Therefore concerning the resurrection of Christ I say unto you: “It [The Christ] is sown in corruption, it [The Christ] is raised in incorruption; it [The Christ] is sown in dishonour; it [The Christ] is raised in glory; it [The Christ] is sown in weakness; it [The Christ] is raised in 155
156
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
power; it [The Christ] is sown a natural body; it [The Christ] is raised a spiritual body.” [Vss. 42-44] The Christ on earth anointed of God is a body of humiliation, a natural body. In the resurrection it is a spiritual body of glory and honor. “Christ” means “Anointed One” of God. The anointing with his spirit takes place on earth. The body when anointed is natural or human. It is planted in death, and then God raises it up out of death and gives it a body as it pleaseth him.’
At verses 45-50 the argument is, in substance: You know that it is written in the Scriptures that Adam, the first man, who was to give life to the human race, was “made a living soul”. That soul or person or creature was made by forming the body from the elements of the earth and then breathing into it the breath of lives. That human soul failed because of sin. The last Adam, The Christ, is a life-giving spirit when completed in the resurrection, and will give life to the obedient ones of the human race; and there is no other means given under heaven whereby mankind can get life, except through Christ Jesus. (John 10:10) The spiritual was not made first: the animal was made first, and later comes the spirit. Christ must die as the animal body and be raised out of death a spiritual body, because such is God’s purpose. Those who are now devoted to God and who are in Christ are men. Our human nature is animal, our body is animal, and we are members of the body of Christ, and we are in humiliation. We must go down into death in the image of Christ Jesus, as when he died, and then we shall bear the image of the heavenly in the resurrection.’
But suppose one who heard Paul’s argument at that time should have said: “But, Paul, may I ask a question? You have stated that ‘it’ is sown in corruption, and that the ‘it’ means Christ. Did Jesus Christ have a corruptible body ? Was it not written of him that his body did not see corruption ?”—Ps. 16: 9,10.
To this the apostle would answer: ‘True, it was written concerning the Lord Jesus that his literal body did not see corruption. That body would have corrupted, because it was an animal body, except for the miracle performed by Jehovah our Father, who in his own good way and for his own good purposes dissolved that body to the dust that it should not see corruption. But every member of the body of Christ, which is the church, is imperfect; and therefore it must go into death a corruptible body, and in the resurrection God raises up The Christ incorruptible. As I said to you, the seed which you sow is not the body which comes forth, but God gives that seed a body suitable to its kind. The Christ is the seed of promise, which seed God promised to Abraham. (Galatians 3:16) That seed is sown a natural body. It pleases God to give that seed at the resurrection a spiritual body. Now I assure you, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither can a corruptible body be in the kingdom of God.’— 1 Cor. 15: 50.
At verses 51-55 the argument is, in substance: ‘Now I will disclose to you a mystery and a secret concerning the resurrection. The faithful members of the body of Christ who go into death prior to his second coming, as he promised, shall be out of existence until the coming of the Lord; and in that day he shall raise them up. But some members
of the body that remain on earth till the time of his coming will not sleep in death, but at death will be instantaneously changed from an animal to a spiritual body. This will take place in a moment, because all members of the body of Christ must be changed from animal to spiritual in order to be of The Christ. The body this side the veil of death and which is corruptible must put on incorruption; the mortal must put on immortality. When this change takes place from corruptible to incorruption, and this mortal has become the immortal Christ, then shall be brought to pass the saying of God’s prophet: “Death is swallowed up in victory.” Then can be said: “O death, where is thy sting ? O grave, where is thy victory ?” Those who shall constitute the glorious body of Christ will never be subject to the power of death.’
The conclusion is irresistible that the “it” refers to The Christ. With the exception of Jehovah God, no one outside of The Christ will ever be incorruptible. It is to The Christ alone that the promise is given that over such the second death will have no power. (See Revelation 2:11; 20:6.) None outside of Christ will ever receive immortality. These are they that are admonished while on earth to seek immortality. (Rom. 2:7) The members of The Christ while on earth are, by God’s will and his precious promises, begotten to an “inheritance incorruptible, . . . reserved in heaven”, which is life divine in the spirit. (See James 1:18; 1 Peter 1:1-4; 2 Peter 1:3, 4.) No others are begotten to this incorruptible inheritance, which is immortality. No others will ever have even a chance of being immortal.
In using the word “it”, which he says is sown corruptible and is raised incorruptible, the apostle does not refer to individual souls or creatures or characters or entities or egos, but his reference is to The Christ as a whole. If, when he says that God gives it a body as it pleases him, the apostle means each individual, and that some of these get mortal bodies and others immortal bodies, the apostle would be manifestly inconsistent; because later and in the same argument he says that the “it” must “put on immortality”. On this very snag the clergy of “Christendom” have fallen They contend that at the resurrection every one will be given an immortal body, and they use this statement of the apostle Paul as authority. But that is not what the apostle said at all.
In the general resurrection during the thousand-year reign of Christ “all that are in the graves” will be raised up with a human body. Long before the time of the apostle Paul patient Job wrote: “And though, after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.” (Job 19: 26) Job believed in and spoke of the resurrection The apostle, of course, was familiar with this, and doubtless those Christians at Corinth to whom he wrote were familiar with the same scripture. Other prophets had taught the resurrection of the dead.—Dan. 12:13.
That question concerning dead humankind coming forth in human bodies was not troubling the Corinthians at all. The apostle was telling them about the resurrection of The Christ, and this they could not understand. The apostle was telling them about a change from human to spirit creature. If the question propounded to the apostle, ‘With what body shall the dead come forth ?’ had reference to the general resurrection of humankind the apostle would not
May 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
157
have given the answer, ‘Thou foolish person.’ On the contrary, he would have said; ‘You are familiar with what the prophets have taught. A man is dead and in the tomb. He went down into death a human creature, and he will be brought forth a human creature under the kingdom of God by Christ Jesus.’ This is further proof that the apostle was not discussing the general resurrection, but that he was discussing the first resurrection, the resurrection of The Christ, and showing that the general resurrection absolutely depends upon the resurrection of Christ.
The apostle and the others knew that the general resurrection would be in a body known to man; but the apostle did not know what kind of body God would give The Christ. The apostle John writes: “It doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he [the Lord] shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.” (1 John 3:2) The apostle Paul, being also an inspired witness of God, would know exactly the same things as expressed by John. Therefore Paul’s answer to the question concerning the resurrection of The Christ was: ‘God will give it [The Christ] a body as it pleaseth him’; and it will be a glorious body.
“The Christ,” God’s great mystery, was hid from all for ages and generations. (See Colossians 1: 26, 27; Romans 16 :25,26.) That mystery was first made known to Christ Jesus after he was anointed with God’s spirit after his baptism in the river Jordan. It began to be uncovered and made known to the followers of Christ Jesus after Pentecost, fifty days after his resurrection from the dead. In God’s due time Paul became an apostle of Jesus Christ, and the mystery was revealed to him. He then wrote that those who will inherit the realms of glory must be of Christ. He stated that the true church while on earth is the body of Christ in the flesh, and that this body is suffering ignominy, persecution and shame at the hands of the enemy, even as Christ Jesus the Head suffered.
As a member of the body of Christ, Paul wrote: “I Paul am made a minister; who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church; whereof I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God which Is given to me for you, to fulfill the word of God, even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints: to whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles [the nations] ; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.”—Col. 1: 23-27.
It was concerning this mystery or glorious resurrection of The Christ that the apostle was writing to the Corinthians. He knew that if these Christians were to turn away from the great truth of the resurrection of Christ they could never be of the glorious body of Christ. His argument, therefore, was for the purpose of showing them that Christ died and was raised from the dead according to the purpose of Jehovah God; that The Christ is made up of many members, yet all one body; that as the Head suffered, the body must also suffer; that “it”, The Christ, must go down into death in dishonor and weakness and shame, and that God would raise “it” up to honor, power, glory and immortality. His argument is clear, cogent and convincing, and brings joy to the heart of the Christian.
Now the “remnant” on the earth, who are the last members of the body of Christ, can appreciate the promise of God made through Jesus: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.” (Rev. 2:10, Am. Rev. Ver.) Those who bear the reproaches that came upon the Head, and who go down into death with him, faithful to the end, shall be granted in the resurrection great honor of life divine in the spirit, and be for ever members of the glorious body of Christ.
When a Christian dies, to say that his “character” is somewhere in existence and that that is what will be resurrected is without meaning. The character is the man or creature. No man has a character, separate and distinct from himself. If he is a man he is a character. If the man dies the character is dead. Man is a soul, and when the man dies the soul is dead. Man is a creature; when the creature dies the creature is dead, regardless of whether it is an old creature or a “new creature”. The apostle’s argument was that the “new creature”, a member of Christ, remains dead until the time of the resurrection, which takes place during the second presence of the Lord in the spirit. The creature when dead is nowhere; it is out of existence, and in due time shall be awakened out of death by being brought again into existence.
If a man goes into the grave not ever having known Christ, his opportunity to be brought to a knowledge of the truth is during the reign of Christ. Then the man will be awakened out of death in the general resurrection after the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors have filled this earth with a righteous race, and he will be given a knowledge of the truth and an opportunity for life through Christ. But surely there is no question about what kind of body he will have when he comes forth from the grave in the resurrection. He could have no other kind of body than a human body. It is likewise certain that he would not have the identical body that went down into the tomb; but, nevertheless, he would have a human body given to him at the general resurrection. This question, however, was not really discussed by the apostle Paul, except that he said that during the reign of Christ those in the grave would be brought forth from the tomb. Not so, however, with the members of The Christ. They come forth as spirit creatures, but with what kind of body no man on this earth has ever known.
In 1 Corinthians chapter 15 the apostle was not discussing the individual members of Christ’s body separately; he was discussing The Christ as a whole. In Revelation 3:12 the promise is made to individuals that those who are overcomers will be made a part of the spiritual temple of God. It would not be possible, however, to be of the temple except one is a member of Christ. When discussing The Christ, if the individual and separate members are kept out of mind and The Christ is considered as one, Head and body, then it is clear what the “it” in 1 Corinthians 15 means. “It,” The Christ, goes into death as a human creature, with a human organism, and comes forth with a divine organism.
Confusion on this question, as on others, has resulted from thinking that each Christian must ‘develop a character’ when he becomes a “new creature” in Christ, and that each new creature exists inside of a human organism,
158
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and that when death ensues the body dies, but the new creature continues to live somewhere and will be resurrected and given a body as pleases the Lord. Confusion is bound to result when we have the wrong premise. When we get the proper understanding of what the “new creature” is and the proper understanding of “character”, then it is easy to see what the apostle meant when he spoke of the “it” : that he had reference to The Christ, the seed of God’s promise, which constitutes “the mystery of Christ”.
No one will be resurrected as a member of the body of Christ unless while in the flesh he grows into the likeness of Christ Jesus. But this likeness is not so-called “character” likeness, as has been erroneously stated through misunderstanding that the character is something separate and distinct from the man. The likeness of the Lord spoken of in the Scriptures is an unqualified, unswerving and abso
lute devotion of the creature to Jehovah God; and never, sympathetically or otherwise, allying oneself with any part of the Devil’s organization and its religion.
The Lord Jehovah has been during the past nineteen centuries developing and is now completing the “new creation”, which is The Christ. (2 Cor. 5:17; Gal. 6:15) This new creation stands out separate and distinct from Satan’s organization. When one is begotten and anointed of the invisible power or holy spirit of God and is then put on trial and proves his love for the Lord in the fulfillment of his covenant to do God’s will, Jehovah God will be faithful in the performance of his part of the covenant. Thus doing, the Christian is certain to have a part in the “first resurrection”. He therefore becomes a part of the “it” while in the flesh. If faithful unto death, he is a part of the “it” that is resurrected to immortality.
THE IDEAL GOVERNMENT
THAT man should have on earth an ideal government has been the purpose of Jehovah from the beginning of creation. For centuries the Creator, God, has been working out his purpose to that end. The Bible and the extraneous evidences in world events are cumulative that a climax in the progressive steps of his great purpose is now at hand. Blessed is the man who can now see and appreciate the fact, and can enter fully into the spirit of that divine arrangement.
An ideal thing is that which is perfect, supremely excellent; hence very desirable. An ideal government is a supremely excellent and perfect government. Because such a government seems impossible to man after long experience, man says: ‘An ideal government exists and can exist only in the imagination of men. It is unattainable and therefore impossible.’ With Almighty God it is not impossible; for in his due time such a government among men is absolutely certain. An abiding faith that this conclusion is correct, and the support of that faith by perfect love toward God, make the Christian a power in the hand of Jehovah God. When the Christian, under the supervision of the Lord, exercises that divinely given power, he is approximately living up to his privileges.
The coming ideal government, and our attitude toward it, is the great issue. The word “issue” means the vital question for determination. It means the point to be decided. The question for determination or point to be decided, the paramount issue before the minds of men, is: Satan’s kingdom versus Jehovah’s Theocratic Government under Christ. Shall Satan continue to be the “god of this world” and rule with an oppressive hand? Or has the time come for the great God of heaven to set up an ideal government on earth ? This is the great issue in the campaign that is now on. Let every creature devoted to or of good-will toward God settle that in his mind now. There is no middle ground in this campaign. There is no compromise. Such creature must unreservedly take the side of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government under Christ or lose what he has. No real Christian can be passive in this campaign. He must be active as opportunities are afforded. He must be either cold or hot. To be lukewarm will not do. (See Revelation 3:16.) The more
quickly this fact gets thoroughly fixed in the mind and heart, the better for the creature.
Zeal means to be heated. It is derived from the Greek word which means to boil. It means ardor for a cause, an enthusiastic fervor and devotion to that cause. The zeal peculiar to the Lord’s house, referred to at Psalm 69:9, John 2:17 and Romans 15:3, is the boiling, enthusiastic fervor and devotion for God’s kingdom, for his ideal government over man. This is the time when zeal for the Kingdom or Theocracy is required. It means that one will be actively engaged in the campaign as opportunity is offered.
What, then, can I do? you ask. At Matthew 24:14 Jesus answers: Tell the good news of the Kingdom to the people of all nations as a witness before the end comes. Tell it now! Tell it by word of mouth. Proclaim it to the people as you have opportunity. Tell it out by the printed page by placing in the hands of the people the books and other literature containing the message of The Theocracy. The Lord has provided the printing presses and other machinery to print and manufacture the books in the various languages, and offers an opportunity to all devoted ones to enter actively into the campaign on the side of the great Theocrat. He has provided the way for some to be full-time publishers as pioneers and for others to be publishers as members of organized companies of Jehovah’s witnesses. He has provided sound-cars and sound-reproducing machines, portable phonographs, with recorded speeches, and provided for the sending forth of the message in that way. He has opened a way for every one who is on his side to do something in the campaign. Hence there is no just cause or excuse for any who really love the Lord to remain silent now. Remember the thousands who went with Gideon for the war and who at the water test bowed down, burying their faces in the brook to drink, and were rejected. Be not of that kind, but be of those who, like the approved 300, dipped the water in their hands and lapped it like a dog, while earnestly watching for opportunities to glorify the King.
Be it remembered, we are now engaged in the greatest campaign of all time. Let us acquit ourselves as becomes the true representatives of the great and new Government, The Theocracy. Call to mind the campaign in worldly poli
May 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
159
ties, how some have engaged therein in times past, how they endured hardships in behalf thereof. How many times have you carried a torch, marched in the ranks or rode in a wagon, waved a flag and shouted and urged the people to vote? How many times have you made a political speech, and diligently distributed literature showing the people what you believed to be the proper way to vote? And why did you do it? If you were honest you did it because you believed that the officers you were trying to elect, the government you were trying to inaugurate, would help to bring about a better condition amongst the people in general. Those efforts failed because of the imperfections of man.
Now we are enlisted in a campaign of the Lord for his ideal government. We are not in doubt as to the result. We know that his kingdom will win. We know that his will be the ideal government and will bring the very things for which man has hoped and watched and prayed, lo, these many centuries past. Do you possess the spirit of the Lord ? Have you perfect love in your heart? If so, then with a burning zeal for his cause you will go forth to do your little part, not because he needs any of us but because we need the opportunity to prove our loyalty and our love. Remember that love is the perfect expression of unselfishness. Remember that the King of The Theocratic Government, Christ Jesus, gave us the example as Jehovah’s “Faithful and True Witness”, and that we must follow in his steps. The way for us now to give expression to unselfishness is joyfully to announce the kingdom that will bring lasting blessings to mankind. This must be done with diligence if we would have an abundant entrance into the Kingdom and into its blessings.
How can anyone in “the present truth”, who appreciates the situation, remain silent and inactive? Let no one deceive you. If you are to be one of God’s “elect” you will not be deceived into believing you can be inactive and yet please the Lord. The Lord has promised that the “elect” shall not be deceived in doctrine. (Psalm 125:3; Isaiah 52:8; Matthew 24:24,25) There is a manifest attempt on the part of the great adversary of God and man to deceive by inducing those devoted to God to remain inactive and silent.
In ages past governments have risen, only to fall again. Now Jehovah’s witnesses are engaged in a campaign for the ideal government which is certain and which will endure forever. Service will mean a sacrifice of worldly ease, wealth, and comfort. It will cost us much, but it is worth more than it costs. If we have started to serve the Lord, we cannot stop and still be pleasing to him. Do not for one moment think that what you did last year will win for you the Kingdom or its blessings. Our victory will be complete at the end, provided we do not relax. (Galatians 6:9) This is no time for quitters. Jesus made this clear when he said: “No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.”—Luke 9: 62.
To humankind an ideal government is one the governor of which possesses absolute power and exercises that power always equally in behalf of all, and with partiality to none, granting to each one his full rights and privileges. It means a government of everlasting peace, in which the people will have plenty, will live in contentment, enjoy liberty, life and uninterrupted happiness. That is why, to man, an ideal government has seemed impossible. The kingdom of God and of his Christ will bring to man all of these and much
more. That the ones devoted to Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government under Christ might be fully assured and be comforted and encouraged, the Lord has given us cumulative evidence of what blessings The Theocracy shall bring to obedient humankind on earth.
We are assured that Jehovah by Christ Jesus shall be king over all the earth (see Zechariah 14:9); that the government shall be upon the shoulders of Christ Jesus (Isaiah 9:6,7); that he shall have dominion from sea to sea and to the ends of the earth (Psalm 72: 8) ; that all power and authority are in the hands of God’s anointed King (Matthew 28:18) ; that out from Zion, Jehovah’s capital organization or Theocracy, which is heavenly and hence invisible, shall go forth the law (Isaiah 2:3); that the king shall rule in righteousness, therefore without partiality (Isaiah 32:1); that unto his kingdom shall all people of good-will be gathered (Genesis 49:10); that wars shall be no more and the people shall dwell in peace, and of his peace and his kingdom there shall be no end (Isaiah 2:4; and 9:6, 7) ; that the people shall have plenty and feast to their heart’s content (Isaiah 25:6); that the earth shall yield its increase and the people shall be supplied with an abundance (Isaiah 30:23; Psalm 67:6); that there shall be amongst the people no beastly organization to oppress them, for the Lord shall destroy the oppressor (Psalm 72:4); that every obedient man shall own his home and shall sit under his vine and fig tree and shall fear no one (Micah 4:1-4) ; that their flesh shall become fresher than that of a child (Job 33: 25) ; that none shall fear sickness nor be sick (Isaiah 33:24); that full regeneration to life will be granted to those who prove their loyalty to the King because he gave his life that all such shall live (John 3:15; 10:10) ; that then they that keep his Word shall never die (John 8:51; Revelation 21: 4) ; that the earth, created for man’s happiness, will be brought to a state of Edenic Paradise, and the desert will blossom with abundance (Isaiah 35:1) ; that every one will know of Jehovah, the great Theo-crat, and of his anointed King and Vindicator, Christ Jesus, and will dwell in endless happiness and sing songs of praise to Jehovah and his Christ for ever.—Isa. 11: 9; Ps. 150 ■ 6
The kingdom of the Lord will establish an ideal condition upon the earth for man. That will be the ideal government, The Theocracy. There is not the slightest doubt in the mind of the Christian that such is true and that the Kingdom is now beginning. We are not following some cunningly devised fable; but we have the sure Word of God spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets (2 Pet. 1-16-21) These prophecies have been and are being fulfilled; and we know that the foretold Dayspring from on High has visited humankind of good-will and that the portals of the New World are swinging open.
Jehovah God will make a sharp and quick work of announcing the Kingdom before the complete end of Satan’s wicked world. (Isaiah 28:22, Romans 9:28) The time is short now till the universal war of Armageddon, and the privileges are great beyond the description of human words. The issue is clearly drawn; the fight is on to the finish, the campaign grows with intensity. The Theocratic Government is at hand. The God-given commission is to now tell the good news to the world. Blessed is the man who fulfills that commission. Witness of Jehovah, with zeal and vigor press on to victory and boundless joy!
FIELD EXPERIENCES
GERMAN GIRL REFUGEE NOW PIONEERS IN ENGLAND
“During the ten years I have been privileged to serve as a pioneer I have never had so much joy and encouragement as just during the last few weeks. In one instance, a gentleman, very interested in the Catholic religion, a few years ago had the booklet Uncovered sent to him. He enjoyed reading it, but never heard any more about its message, till perhaps a month ago. Hearing the recorded lecture ‘Government and Peace’, he was so thrilled, ‘Every single word is true,’ was one of his remarks and he asked for all the books and two or three dozen booklets. Each morning he is giving lifts in his car to some people and is using every opportunity to speak about the truth. Then he gives them a booklet with his name and address inside and asks them to call at his house in case they want to know more. In the meantime he and his wife and daughter have heard our two new lectures and are now having a model study in their home. Also they attended service meeting and the Watchtower study on Sunday, and he has offered his car to all witnesses in his district to take them on the work Sundays. He was anxious to tell his sister who lives in London about the truth, and in her reply she said she has been associated with our Society since 1914. Such a surprise! In another instance, a gentleman and lady had heard about the truth sixteen years ago through some witnesses next to them. They had many arguments, but never agreed. Through moving they lost contact. A few months back these people tried to give a lift to two persons waiting for a bus. They stopped, but could hardly believe their eyes when they realized they were speaking to their old neighbors. It took two hours to do the journey normally done in fifteen minutes, and resulted in giving them the book Religion. Two weeks ago I arranged with the lady to call with the lecture. Last Monday night they listened to ‘Religion’. Both said, ‘The more you hear, the more you want to know.’ The first time I called I left two copies of Consolation. I didn’t want to take anything. He was most upset, and so he put three shillings in my pocket. On my last back-call with the recordings I asked his wife to accept two books and some Watchtower copies as a small gift from me, which she appreciated very much. Before I realized it, he had put three more shillings in my pocket. They asked about meetings. When I offered to call for them, they said they would come to fetch me instead and take me down in their car. As I was leaving they both seemed quite concerned and asked if I had somebody here in Sheffield to look after me. It was a great pleasure to tell them that the people I am staying with are as kind to me as my own parents.”
WORKING THE CITY JAIL BUILDING (NEBRASKA)
“I went straight to the elevator and asked to be taken to the top floor. Before I got off I witnessed to the elevator man, and that contrary to my regular course. I thought I had made a mistake, but, much to my surprise, he readily took Religion, smiled broadly and said: ‘I have taken these from you before. I am for you.’ He then took me to the office of the radio broadcaster and let me in. Whenever the elevator man could run away he would come in and stay until they rang for him, and we almost had a study there. At the prosecutor’s office my reception was much different. How did I get into the building 11 should be locked up! My days for doing this work were numbered, and I and the rest of
160
us would be dealt with the same here as in other parts of the country! I told him that that was a great responsibility he was taking upon himself and he would not be able to do one thing until the Lord permitted. So much attention was drawn to me that I had little interest from then on. They were all very fearful on that floor. Every little while the elevator man would walk by to see how I was getting along. He would tell me not to be afraid, not to let them bluff me. Finally I got to the first floor. I was five hours in this building. I got to the captain. He smiled, so amused, and said: ‘Well, hello there! the last time I saw you, you had an escort down here!’ and he laughed heartily. He is a Catholic. I witnessed and he admitted he knew religion is a racket and that we are harmless. He told me to come into his private office and meet the rest of the boys. When they found that one of Jehovah’s witnesses was there they were anxious to hear what I had to say. The switchboard operator came from the next room and asked, and I told him I was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. He said, ‘Why, I have had fifteen complaints from here in the building, asking why you were not locked up.’ Then the captain saw I had slipped one over on him. He wanted to be angry, scolded me for going through as I did, and said after this I must get an order or permission from the chief. Then the switchboard operator asked where the soul went at death. I quoted scriptures and told him that where man’s word differs from the Scriptures man is the liar, not God. He saw what I meant His switchboard was buzzing, bells were ringing, and no one paying attention! All interested in the witness. After I finished he went to his office and said to one of the fellows there: ‘I’ll never go to that d--church again!’ Then you
could hear, ‘That’s right! Religion is a racket. She’s right! That’s the truth!’ all talking at once. In the building I placed two bound books and many booklets. The elevator man asked me to be sure to come back, and showed me how much he had read of the booklet Satisfied—between calls.”
SCHOOL BOARD APPEARS BEFORE JEHOVAH’S WITNESS
“The Grammar school decided everyone must salute the flag or else! That put my 12-year-old daughter out automatically. I could not get up and go to see the board of trustees; so I wrote a letter to the man who made the motion to adopt compulsory saluting. He is also justice of the peace and runs the leading service station here in town I invited him and his colleagues to call and hear our side of the issue more fully. This he did. He came believing in salutes from everybody. He left, and another trustee with him, all wobbly and reeling in their convictions, and in distress because of the position in which my girl had been placed. They took Loyalty and Conspiracy Against Democracy home with them. Then they ‘went to town’ on the school principal, the teacher, and the third member of the board, with the result that the whole silly ruling was quashed, and my girl was back in school by 10 o’clock the morning after the visit. She was out only a week, in which I taught her at home. I am convinced there was no malicious intent on the part of the trustees. New instructions have been sent out to school boards from the inner sanctum of the higher-ups, and among the ‘suggestions’ for adoption by each individual board is this vicious compulsory salute ruling. This neatly circumvents California’s governor’s veto on the state-wide adoption of such a law. Clever guys (?).”
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS Journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign,- $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African _________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear iss several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty er adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the Journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn. N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“THEOCRATIC AMBASSADORS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
June, for the entire month, is the Period here named. Are you a Theocratic ambassadorT You can be, if you take your stand on the side of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and then engage in announcing that government to others. The June Period affords you the opportunity to exercise your ambassadorship. The means provided by the great Theocrat, who sends you forth, is his published Kingdom message, and, during June only, you may offer to the public, on a mere contribution of 35c, a combination of any three bound books published by the Society, excluding the latest books, jRiIipion and Salvation. Prompt advance preparation will be necessary to your most effective part in this Testimony. Any needed references to the local company organized for this service we shall gladly furnish you. May you be able at the end of this month to fill out a good report of work.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of July 6: "Man’s True Guide,”
fl 1-29 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1941.
Week of July 13: “Man’s True Guide,” fl 30-62 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1941.
VACATION
The members of the Bethel family will enjoy their vacation this year from Saturday, August 2, to Wednesday, August 20, inclusive. This will afford them a change from their regular work at headquarters and the opportunity for a larger part m the increasing field work. The factory and office will be closed down during this period, and no books will be shipped nor regular mail answered. Hence all orders for literature should be sent in well m advance of August 2 to receive attention before closing down. Order in sufficient quantity to carry you through the vacation period and the rest of August. Also as little correspondence as possible should be sent to the Society, with the exception of report cards and subscriptions.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals ior The Watchtower should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal .blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the tune of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, -and note any -recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
ffieVWOTuWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	June 1, 1941	No. 11
MAN’S TRUE GUFDE
"Man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live."—Deut. 8:3.
TEHOVAH the Lord God made known to his typ-I ical covenant people, the Israelites, the words of J the foregoing text. He caused Moses to make the announcement of that rule shortly before the Israelites were led into the land of Canaan. God had made a covenant with that people, and he was instructing them how they might receive the benefits of that covenant. They desired to live, and the Lord God was informing them what they must do in order to gain life everlasting. For the physical organism they would need their daily bread; but that was not all. In order to have life that is lasting, something of far greater power than material bread is needed. The Word of God furnishes that bread of life, and it is necessary for them to give heed to his Word in order to find the way to life. God’s rules are the same with regard to all intelligent creatures. There is but one way for any human creature to receive life everlasting. God does not change, neither do his rules change. Being the same at all times, they apply now to every one who seeks to be guided in the way to life.
2	The angels are far superior to men. The angels can live forever only by being obedient to the Word of God. Concerning the angels it is written: “Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.”—Ps. 103: 20.
3	Human creatures that voluntarily agree to do the will of God and whom God receives by and through Christ Jesus, and to whom he gives the promise that they shall be members of “the body of Christ” and reign with Christ Jesus, can attain to life everlasting in heaven only by giving heed to and obeying the Word of God. The rule, therefore, is the same concerning them as applies to the angels. All persons who enter into a covenant with Jehovah with the hope of life, either in heaven or on earth, are governed by the same rules. Concerning all such the Lord Jesus prayed to Jehovah in these words, which apply primarily to the spiritual class, but also to all of his covenant people, to wit: “Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.”—John 17: 17.
4	At the present day the Lord Jesus Christ, in obedience to his Father’s commandment, is gathering
unto himself his “other sheep”, who shall in due time form the “great multitude” (Rev. 7: 9-17) and whom the Lord will use to carry out his mandate to “fill the earth”. (Gen. 1: 28; 9:1) Such “other sheep” of the Lord are required to come under the same rule of God as applies to the spiritual class and to the angels in heaven, insofar as it pertains to their receiving life. They must live, as Jesus stated, “by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God” (Matt. 4:4); and, since Jesus quoted this from the law of God announced by Moses, this is further evidence that it applies at all times to all who are seeking the way to life.
5	Demons have seduced and debauched human creatures since the time of Eden. Now in these last days the demons are seducing and debauching the entire human creation, and the only exceptions thereto are those persons who devote themselves to and faithfully obey the Lord God. Today many persons who desire to live are seeking the true guide to life; and for the aid of such The Watchtower publishes what follows herein. If the people now on earth who are of good-will toward God would find the way to life everlasting they must be led by the true guide, which is God’s Word.
6	The will of Almighty God expressed to his creatures is his Word and constitutes the true guide, which directs mankind into the way of life everlasting. Jehovah God sent Jesus to the earth to proclaim his expressed will, and this he did for the purpose of guiding men in the right way. The message which Jesus declared was and is not his own, but is that which proceeds from the mouth of Almighty God. Jesus said: “For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting; whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.”—John 12:49.50.
7	As further proof that this is the Word of God Jesus said: “My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.” (John 7:16) That express will of God which Jesus uttered was and is the truth, and concerning such Jesus says: “Thy word is truth.”
163
164	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
FALSE GODS
‘ The “science of evolution” is offered as a guide for man, but that guide is absolutely false so far as furnishing to man a guide to life everlasting. It is based entirely on the theories and conclusions of men, and is therefore without any sure foundation. Says The Encyclopedia Americana, Volume 10, under the title “Evolution”, the following: “The history of evolution clearly reveals that the evolution idea is the result of a long evolution itself; it is impossible to say just when the idea came first into its more primitive form of being, or just when its principal modifications or accretions occurred, or when its present form was finally determined. In tracing the history of the unfolding of the evolution idea we shall find that the conspicuous achievements in connection with it have not been the discovery of absolute newness, but the recognition and determination and general establishment of the important ideas and conception germs among the host offered. . . . First, a stage of dim suggestion and pure speculation with little reference to facts; second, a stage of the statement of a working hypothesis to explain certain facts; and, third, the proof or demonstration of the law by facts. These stages can be recognized in the history of evolution. The first corresponds with the period of the Greek philosophers; the second with the postGreek, pre-Darwinian period; and the third with the Darwinian and post-Darwinian period.”
’ Applying the theory of evolution to man the evolutionists quote from Aristotle as follows: “Man is the highest point of one long and continuous ascent.” Thus it is seen that the theory of evolution is based wholly upon the opinions of men and the theory has been handed down from one generation to another by men wise in their own conceits. The evolution theory is flatly contradicted by the Word of Almighty God, which shows that evolution is a false guide.
10	Religion is offered as a guide to man. Religion is also a false guide. There are many kinds of religion, all claiming to be proper guides, but all are false. Religion, originated with the demons, of which Satan is the chief. Religion brought about the destruction of the old world by the flood of waters. Thereafter religion was organized on earth by human dictators acting under the influence and power of demons. Concerning religion the Almighty God specifically warned the Israelites that religion would ensnare them and bring about their destruction. (Deut. 7:16) Religion did bring about their destruction, exactly as God foretold and warned them: “And they served their idols; which were a snare unto them.”—Ps. 106: 36.
11	The Pharisees practiced and taught religion to the people, doctrines which had been handed down
by tradition from one generation to another, even though those men claimed to be servants of God. They had yielded to the influence of demons and fallen into the Devil’s net. To them Jesus declared that their religious teachings were of the Devil and that by their traditional teachings they had made the Word of God of none effect amongst his covenant people. (Matt. 15:1-9) Thus Jesus showed that religion is a false guide for men.
12	The earthly religious organization today that exercises the greatest amount of influence and power over the people is that old organization of the Hierarchy operating from Vatican City. Those who compose that Hierarchy organization claim to have the Bible, but they do not teach the Bible to the people, but, on the contrary, attempt to keep the people from personal study of the Word of God. They claim that the pope is the sole interpreter of the Scriptures. The pope is a human creature, therefore a private one insofar as the Scriptures are concerned; and it is written in the Bible that no human authority can interpret the Scriptures. God alone is His interpreter. (2 Pet. 1: 20) The Hierarchy teaches the people the doctrines of “purgatory”, “torment,” “immortality of all souls,” and like doctrines, which find no support whatsoever in the Bible and are the mere opinions of men handed down from one generation to another. The venerable Cardinal Gibbons, recognized in his time as authority amongst those of the Hierarchy, in his book The Faith of Our Fathers, page 208, states that these doctrines find their authority in the tradition of the early fathers of the Catholic organization. This is proof that the teachings of the doctrines above mentioned are traditional and are not founded in the Scriptures. That mighty religious organization, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, prevents the common people from studying the Bible, whereas the Lord’s Word says that all who would know the way to life must study to show themselves approved unto God, rightly dividing and applying his Word.—2 Tim. 2:15.
19	To the Jewish religionists, who were teaching tradition, Jesus said: “Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. I receive not honour from men. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.”—John 5:39-42.
14	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has the reputation extending over a long period of years of destroying the Bible that the people might be kept in ignorance of what God has to say to them. A striking example of very recent date follows: Spain is controlled by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Its dictator is a part of the Hierarchy. In 1940 the British and Foreign Bible Society, of London, sent a large
3THE WATCHTOWER.
June 1, 1941
consignment of Bibles to Spain for distribution amongst the people. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy dictator seized those Bibles and destroyed them. October 6,1940, the New York Times published these facts in its first edition of that date, but after that first edition a powerful influence caused the same to be deleted from all other subsequent editions. A magazine in New York published the following comment concerning the same:
“The Bible in Spain. Protestants everywhere, and particularly those who are becoming more and more careful lest by any semblance of protesting they hurt the feelings of their Roman Catholic friends, would do well to ponder the fate of 110,000 copies of the Bible, including Testaments, which the British and Foreign Bible Society sent to Spain recently for distribution.
“By order of the Spanish Government, which is strongly Roman Catholic, the entire shipment was confiscated and pulped for the making of cellulose!
“Spain, as everybody knows, has had an unenviable reputation for Bible destruction in years gone by, but this wholesale pulping of a hundred thousand copies is perhaps the most glaring example of open hostility to the Book that history records. And it occurred in 1940!
“It is exceedingly interesting to note, moreover, that this report, cabled from London, appeared in the early morning edition of the New York Times of October 6, but was deleted from the second and following editions. Who ordered that it be cut out? What invisible censorship tried to prevent this highly significant item of news from reaching the people of this Protestant country?
“Can anybody guess?”—Signs of the Times, January 21, 1941.
15	The people must choose to follow tradition of men and walk on in the darkness concerning the way to life, or to gain knowledge from the Word of God, which points out the only way that leads to life everlasting. The purpose of Watchtower publications is to help the people to make a choice in harmony with God’s Word. The Watchtower is not at all interested in holding up anybody to ridicule. It publishes the truth, and it is the truth of God’s Word that is sharper than a two-edged sword, and which exposes the fallacy of guides that are offered by men.
16	Human theories concerning the way to life are directly in conflict with the Word of Almighty God. Those who desire to live should ignore human theories and give heed to the Word of God. The almighty Jehovah inspired holy men of old to act as his amanuenses and write down the truths given by him for man’s benefit; and concerning this it is written in the Scriptures: “For not at any time was prophecy brought by the will of man, but men from God spoke,
165
being moved by holy spirit.” (2 Pet. 1: 21, Diaglott) “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.”—2 Tim. 3:16,17.
17	The person who desires the approval of God must be guided aright. The Bible, which contains the Word of God, is true and is the correct guide: “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.” (Ps. 119:105) The Bible guides sincere persons to desire and to pray for the most important things that may result to their welfare. God has put such prayers into the mouth of his sincere servants, and one of these prayers is this: “Shew me thy ways, O Lord; teach me thy paths. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me; for thou art the God of my salvation; on thee do I wait all the day. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions; according to thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness’ sake, O Lord.”—Ps. 25:4-7.
18	The sure and unfailing promises of God to such sincere seekers for truth are certain, and God will fulfill those promises; as it is written: “Good and upright is the Lord; therefore will he teach sinners in the way. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.” (Ps. 25:8-10) “For the word of the Lord is right; and all his works are done in truth.” (Ps. 33:4) “For the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting; and his truth endureth to all generations.” (Ps. 100:5) “For thy mercy is great above the heavens; and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds.” (Ps. 108:4) “Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is the truth.”— Ps. 119:142.
18	He who would be wise in things that are right seeks pure knowledge, such as is contained in the Bible: “Wise men lay up knowledge; but the mouth of the foolish is near destruction.” (Prov. 10:14) ‘Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge; but he that hateth reproof is brutish.” (Prov. 12:1) “The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.”—Prov. 18:15.
20	The person who is wise and pursues a wise and prudent course desires to live forever and enjoy all the blessings that God has provided for those who love him. There is but one way to life, and that way is to receive a knowledge of God and Christ Jesus and then obey the commandments of the Lord and continue to follow in the right way: “And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” (John
166
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
17:3) The person that would please God and live must know that Jehovah is the Almighty God and that Christ Jesus is his great Executive Officer, and he must fear to displease God. Such a person begins to acquire the right kind of knowledge. “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge; but fools despise wisdom and instruction.”—Prov. 1: 7.
21	One is foolish to rely upon his own understanding and to ignore the Word of God: “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. Be not wise in thine own eyes; fear the Lord, and depart from evil.” (Proy. 3:5-7) To follow the traditions of men, which are contrary to the Word of God, is to pursue a course of evil.
AUTHENTICITY
22	Worldly-wise men deny the authority of God’s Word. They deny the existence of God. What is the proof that the Bible contains the authentic record of God’s Word? The evidence, which furnishes the conclusive proof, is both circumstantial and direct, and the two kinds of evidence fully corroborate each other. Here the evidence circumstantial and that which is direct will be considered together, and will be found to fully establish the authenticity of the Bible as God’s Word.
23	“The Bible” is the name given to what is written in the sixty-six books bound together and forming one book. It has in reality only one Author, who is God, and its one great purpose is to furnish a guide to man who desires to walk in the way of righteousness and live and to honor his Maker. The “canon” of the Scriptures is the collection or catalogue of the books or writings into one volume. The Book contains sacred writings God has provided, and which Book is called “The Holy Bible”. Such contains the true rule and guide for faithful men. Other writings for which claim has been made as to their genuineness, but which are spurious, are called “the Apocrypha”. The word “canon”, from the classic Greek, means “a straight rod or rule”. It is a measuring rod. As to the Bible, it means the rule of truth. Concerning this sacred rule the inspired apostle wrote: “And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.” (Gal. 6:16; see also 2 Cor. 10:13-16) Without any doubt the spirit of Almighty God directed faithful men to arrange the canon of the Scriptures according to his will. That much could not be said of any other book in existence. All the evidence, when considered together, proves beyond all doubt that the Author of the Holy Scriptures set out in the Bible is Almighty God, whose name is Jehovah, and which name means his purpose toward his creatures.
24	Moses, as a servant and an amanuensis of God, wrote the five books that appear first in order in the Bible. Moses was selected by Jehovah God as his servant to lead the Israelites out of Egypt. At Mount Sinai God took Moses up into the mountain and there dictated to him the fundamental law, which law was written on stone, and which has been translated and recorded in the Bible.
25	The Scriptures disclose that God invites man to reason with him (Isa. 1:18); and the fact that the Creator endowed man with faculties of reason shows that it is proper that man reach a conclusion by process of reasoning in harmony with facts and authority which cannot be disputed. Moses was a learned man, “learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.” (Acts 7: 22) Moses records the fact that God spoke to him and directed him to go into Egypt, saying, “Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.” (Ex. 3:14) “I AM” means the Everlasting One, not the One who was, nor the One who will be, but the One who is. The great I AM made known to Moses his name Jehovah, and this was the first time his name was thus revealed. (Ex. 6:2,3) The general history of the human kind could well have been known to Moses even before God revealed his great truth to Moses and before Moses was selected to go to Egypt, because of the following circumstances, to wit:
28	Adam was the original man, from whom the race sprang. Adam lived 930 years, and lived 300 years of that time after the birth of Enoch, a man whom God approved. Enoch was the father of Methuselah, who lived 969 years. Noah was the third generation from Enoch. He was a grandson of Methuselah and must have received much information from his grandfather. Noah was 600 years old when the flood came. Being devoted to Almighty God, he would certainly gather all the information he could from his forefathers, and hence would have a very accurate account of the race from Adam to Noah’s day. That information he would transmit to his sons.
27	Noah and his sons came out of the ark together, and Noah lived 350 years thereafter. His son Shem lived 502 years after the flood. (Gen. 9:28,29; 11:10,11) Two years after Noah’s death Abraham was born, and therefore Shem and Abraham were on the earth together for a period of 150 years. It is reasonable that Abraham would learn from Shem the facts concerning the human race which Shem had received from his forefathers. Abraham bore the title of ‘father of the faithful’; and since knowledge is necessary to faith, Abraham must have had as the basis of faith the necessary knowledge from the creation of man until his day.
28	Isaac was the beloved son of Abraham and would no doubt receive faithful instruction from his faith
June 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
167
ful father. The favorite son of Isaac was Jacob. (Gen. 28:5-14) Jacob had twelve sons, and he bestowed his greatest affection upon Joseph, evidently by the Lord’s direction. Joseph was a man of great importance in Egypt and would be widely known by almost all of the people of Egypt, and particularly by the Israelites who resided there. Less than fifty years after the death of Joseph Moses was born. When Moses became a man he devoted himself entirely to the Almighty God. It is only reasonable that Moses was thoroughly familiar with the history of his forefathers from the time of Adam to his own time, when God called him to be the deliverer of the Israelites. From the human viewpoint, as shown by the facts and circumstances, Moses was amply qualified to write the history of mankind from the beginning until his own day. Intelligent men have a natural tendency to keep a record of facts and events, and it is but reasonable that Moses had a fund of true information duly set down to be passed on to other generations. So much from the human viewpoint.
28	None of the testimony mentioned here will be accepted by evolutionists or higher critics who have no faith in God. “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.” (Ps. 14:1) A person does not need to say in words, “There is no God”; but by his own conduct or course of action he discloses his secret thoughts. All visible creation testifies to the indisputable fact that there is a Supreme One who is the Creator, the Almighty God.
80	The miraculous birth of Jesus, his teachings, his crucifixion and his resurrection out of death are supported by a multitude of witnesses, all of which establish the fact that Jesus was not an ordinary man, but the Son of Almighty God. A host of heavenly angels bore testimony at the time of the birth of the babe Jesus that he is “Christ the Lord”.—Luke 2: 9-14.
81	The circumstantial evidence of the miraculous birth of Jesus, and the direct testimony delivered by the man Christ Jesus during the three and more years of his ministry, establishes the authenticity of the Holy Scriptures, or Bible, as the Word of Almighty God. After his resurrection by the power of Almighty God, Christ Jesus appeared to his faithful disciples, at which time he confirmed the words which he had spoken to them before his death. At the same time he testified as to the authenticity of what is written in the law and in the prophecies and in the songs which we call “Psalms”. It was then he said: “These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me.”—Luke 24:44.
82	After his ascension into heaven the Lord gave to John, his faithful servant, a revelation of the things that must come to pass: “The Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John.”—Rev. 1:1.
“Jesus Christ is “The Faithful and True Witness”. (Rev. 1:5; 3:14) The testimony of Christ Jesus, therefore, imports absolute verity. Jehovah, the Almighty God, sent his beloved Jesus to the earth to tell the truth, and he told the truth. When standing before the Roman governor, charged with treason, Jesus testified, to wit: “To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.”—John 18: 37.
84	The testimony of Jesus when he was a man on earth is further proof that the Pentateuch, or the first five books of the Bible, were written by Moses at the dictation of Almighty God. (Mal. 4:4; Matt. 8:4; Mark 1:44; 7:10; 12:26; Luke 5:14; John 3:14; 7:19,22,23) After his resurrection out of death, and when Jesus appeared unto his faithful disciples, his testimony to them fully confirmed what he had told them when he was with his disciples: “And beginning at Moses, and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.”—Luke 24: 27.
85	Not only was Moses the servant of Jehovah and used by Jehovah to write the five books first appearing in the Bible, but he was a prophet of Almighty God and foreshadowed Christ Jesus, the great Prophet. The testimony of Jesus confirms this statement, when we note that he said: “Moses . . . wrote of me.” The religious leaders amongst the Jews were opposed to Jesus and, addressing them, he said: “Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me.”—John 5: 45, 46.
88 Not only did he say that Moses had written a portion of the Bible and had written of Christ Jesus, but furthermore he testified: “Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me.”—John 5:39.
87 Moses was a type of Christ Jesus, the great Prophet; which the evidence completely establishes. Addressing his words to the Israelites, the covenant people of God, Moses uttered this prophecy: “The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken.” (Deut. 18:15) That prophecy is fulfilled in Christ Jesus: “For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be
168
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
destroyed from among the people.”—Acts 3: 22, 23.
” Christ Jesus is that great Prophet, who speaks with full authority conferred upon him by his Father, the Almighty God Jehovah. Repeatedly the testimony given by Jesus shows that his Father, the Almighty God, sent Jesus to the earth and that the testimony of Jesus is in exact accord with the will of his Father. (John 6: 38, 39) To his learned critics Jesus said: “My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me." (John 7:16) Jesus always testified to the truth as he was directed by Jehovah.—John 8:28,29,42.
” The holy spirit, which is the invisible power of Almighty God, moved upon faithful men of old to write what is set forth in the prophecies and which is there written according to the will of Almighty God. This is a guarantee that the prophecies are true. The testimony of Jesus confirms the authenticity of the prophecies. Both the acts and the words of Jesus refer specifically to the prophets; which proves that the prophecies written in times of old, as set out in the Bible, are true. Note some of the things which Jesus did in confirming the words of the prophets recorded in ancient times.
40	Early in his earthly ministry he read from the prophecy of Isaiah, to wit: “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the‘acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn.” (Isa. 61:1,2) “And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.” (Luke 4:18,19, 21) Thus he proved the authenticity of Isaiah’s prophecy. Jesus, in fulfillment of a certain portion of Isaiah’s prophecy, healed the sick: “that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.” (Matt. 8:17) Thus he directly applies this prophecy to himself. He repeated the words of the prophet Malachi and applied the same to himself: “For this is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.” (Mal. 3:1; Matt. 11:10) He repeated the prophecy written at Isaiah 42:1-3 and applied the same to himself. (Matt. 12:17-20) From the prophecy of Jonah Jesus quoted, fully testifying to the authenticity of that prophecy. (Matt. 12:39-41) He referred to the prophecy concerning Solomon and the queen of the south and then said: “Behold, a greater than Solomon is here.” (Matt. 12:42) Jesus spoke in parables, “that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,” at Psalm 78: 2: “I will open my mouth in a parable; I will utter dark sayings of old.”—Matt. 13: 31-35.
41	At Matthew 21:4, 5 Jesus quoted with approval other prophecies: Zechariah 9:9 and Isaiah 62:11. Jesus cited with approval the prophecy of Daniel 9:27 and Daniel 11:31. (See Matthew 24:15.) At the same time he spoke of the conditions in the earth that prevailed in the day of Noah and told his hearers that a similar state of affairs would again obtain upon earth in the last days, thus proving the authenticity of the prophecy of Noah and prophesying of “the time of the end”. (Matt. 24:37-39; see also Matt. 27:9-35) Jesus testified as to the authenticity of the law and of all the holy prophets (Matt. 11:13), and stated that upon these the two great commandments of God are based. (Matt. 22: 36-40) Having testified to the authenticity of the law and of the prophets, which are set forth in the Holy Scriptures, and having stated that he received these truths from the Almighty God, his Father, Jesus summed up the matter in these authoritative words: “Thy word is truth.” —John 17:17.
42	For more than three years the twelve apostles of Jesus were personally taught by him. God gave him those apostles, and all except one of them remained faithful. (John 17:6-10) The testimony is abundant that at Pentecost the faithful apostles received the outpouring of the holy spirit of God in fulfillment of the prophecy uttered by Joel. (Joel 2:28; Acts 2:1-21) Inspired and moved by the holy spirit of God, Peter the apostle then and there testified that the Lord God had raised Jesus out of death, and then added: “God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ”; and at the same time cited the prophecy foretelling that great and marvelous act of God. (Acts 2:31-36) Later the apostle Peter wrote concerning the prophets: “Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy spirit.”—2 Pet. 1:20,21; see also 2 Sam. 23:2.
45	Paul the apostle, who was made a special ambassador of the Lord Jesus Christ and who was anointed and filled with the holy spirit, under inspiration of the holy spirit testified concerning the authenticity of the Scriptures in these words: “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.”—2 Tim. 3:16,17.
PROPHECY
44	The prophecies recorded in the Holy Scriptures are the most conclusive circumstantial evidence of the authenticity of the scriptures set forth in the Bible. A human could not foretell with accuracy
June 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
169
events coming to pass in the long-distant future. All true prophecy proceeds from the Almighty God, Jehovah. He is perfect in wisdom and knows the end from the beginning: “Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.” (Acts 15:18) It was the great Jehovah, the Eternal One, who caused these prophecies to be written according to his will.
45	The true prophet of God is one who speaks as he is directed by the power of Jehovah to speak. He does not utter man’s message, but utters God’s message. Christ Jesus is the great Prophet of Jehovah, who speaks with authority from his Father. True prophecy is recorded authoritative words declaring things that must come to pass in future days. It appears that at the time of uttering the prophecies the men who uttered or recorded them did not understand the meaning thereof. But in his own due time God makes known to righteous men the meaning of such prophecies. This is proved by the words of Jesus addressed to his disciples. He had told them what the future years would bring forth, particularly with reference to the end of the world. He instructed them concerning the holy spirit, which God would send after Jesus ascended into heaven, and which he did send upon his faithful servants at Pentecost. During his last days on earth with his disciples Jesus said to them: “And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe.”—John 14: 29.
46	That which stands out most prominently in the Bible is its teaching concerning the kingdom of God, and because of its paramount importance Jesus instructed his followers that they should always pray for the coming of that kingdom. (Matt. 6:9,10) It is God’s kingdom, and necessarily all prophecy concerning that kingdom must proceed from the Almighty God. Christ Jesus is the duly appointed and anointed King of the kingdom of God. All the prophets of God foretell the coming of that kingdom and the King, and point forward to that day as one of greatest importance.
47	When man was in Eden Jehovah God uttered the first prophecy. (Gen. 3:14-17) Thereafter he used men who had wholly devoted themselves to God’s service to utter prophecy and write it down at his dictation. Under inspiration of the holy spirit God caused Peter to utter the words of prophecy concerning the great King, Christ Jesus, and then to say: “Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.”—Acts 3:24; 3:20-26.
48	Over a period of practically four thousand years men of old who were devoted to God and who prophesied according to God’s will foretold the coming of Christ Jesus the Messiah. Not only did they fore
tell his coming, but they recorded the minute details of the place where he would be born, his ministry, his temptation, his persecution, his suffering, his ignominious death, and his resurrection and exaltation. Such wisdom could proceed only from the Almighty God. The fact that those prophecies were fulfilled exactly as foretold proves the authenticity of the same beyond any question of doubt. (For further discussion of the prophecies see the book Prophecy.)
49	Prophecy of God cannot be understood by men who have no faith in God and in Christ. Such men are blind to the truth. A man who has no faith in God and does not believe God’s Word cannot understand the Bible. Such men relyaipon their own learning and walk on in the dark. Such men class themselves as “higher critics” and as evolutionists and base their arguments upon the “science” of evolution. Concerning them God says: ‘They are fools.’ (Ps. 14:1) In these latter days the colleges teach evolution concerning man, his creation, and his development, and ignore entirely the Word of God. They are wise in their own conceits, and concerning such the Lord in his Word says: “He taketh the wise in their own craftiness; and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong. They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the noonday as in the night.” (Job 5:13,14) “The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken; lo, they have rejected the word of the Lord; and what wisdom is in them?”—Jer. 8: 9.
50	Men are imperfect, and their theories are like^ wise imperfect. Men and their theories die, but the Word of God endures for ever: “The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it; surely the people is grass. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever.”—Isa. 40: 7, 8.
81	Peter walked with the Lord and learned of him, and, inspired by the spirit of God, he wrote: “For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away: but the word of the Lord en-dureth for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you.” (1 Pet. 1: 24, 25) Another inspired apostle testifies: “And the world pass-eth away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.”—1 John 2:17.
UNTO LIFE
82	The person who desires to live seeks knowledge at the Word of God. He seeks to learn and to do that which is right. The following scripture text expresses the sincere desire of such person: “I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy word. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Order my steps in thy word; and let
170
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
not any iniquity have dominion over me.”—Ps. 119:101,105,133.
“ The person who ignores the Word of God cannot receive life everlasting. ‘Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed; but he that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded. The law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.” (Prov. 13:13,14) If that person desires to avoid that which defiles and leads to destruction he is diligent to seek information from God’s Word. “Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way! By taking heed thereto according to thy word. With my whole heart have I sought thee; 0 let me not wander from thy commandments. Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.” “Thy testimonies are wonderful; therefore doth my soul keep them. The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple.”—Ps. 119:9-11,129,130.
COMPLETE
“ The Word of God is complete and needs nothing to be added to or taken away therefrom. God is the fountain of life, and his Word points out the way to life: “Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you.” (Deut. 4:2) “Every word of God is pure; he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him. Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.” (Prov. 30: 5, 6) “For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: and if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.”—Rev. 22:18,19.
55	The Pharisees, and the modern-day religionists also, take from the Scriptures what God has said and in the place thereof substitute their own words and the traditions of other men. Thus they make the Word of God of none effect, detrimental to the interest of the people who give heed to them, and hence all are headed for destruction.—Mark 7: 5-13.
S6	The wise person is one who follows the guide which God has provided for him. That person may be unlearned in things of this world, but if he seeks righteousness and meekness at the mouth of God he becomes wiser than the learned religionists who attempt to teach the people their theories: “Thou, through thy commandments, hast made me wiser than mine enemies [than my religious teachers]: for they are ever with me. I have more understanding than all my teachers; for thy testimonies are my
meditation. I understand more than the ancients; because I keep thy precepts.”—Ps. 119: 98-100.
SI “For what if some did not believe! shall their [evolutionists, higher critics and religionists’] unbelief make the faith of God without effect! God forbid: yea,let God be true, but every man a liar.”-Rom. 3:3,4.
SURE
68 Jehovah gives full assurance to men that his Word shall not return unto him void, but shall be fully and completely performed and fulfilled. Such assurance is given that those who put their trust in him may have a sure anchorage for their hope: “For as the rain cometh down, and the snow, from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void; but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.” (Isa. 55:10,11) “Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us; which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and sted-fast, and which entereth into that within the vail.” (Heb. 6:17-19) “Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.”—Matt. 24: 35.
SPIRITUAL FOOD
50 Those in a covenant with God to do his will must have food for the mind. God has furnished such food in abundance, and every word uttered by the Lord is truth and food for the mind: “Princes [worldly rulers] have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in awe of thy word. I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.” (Ps. 119:161, 162) “Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart; for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts.”—Jer. 15:16.
40 The “mountain of the Lord” symbolically pictures his kingdom, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and which capital organization is called “Zion”. “Jerusalem” stands for all of Jehovah’s organization: “But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it. And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the law
June 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
171
shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.”—Mic. 4:1, 2.
61	Because religionists and evolutionists teach the people the doctrines of men and multitudes give heed to such teachings and disregard God’s Word, there is a famine now in the land amongst such for the hearing of the truth: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land; not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord.”—Amos 8:11.
62	Therefore Jehovah God has risen up and sends forth his witnesses to carry his message of truth from house to house to all those who hunger for the truth, that they may have opportunity to hear and to find the way to life. The prophecy of Amos 8:11 is now being fulfilled, and at the same time the prophecy of Isaiah 28: 21 is being fulfilled. Jehovah is doing
his “strange work”, and he gives his humble and faithful people a part in that work. This work of testifying to the name and to The Theocratic Government of Jehovah must be completed, and then quickly will follow his “strange act”, which means the destruction of Satan’s organization. The people must choose between the leadership of men, such as religionists and evolutionists, and the perfect guide, Jehovah, and his Word. Here the words of Joshua, who was a type of Christ Jesus, are appropriate: “And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.” (Josh. 24:15) Choose and follow the true Guide, and live!
"RICH MEN, WEEP AND HOWL”
•• O TO now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your
I ’▼miseries that shall come upon you.” To whom are * these words of the apostle James, at chapter five, verse one, addressed? Manifestly to those who are opposed to the kingdom of righteousness, the ideal government, The Theocracy of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus. For long students of the Bible have considered the “rich men” as applying to the banking interests of the world, notably Jewish bankers, but there seems to be another application, and that from the ecclesiastical viewpoint.
While there are some men of great material wealth identified with the religionist systems of “Christendom”, and while it is true that some of these men have been instrumental in the operations and schemes working to the material detriment of their fellow men, it is still more true that there have been spiritual riches entrusted to the custody of a class of mighty ones in the spiritual field who have used such to the great detriment and oppression of the followers of Christ Jesus. It is not probable that the materially wealthy are the men exclusively referred to as “rich men”. The above quoted words of the apostle James apply specifically to the clergy, the leaders and mighty men of the so-called “church”, both Catholic and Protestant. In support thereof the following is cited.
Addressing his disciples, and manifestly intending the near-by religious Pharisees to hear his speech, Jesus said: “No servant can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” And the record adds: “And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these things; and they derided him.” (Luke 16: 13,14) Those words of Jesus galled the religious Pharisees, because they understood that they were guilty of the very things about which Jesus spoke. They had been and were unfaithful to Jehovah God and their covenant with Him.
The Pharisees then occupied a position of great ease and comfort as compared to what the common people had.
Their place corresponded with the position of the clergymen of the big religious organizations of the present time, which affords them ease, creature comforts, and much power among the people. As the Pharisees, compared with the common people, were thus rich, likewise the clergymen of the big religious organizations of the present time are rich. They were “covetous” or “lovers of money”. (Rotherham’s translation) In them was the “root of all evil”. (1 Tim. 6:10) Such was the condition of the Pharisees, and in this they pictured a class that occupy a similar position in these “the last days” and that are described by the Scriptures as being covetous and entirely unfaithful. (2 Tim. 3- 1, 2) The Pharisees, hearing the words of Jesus, attempted to justify their position, and this they manifestly did that they might hold the support of the common people and continue to enjoy without interruption their condition of ease and comfort. Jesus, knowing their minds and hearing what they had to say, answered their words of derision and said to them: “Ye are they which justify yourselves before men , but God knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God ” —Luke 16:15.
Their self-exaltation among men made them an abomination in the sight of God. Those religionists feared that men would not think so highly of them as they desired, and, having a desire for the approval of men and fearing to lose the same, they had been led into the snare of the Devil. (Prov. 29:25) They had become religionists and were therefore an abomination in the sight of God.
Jesus’ words thus identify the Pharisees and the modernday class that they picture as being the “rich man” in the prophetic parable which Jesus forthwith delivered to his disciples and in the presence of the Pharisees, to wit: “There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day: and there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man’s table: moreover the dogs
172
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
came and licked his sores. And it came to pass, that . . . the rich man also died, and was buried; and in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments.”—Luke 16:19-23.
This parable had its small-scale or miniature fulfillment and application to the religionists of the Jewish people. The Jews, as a people, were in a covenant with God. They were favored above all other peoples of the earth, because God had said of them: “You only have I known of all the families of the earth.” (Amos 3:2) The chief men among the Jews were the clergy, particularly the Pharisees, who were bound by the covenant to teach the people the commandments of God and themselves to obey those commandments. The Pharisees having set before them the privileges and blessings of the promised kingdom were in line to be truly rich, conditioned upon their faithful obedience to God. As stated at Proverbs 10:22: “The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich.” Instead of obeying God’s commandments and in due time receiving the proper riches, they preferred to receive the favor and the power and the plaudits that might come to them by ruling over and dominating the people and receiving what the world might bestow upon them. They were “high-minded” and “trusted in uncertain riches”. (1 Tim. 6: 9,10,17) Among the favored Jews was Judas Iscariot. Jesus had chosen him as one of his disciples and had assigned Judas to a responsible place in His company. Judas was in line for great heavenly riches, but he preferred to have things visible that might enrich him among men, and, falling into the snare of the Devil, Judas betrayed his Master Christ Jesus, and Judas was therefore named by Him as “the son of perdition”. —John 17:12.
That which came to pass upon the Jews, particularly the religious element of that people, constituted types or prophetic patterns of larger things to come to pass in our day, and those things concerning the Jews were “written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come”. (1 Cor. 10: 6,11) Those now opposed to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and yet falsely claiming to have God for their Father do collectively make up “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition.” (2 Thess. 2:1-3, Am. Rev. Ver.) The “man of sin” and “son of perdition” of today is a composite body made up of men who are in an implied covenant to do God’s will or in an actual covenant to do so. Such “man of sin”, “son of perdition,” includes clergymen, the “elective elders” of congregations, and particularly those classed by the Lord Jesus as the “evil servant”; all of whom conspire together to do injury to God’s Theocratic organization and persecute his people. (See Matthew 24:24,48-50; 2 Thess. 2:9.) All of that composite body are the instrument of the Devil and opposed to God’s kingdom. All such are religionists and practice in some form what is improperly labeled “the Christian religion”. The clergy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy take the lead among such religionists and are given to bombastic claims, while others likewise boast and lay claim to that which they do not have, and all such render evil to Jehovah’s faithful witnesses, and all are pictured by Judas and are all in one and the same class, their end being the same.
Jesus describes the “rich man”, but does not give his name. Probably that was due to the fact that the class pictured is made up of God’s enemies who are not worthy of
a name. The rich man’s description fits the class above mentioned. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy of control are rich in this world’s goods literally, and they, together with others who practice religion for temporary gain, enjoy many material riches of this world, and the plaudits and honor of men, and they have become high-minded and heady. They are, as 2 Timothy 3:1-5 describes them, the class arising in these evil days, being ‘lovers of their own selves, boasters, proud, blasphemers, covenant-breakers, de-spisers of that which is good’, and they persecute those who proclaim the Kingdom message. While claiming to serve God, they exhibit a godlike attitude but deny the power of godliness. They draw near to God with their mouth only, but take a course of action contrary to God’s commands. They follow the traditions of men, which they teach and by which they make the Word of God of none effect. (Isa. 29:9-13; Matt. 15:7-9) They are hypocrites and an abomination in God’s sight. The deceitfulness of worldly riches (that is, what this world can give) chokes them off from the truth of God’s Word. (Luke 8:14; Rom. 3:1, 2) They are greedy and covetous, and love ease and the approval of men, and therefore are blinded to God’s purpose.—Isa. 56:10-12.
Such ones class themselves as being rich, like the Laodi-ceans, who say: “I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing.” (Rev. 3:17) Concerning such religionists, particularly the leaders that go to make up the great organization symbolized as “Babylon”, it is written: “How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her.”—Rev. 18:7.
Jesus described the “rich man” as wearing purple. The modern-day “rich man” is wealthy enough to buy royal robes. The rich man in the parable is described as wearing fine linen, which, when applied to God’s faithful ones, is a symbol of the righteousness of saints. (Rev. 19:8,14) The modern-day “rich man” is self-righteous, but does not possess any of the righteousness of the saints. The “rich man” class ignore the true riches of God: “For they being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God.” (Rom. 10:3) They have looked to self and to self-interest, and continue to exalt themselves and push aside the “other sheep” of the Lord, as pictured by the beggar named Lazarus. They do nothing to bring comfort to those who are poor and seeking the way to life.
Further addressing them the apostle James says: “Your [claimed] riches are corrupted and your garments are moth-eaten.” (5:2) That there are two kinds of treasure Jesus showed when he said: “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth [tangible things, such as material wealth, or intangible things, such as the emoluments, honors, preferments of men, reputation, etc.] where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven [treasures given by God, who is in heaven] where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.”—Matt. 6:19, 20.
Opportunity was given to lay up the incorruptible heavenly treasure, but the ecclesiastical systems, particularly the clergy class, have preferred the earthly treasure.
June 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
173
They have spurned the invitation to walk humbly and faithfully in Jesus’ footsteps and, like him, be witnesses for Jehovah, but have doted on great buildings, costly furnishings, paid choirs, gorgeous robes, numerous followers whom they count by the millions, great drives for money and members, plaudits of men, political preferment, titles, sumptuous meals, ease and comfort. As described at Jeremiah 5: 26-31, they, to accomplish their purpose in laying up the earthly riches, have preached falsely and have made themselves rulers by the same fraudulent means; they have grown fat, and they shine, and verily they have their reward.
Jesus warned against the riches which “moth and rust doth corrupt”. To the “rich men” the apostle James says: “Your riches are corrupted and your garments are moth-eaten.” The word rendered corrupt means “putrefy, perish” (Strong’s Con.)- and truly such riches are putrefied and are perishing. A moth-eaten garment is one full of holes, disclosing nakedness. The official “robe of righteousness”, symbolic of God’s approval, now covers the faithful remnant of Jehovah’s anointed witnesses. (Isa. 61:10) The religious clergy, assuming to wear that beautiful robe, have neglected the Kingdom requirements, and now the covering of their own righteousness is moth-eaten and their nakedness is exposed, nevertheless they boast of their riches. To such the Lord Jesus says: “Thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and know-est not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor [spiritually], and blind, and naked.”—Rev. 3:17.
Furthermore James 5: 3 adds: “Your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you.” Canker is a corroding rust that is destructive. Now, the rusting of literal gold and silver would be no cause of God’s pronouncing a severe judgment against men. These words “gold and silver” apply spiritually to the divine truths committed into the custody of the church, truths which the clergy by neglect and willful misrepresentation have permitted to become .obscured as by corroding rust. “The words of the Lord are pure words; as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times.” (Ps. 12:6) “The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold ” (Ps. 19: 9,10) The divine truths so brightly, beautifully and wonderfully set forth in the Word of God, the clergy have permitted to become covered with the canker and rust of traditions of men, higher criticism, evolution and humanitarianism, until by reason thereof the divine truths are hidden from many honest minds who would have heeded the truth had they been taught.
The apostle James adds that in the day of retribution “the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire”. Silent, but potent, is the witness of the rust at this very hour.
Then declares the Lord’s servant (James 5:3,4) : “Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth; and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth [of armies].” To apply these words exclusively to the owners of literal fields of grain seems hardly permissible. Many are the farmers who own their own fields, and nowadays they pay liberal wages to those who aid in
the reaping time. The courts of the land are always open to compel any defrauder to pay, and in most jurisdictions, particularly in the United States, nothing is exempt from execution to pay the wages duly earned by labor. But when the words of James are considered from the ecclesiastical viewpoint, the entire question is clarified. The great Master said: “The field is the world.” (Matt. 13:38) Who have claimed to be owners of the field? The clergy, the “rich men” themselves, by their conduct answer: 'We are possessed of all spiritual wisdom, and to us has been committed the responsibility of looking out for the spiritual welfare of the world. No one else is ordained to preach or teach. We are the watchman of the flock, and we alone are entitled to the fleece. What the world needs is more religion !’
But did these engage in the ‘reaping’ ? No! Those who have followed the example of the Lord Jesus and his apostles and have gone “from house to house” and called upon the people at their homes and offered to them the message of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus have been the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses and their faithful companions of good-will.—Matt. 10:12-14; Acts 20: 20; 2:46
Were these “labourers” in the field entitled to any hire or wage from the rulers in the religious systems? Yes, they were; for the reason that these mighty men openly pretended to be the representatives of the Lord Jesus and to be owners of the field. Does not Romans 13:8 read: “Owe no man any thing, but to love one another; for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law” ? Jesus specifically commanded his followers to love one another even as he loved us. That would mean that each one who claims to be a Christian owes it to his brother to love, encourage, comfort and help him. The faithful laborers in the field expected to receive buffetings from the world; but they were justly entitled to receive from all who professed faith in Christ the wage of encouragement, comfort and love. Had the clergy paid their hire or wage, many of the congregations would have paid the laborers a like wage. But, says the apostle: ‘You have by resort to fraudulent means kept back the just wage of the reaper.’ And how did they do this ? By fraudulently representing to the peoples of “Christendom” that Jehovah’s witnesses were not ordained to preach and that they were ignorant, dishonest and vicious persons, yea, even enemies to the peoples, and should be shunned and persecuted. Notwithstanding this, the loyal followers of the Master pushed on with their work in the field. Often tired, weary and footsore, despised of men and mobbed and persecuted, they toiled on, almost fainting. Many times when a word of loving-kindness and encouragement would have helped, it was not forthcoming. The bitter tears of sorrow often burned their cheeks; and they cried aloud, and, says the apostle, ‘the cries of them are entered into the ears of the Lord of heavenly armies,’ who bides his own time for the day of reckoning.
Turning again to the same class of “rich men”, James 5: 5 says: “Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.” This means they have practiced self-indulgence to the reckless and utter disregard of other Christians, continuing it even to the day of God’s vengeance. In terse language Isaiah 56:10 describes them, saying: “His watchmen are blind; they are all ignorant, they are all dumb
174
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter.”
This company, which the Lord calls hypocrites, the apostle (James 5:6) charges with a grave crime, saying: “Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you.” Prior to the writing of this epistle by James the clergy of the Jews had caused the Lord Jesus to be hanged on the tree on Calvary. Moved by the same wicked designs, the wicked Edomite King Herod, the ancient prototype of the modern religious element among whom the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is chief, imprisoned and killed John the Baptist, a righteous man. John prophetically pictured a class of faithful Christians who at the end of the world, where we now are, were, because of obedience and loyalty to the Lord God, temporarily restrained of liberty and rendered useless during and for some time after the World War period. “Killed” means rendered inactive, helpless, or useless. By the sword of war they “killed” the witness work in 1918, and also some of the witnesses, as symbolically pictured at Revelation 11:7-10. But yet more recently than that, to wit, during the year 1940 and since, has occurred the worst persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, Christians, in the nation’s history, and at the instance of the religionists.
And what may we expect to follow shortly? James 5:1 answers: ‘Come now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries which will soon be upon you.’ (Weymouth’s trans.)
To paraphrase: ‘Judgment has begun at the house of God, and now it shall shortly come to you. You have lived selfishly, in utter disregard of the rights and welfare of the church of Christ. You have heaped up earthly riches, but these are now worthless. Your titles are empty and meaningless. The divine truths you have permitted to be covered and hid by a corroding rust Your nakedness is apparent before God and man. You have defrauded the humble and faithful laborers in the Lord’s witness work. You could not feed God’s people, and you have conspired to prevent others from doing so. All these things are witness against you, condemning you, and they shall eat your flesh as it were fire.’
In the 17th and 18th chapters of The Revelation the “Lord of Sabaoth [armies]” vividly describes the fall of these evil religious systems, to wit, antitypical Babylon, and the howling and weeping of the “rich men” thereof. Shortly the people, enlightened as to the facts and motives of the wicked religious system, will unite to complete her destruction : “And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his will.” (Rev. 17:16,17) Then the “rich men” shall “weep and mourn”, because the hour of retribution is at hand. (Rev. 18:11) Jehovah declares his determination to “rise up to the prey” and pour out his indignation. (Z'eph. 3:8) The Lord Jesus declares that this expressed indignation of Jehovah at the battle of Armageddon will be such as man has never before known, but it will be the last. (Matt. 24: 21, 22) “Be patient therefore, brethren.”—Jas. 5: 7.
WHO BEARS UP THE GOVERNMENT?
THE CHILD had not been born when the prophet Isaiah wrote: “For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end.” (Isa. 9: 6, 7) The words he wrote applied to a future time; hence these words constituted a prophecy. Isaiah could not understand the full meaning or import of his own words, nor could any man prior to the giving of God’s holy spirit on the day of Pentecost following Jesus’ resurrection. Isaiah did not know about that. Why, then, did he say, “Unto us a child is born” ? Whom did he mean by “us”? Primarily he meant the natural house of Israel, which house then constituted God’s chosen people, whom God had selected and set aside for his own purposes. However, “Israel after the flesh” foreshadowed spiritual Israel, “the Israel of God,” and Isaiah’s prophecy had reference more to the latter. Although spoken as in the present tense as though pertaining to the time when Isaiah was serving in the office of prophet, his words concerning the “child” refer to some future time. The time must come when this prophecy should be fulfilled.
In the exercise of his loving-kindness Jehovah God made provision for the redemption of humankind by payment of a ransom. “Ransom” means “an exact corresponding price”; that is to say, an eye for an eye,- a tooth for a tooth,
and a life for a life. Such is the statement of the divine law, at Exodus 21: 23, 24 and Deuteronomy 19: 21. An angel could not become man’s redeemer, because angels are greater than men and of a different form of life. “For thou hast made him [man] a little lower than the angels.”—Ps. 8: 5.
The term “incarnate” means to be invested with a body of flesh, to be clothed with flesh. An incarnated creature would therefore be a spirit creature who is merely for the time being clothed with a human form, but is at the same time in truth and in fact a spirit, and not a man. The incarnation theory is that Jesus, when he was on this earth, was a divine person who walked around in human body; and that it was only this human body that died. It is easy to be seen that an incarnated creature could not provide the ransom price. The one who furnishes a “life for a life” in behalf of the right to life that Adam forfeited for his offspring must be one that not only appears as a human creature perfect in organism, but that must really be a human creature and have the right to life as a human creature He must exactly correspond with Adam before Adam sinned.
The one that would provide the ransom price for such of Adam’s offspring as would believe and obey must therefore be just exactly equal to the perfect Adam. For this reason, as recorded at Psalm 49:7, upon earth there was none that could, meet these requirements nor give to God a ransom for man. But in due time God sent forth his Son,
June 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
175
“made of a woman,” which means that he was “made flesh” and dwelt among men. (Gal. 4:4; John 1:14) Of course, Jehovah God and his only-begotten Son, The Logos, or Word, were at all times higher than the angels; God is without beginning, and the Logos was the “beginning of the creation of God” and the active agent of Jehovah God in the creation of all things that were created.—John 1:1, 2.
At Hebrews 2:9 it is written: “But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour: that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.” Of necessity the one providing the redemption for mankind must be a man, not more nor less; otherwise he could not be an exact corresponding price That Jesus was a man is further testified to by the apostle, at 1 Timothy 2: 5, 6: “For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.”
To provide the ransom price such man must be without sin. But how could he be without sin if brought forth from an imperfect woman? The answer is that Jesus was not begotten of imperfect man, but begotten in the womb of Mary by the power'of Jehovah. (Matt. 1:18) Hence he was born holy, complete, harmless, without sin or iniquity, or otherwise imperfect. The birth of this wonderful Child was necessary in order for God to fulfill his promise concerning man’s redemption. It was necessary for that Child to be born perfect and grow to manhood’s estate in order that he might be the Redeemer. The hope of man for life is entirely dependent upon this great and wonderful event. Without the birth of the perfect One the ransom sacrifice could not have been given.
Jesus was born a Jew. The Jews had tried to establish a desirable government, but had failed. For a long time they were in bondage to other rulers. God had promised by the prophets that a Messiah or Anointed King, the Christ, should come. The Jews were anxious for the coming of the promised Messiah that they might be relieved of their burdens. They knew nothing about the necessity for a ransom sacrifice. Isaiah the prophet prophesied therefore, saying: “Unto us [Jews, and afterward to believing Gentiles] a child is born, unto us a son is given.” This Child now born, being the Son of God, was therefore perfect and able to do the will of God perfectly. God clothed him with power to save to the uttermost.
The prophet Isaiah says further: “And the government shall be upon his shoulder.” Thus he states that the mighty One would bear up the government; and then, in other parts of his prophecy, Isaiah proceeds to tell the Jews and all who would hear and believe that this mighty One not only would be the Governor but would rule in righteousness and bring blessings to the people.
The Jews looked upon Moses as a great leader, upon David as a great king, and upon Solomon as the wisest man of all time; but now, says Isaiah the prophet unto them concerning this Child about whom ,he prophesied, “his name shall be called Wonderful,” meaning thereby that his name would become marvelous, that he would be a worker of miracles, and especially that he would vindicate his Father’s name and that his fame would spread throughout the whole universe and his greatness would far exceed that
of anyone else. The prophet then adds that He shall be called “Counsellor”, which means that he would guide the people aright, advise them and teach them to go in the right way, and would lead them into life and happiness. Isaiah then adds that He would be called “The mighty God”. The Jews would thereby understand that their magistrates before had been called “gods”, or mighty ones (Ex 22: 28, margin), but now this Child, when born, would be One who would receive all power and authority to act for God and in their behalf.
Then the prophet also says that He shall be known as “The everlasting Father”. The term “father” means “giver of life”. Those understanding this prophecy would know that this mighty One would be clothed with power and authority to grant life everlasting to those who would obey In harmony with this Jesus afterwards said: “This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” (John 17: 3) Further, the prophet adds that He shall be known as “the Prince of Peace”. The word “prince” means “governor” or “lord”. This mighty One, then, is to be the rightful governor of the earth. “Unto him shall the gathering of the people be” (Gen. 49:10), and under his righteous reign peace shall be established and never end.—Ps. 72: 7.
It was a great privilege enjoyed by Isaiah to be permitted to foretell the birth of the Redeemer and earth’s rightful Governor. Had he been able then to comprehend the full import of his own words he would doubtless have been overwhelmed with joy. Even greater than his was the privilege of the angels to announce the birth of this mighty One. The apostle Peter clearly intimates that the angels themselves did not understand the full meaning of the birth of Jesus. (1 Pet. 1:12) But they knew it was the outworking of God’s purpose for the vindication of his name and in behalf of mankind, and probably understood it was the beginning of the fulfillment of the prophecy uttered by Isaiah. What they did know thrilled their hearts with joy and they sang praises to Jehovah God: “Glory m the highest unto God! and on earth peace, among men of goodwill.” It was a still greater privilege which Jesus’ disciples enjoyed by being permitted to walk with him and for three and a half years talk with him and hear the gracious words that fell from his lips. They greatly rejoiced when they learned he was the Messiah and the Redeemer.
But now a much greater favor is conferred upon those who are truly consecrated to Jehovah God in being permitted to know that this great and mighty One has taken his power and begun his reign, and in being permitted at this time as Jehovah’s witnesses not only to speak of his birth but to tell forth the goodness of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus and that it is now the time for the beginning of the fulfillment of the prophecy which in God’s due time will result in the complete establishment of peace on earth to men of good-will.
Blessed is the privilege of all who are witnesses for Jehovah God now! As these now look upon the works of Jehovah and his beloved Son and know that Christ Jesus is earth’s rightful Governor and has taken his power and begun his reign, they lift up their voices in song, saying. “Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty ; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints.”-Rev. 15:3.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
A BACK-CALL IN BODENHAM, ENGLAND
“When calling to keep this appointment I was gladly received by the household consisting of a youth of eighteen years and his parents. Part of the lecture ‘Government and Peace’ was played, which they enjoyed, and I left promising to return the following week to let them hear the remainder. The following week, after listening to the remainder, the boy eagerly inquired how he could become an ambassador of the King Christ Jesus. I explained. The following week-end he was engaged in the field work, publishing the Kingdom. Gradually I learned how these people had taken their stand for Jehovah, resulting in being separated from their children. I was shown a news cutting of seven years ago, which read:
‘Attendance Orders Ignored — In a school-attendance ease at Ledbury Police Court on Thursday, it was stated that the defendant----, of Suffield, Bosbury, England, had
ignored two attendance orders made in respect of his son Edward (11) and daughter Linda (9). The bench adjourned the case in respect of the girl, but the boy was sent to an industrial school until he is 16. This, the chairman remarked, was in the interest of the child.’
A few months ago the boy was reunited with his parents; so far the girl has not been reconciled to her parents.
“These good people explained that the only reason the children had been taken away was because of acquiring the books The Harp of God, Creation, and Government, which explained the Scriptures and the way they ought to go Such came in conflict with the school teachings, and the mother paid many an anxious visit to the teachers on this account. The outcome was that Edward and Linda stayed away from school. An order was made against their parents. Two fines were paid. This did not satisfy the authorities. The day came when the children were literally torn from their parents, leaving the mother heartbroken. Now, seven years later, these parents have attended their first W atchtower study, the article under discussion ‘Persecution’. They maintained faith that all things eventually work together for good to the glory and honor of the great Creator, and now their son has been reunited with them and is fully determined to continue his fight for The Theocracy. These three honest hearts now contemplate being immersed by water, thus setting the seal upon their consecration to the almighty heavenly Father.”
“REVEREND” REACTIONS
Roanoke, Va.: “To one of the supposed leading clergymen : ‘Good morning, Reverend --------!’ Harshly: ‘Good
morning’’ ‘This is one of Jehovah’s witnesses presenting you the news concerning The Theocracy.’ Throwing up his hands in horror: ‘I don’t want it. I do not want Jehovah to be my God. I have intelligence enough to read my Bible and get to heaven. I do not want you to bring me any pamphlet. I do not want your human-made stuff’—shutting the door with a bang. I have met him in several homes daily and he knew who I was.”
San Diego, Calif.: “I had two ministers to call on with Theocracy and God and the State. The Adventist accepted his with a smile. The Methodist said: ‘You had better keep them. I know all about that and want nothing to do with it.’ ”
Crooksville, Ohio: “A few days after I was invited by the local Methodist minister to address the Perry County Ministerial Association: they wanted the facts concerning our work and the persecution and wanted this information from one 6f Jehovah’s witnesses so as to get it right. We met at the Methodist church March 17. Five ministers were present; some were ill and could not come. The chairman opened the meeting and prayed they would have no malice or prejudice. It was explained to them that Jehovah’s witnesses began with Abel, etc. This, with all the Scripture citations, consumed about an hour. Then they wanted to ask some questions. The Presbyterian minister wanted to know if we thought none of the church organizations were preaching this Kingdom. Someone asked how we kept our membership, that is, how we listed our members. Jehovah keeps his own book of life: ‘You have many names on your church roll, many of whom are worthless and are not recorded in God’s book of life, while a great number are, no doubt, written in heaven who are not on your books.’ To which the Presbyterian replied: ‘I am inclined to believe that all right.’ The others laughingly agreed. Then they asked why we did not try to convert the heathen, and not bother their members. They wanted to know how Judge Rutherford came to be head of the Watch Tower. They expressed themselves as being for us in' our right to preach the Bible as we understood it. They all took the booklet Theocracy, some almost eagerly.”
IN BOMB-STRUCK BIRMINGHAM
“I called upon this young man in accordance w ith your letter. I took along ‘Government and Peace’ and also some books and magazines. He and his parents listened with rapt attention and expressed approval. I left three Watchtowers and two booklets with him. When I mentioned the witness work he reaffirmed his desire to ‘become an agent’. I arranged to see him the following Saturday. He turned up, having read the literature I left with him, and he accompanied me on the work for two hours. He expressed his delight in doing such work and was keen to turn up to meeting next day. He has promised to take part in a campaign next Saturday. Up to last Sunday he had been a regular churchgoer and communicant. After hearing ‘Government and Peace’ he said: ‘So it’s a mockery to go to church ’’ I said, ‘Yes.’ So he said: ‘I’m going no more!’ ”
INCREASED ACTIVITY DESPITE WAR (BRISTOL)
“This was especially made manifest during the December ‘Courage’ Testimony Period, when a new peak of 164 Theocracy publishers was attained, the previous highest being 140. Having in mind that the Bristol stock of booklets was destroyed along with its Kingdom Hall only one week before the campaign started, and that the city experienced a number of major blitzes during the month, resulting in laying waste by fire and high explosive the shopping districts and to some extent many housing estates, the fact that the quota of ten sets of booklets per publisher was exceeded speaks well of the courage, zeal and unity now existing among the brethren in these last days. The campaign was certainly a joy to all, resulting in a distribution of about 20,000 booklets by the Bristol company and the Pioneer Home.”
178

' V\P * !I'S
* ■
WCHTQWrQ
"They shall know that I am Jehovah.”	
Vol. LXII	Semimonthly	-Ezekiel 35:15. No 12
JUNE IS, 1941	
CONTENTS	
Covenant Obligations	179
Man’s Obligation	179
People for His Name	180
Covenant by Sacrifice	181
His Witnesses .	181
Ordained	1S2
Obey Whom? ..	182
Covenant-Breakers	183
Covenant-Keepers	184
Fear God ..	184
By Sacrifice	18.5
Safe Highway .	187
Who Is Gog? ... .	190
Field Experiences 		192
“Theocratic Ambassadors”	
Testimony Period		. .	178
Opportunity for Service	178
Vacation 		178
“Watchtower” Studies .	178

''Y£AEEM^W/rNE55£5;5AHH JEHCVAHJHATI AMGOp;'-HA4:>fl2
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Ambuboh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:I3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yeably Subscbiption Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be madedirect to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Fobbion Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England Canadian.................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield. N. S. W., Australia
Bouth African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this foumal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The "Watchtower tree upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Bubsoribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“THEOCRATIC AMBASSADORS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
June, for the entire month, is the Period here named. Are you a Theocratic ambassador T You can be, if you take your stand on the side of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and then engage in announcing that government to others. The June Period affords you the opportunity to exercise your ambassadorship. The means provided by the great Theocrat, who sends you forth, is his published Kingdom message, and, during June only, you may offer to the public, on a mere contribution of 35c, a combination of any three bound books published by the Society, excluding the latest books, Religion and Salvation. Prompt advance preparation will be necessary to your most effective part in this Testimony. Any needed references to the local company organized for this service we shall gladly furnish you. May you be able at the end of this month to fill out a good report of work.
OPPORTUNITY FOR SERVICE
The Society may require the service of qualified brethren between the ages of 36 and 50. If you are free to engage in full-time service please write the Society’s office at Brooklyn for a questionnaire.
VACATION
The members of the Bethel family will enjoy their vacation this year from Saturday, August 2, to Wednesday, August 20, inclusive. This will afford them a change from their regular work at headquartens and the opportunity for a larger part in the increasing field work. The factory and office will be closed down during this period, and no books will be shipped nor regular mail answered. Hence all orders for literature should be sent in well in advance of August 2 to receive attention before closing down. Order in sufficient quantity to carry you through the vacation period and the rest of August. Also as little correspondence as possible should be sent to the Society, with the exception of report cards and subscriptions.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 20: “Covenant Obligations,” fl 1-29 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1941.
Week of July 27: “Covenant Obligations,”
fl 30-50 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1941.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	June 15, 1941	No. 12
COVENANT OBLIGATIONS
"My covenant will I not break, nor
TEHOVAH, the Almighty God, has announced his I purpose concerning man and has caused that an-J nounced purpose to be recorded in the Bible, which is his Word. Jehovah’s expressed purpose concerning man constitutes or is God’s covenant concerning man. A “covenant” is a binding promise, or a declaration of purpose, to do or not to do a certain thing. When God makes a covenant he binds himself to keep it faithfully. When God made known to Abraham his purpose to bless obedient men, that declaration constituted God’s covenant. In the great and prophetic picture which God caused to be enacted by Abraham and his son Isaac, Abraham pictured God himself and Isaac pictured the beloved Son of God, the Seed of promise. On that occasion Jehovah God said: “I will richly bless thee, and abundantly multiply thy seed as the stars of the heavens, and as the sand which is on the lip of the sea, that thy seed may take possession of the gate of his foes: so shall all the nations of the earth bless themselves in thy seed.”—Gen. 22:17,18, Rotherham.
2 The above-quoted statement of Jehovah is properly called “God’s covenant with Abraham”. The statement, being an unconditional one, is properly called a unilateral or one-sided covenant. Nothing that any creature can do would hinder Jehovah God in carrying out his announced purpose. Every expressed purpose of Jehovah concerning man is a covenant of Almighty God, which covenant He performs in his own due time. If God takes a man into covenant with him, that is called a two-sided or bilateral covenant. The obligation rests upon both parties to the covenant to carry that covenant into complete operation according to its terms.
’Jehovah God binds himself to perform all his covenants. His announced word of promise is always the truth, and he always keeps or performs his word. Therefore Jehovah says: “I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46:11) “So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void; but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.” (Isa. 55:11) At all times Jehovah has magnified his word, keeping or performing it faithfully
alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.”—Ps. 89:34.
and completely. Concerning this it is written : “Thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name.”—Ps. 138:2.
4 As Isaac, in the prophetic picture, foreshadowed Christ, the Beloved One of God, so also David, in another prophetic picture, represented the Beloved of Jehovah God, who is Christ and who is the Seed of promise. Jehovah’s covenant to bless men under certain conditions is an unbreakable promise and is certain. As God has made the sun to shine, just so certainly will he carry out and fully perform all the terms of that covenant to make Christ Jesus the Head of The Theocratic Government, from which all blessings shall flow to obedient human creatures. Note that Jehovah says concerning this covenant: “My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.”—Ps. 89: 28, 34.
’ In the exercise of his loving-kindness toward men Jehovah has doubly assured man of his purpose to fully perform His covenant. Not only does he give his word, but he supports and binds his word by his oath. To Abraham he said: ‘By myself have I sworn, In thy seed shall all the nations be blessed.’ (Gen. 22:16-18) “Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.” (Heb. 6:17,18) When a man is taken into covenant with Jehovah God there is left no room or reason for that man to have any doubt about God’s carrying out His part of the covenant.
MAN’S OBLIGATION
• Almighty God makes it impossible for his side of the covenant to fail. Can a man who has been taken into a covenant with God treat his obligations under that covenant lightly and violate them or break them with impunity? God’s Word answers: “Covenant breakers ... are worthy of death.” (Rom.
179
180
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
1:31,32) Jehovah made this matter plain to the Israelites, with whom he had made a covenant. What God there announced to the Israelites is his unchangeable law, and which applies to all people who willfully break covenant with God: “Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments, to a thousand generations; and repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him that hateth him, he will repay him to his face. Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.”—Deut. 7: 9-11.
7	God is faithful in all things he has promised, and he requires faithfulness of all those who undertake to perform an agreement or covenant with him.
WITH WHOM MADE
8	The purpose of Jehovah is a secret to sinful men. Since each announced purpose of Jehovah is a secret, his covenant is a secret to all who are against The Theocracy. What, then, is required of man before he can be taken into covenant with Jehovah? He must fear God. He must believe that God is, and that He is the rewarder of them that diligently seek to serve him. That man must have some knowledge that the Almighty God is Jehovah, the Creator of heaven and earth, the Fountain of life, and the only Giver of life everlasting. He then recognizes Jehovah as the all-powerful one who is just and righteous, and who is entirely unselfish. Believing that all blessings flow from Almighty God, the creature man fears to take any course that would cause him to miss the blessings that God gives. He believes that disobedience to God would cause him to lose God’s favor, and he fears lest he might not receive God’s favor. He desires to be taught of God, that he may go in the right way. He believes he must choose to be for Jehovah or against him, and he fears to choose contrary to the will of God. Concerning such person Jehovah says: “What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.”—Ps. 25:12.
9	The man who fears God, and who with diligence seeks to know and to do the will of God, is led in the right way. Such person begins to have faith; and without faith it is impossible to please God and to receive his blessing. Would man know the purpose of Jehovah? How may he find out that purpose? The Lord answers: “The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will shew them his covenant.”—Ps. 25:14.
10	The man fearing God, diligently seeking the truth, God reveals to that man his purpose. God’s
primary purpose is the vindication of his own great name; not for his own benefit, but in order that his creatures who desire righteousness may choose the way of righteousness and live, to the honor of the great Creator. His announced purpose is to accomplish his will by and through Christ Jesus, his beloved Son, whom God has made Christ and Lord and Executive Officer, and to whom he commits all power in heaven and in earth and whom he commissions to carry out his purpose.
11	Following the rebellion in Eden God announced his purpose to have a seed, designated in the Scriptures as “the seed of Abraham”, which is The Christ, and which seed shall administer blessings to obedient men.—Gal. 3:16, 28, 29.
12	Immediately following the wicked act of Lucifer at Eden God declared his purpose to ‘put enmity between the seed of His woman (His organization) and the seed of Satan’, and further stated that the Seed of God’s organization would in due time completely crush Satan and his seed and vindicate Jehovah’s name. That declaration was an unalterable covenant of Jehovah, which covenant Christ Jesus is now carrying into full operation. From Eden till the present time enmity between God’s organization and the seed of Satan, that is, the Devil’s organization, is made manifest. That enmity will end only by the complete triumph of the Seed of Abraham and the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
PEOPLE FOR HIS NAME
18 God announced his purpose to have his name declared throughout all the earth before he exercises his power in the destruction of Satan’s organization. (Ex. 9:16) To have witnesses in the earth to declare his name was God’s announced purpose; and therefore it is written: ‘God first visited to take out of the nations a people for his name . . . that the residue of men might seek out the Lord, and all the nations upon whom my name is called.’ (Acts 15:14-17, Rotherham) All of which was God’s purpose known unto him from the beginning; and likewise the end was known. (Acts 15:18) That covenant of Jehovah is everlasting and unchangeable. All of God’s covenants are everlasting, and are not subject to change, because God does not change.— Mal. 3:6.
HIS COVENANT PEOPLE
14 The people whom God takes out of the nations for his name are his covenant people. They are taken into the covenant with God. They being taken out from the nations, God makes them separate and distinct from all other peoples of the world. They are a people for a purpose, that is to say, for God’s purpose, that they must bear testimony to his name,
June 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
181
represent him, and show forth his praises. He has called them out of darkness into the light, and they must make known his light and name. (1 Pet. 2:9,10) Almighty God selects that covenant people for himself, and he selects them for the primary purpose of bearing testimony to his name, and thereafter the life of each one thus taken into the covenant depends upon his faithful performance of all obligations of his covenant by being obedient to the commandments of Almighty God. There is no excuse for him to alter his part of the covenant nor to fail to perform fully every part thereof.
16	God’s manner of taking out people for his name is, in brief, this: He has brought each and every one of them to a realization that Almighty God is Jehovah, and that Christ Jesus is man’s redeemer by the grace of God. Each one who believes these great truths and who has godly fear, the Lord leads into the light of truth and reveals to such his purpose or covenant. Thus God draws the seekers of truth to Christ Jesus, whose precious blood bought all men who obey him. “No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him; and I will raise him up at the last day.” (John 6: 44) That sincere man, seeking the way to life, seeks to know God, and to him the wards of Jesus apply: “I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father but by me.” (John 14:6) The seeker for truth and life must therefore walk in the way that Jesus takes, and hence must be obedient to God’s expressed will. (1 Pet. 2:21) Mark then the way of Jesus.
16	Beginning with the coming of Jesus into the world, it is written, he said unto Jehovah God his Father: “Lo, I come ... to do thy will, 0 God.” (Heb. 10: 7) “Then said I, Lo, I come; in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, 0 my God: yea, thy law is within my heart. I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I have not refrained my lips, 0 Lord, thou knowest.”—Ps. 40: 7-9.
17	Each and every one who is taken out of the world for the name of Jehovah and taken into the covenant with Jehovah must likewise agree to do and delight to do the will of God. He makes such solemn agreement to do God’s will and thus he obligates himself to perform his covenant. That covenant or agreement binds him unalterably to be obedient to the commandments of God as set forth in his Word.
COVENANT BY SACRIFICE
18	All persons who fully agree to do the will of God and who are selected by Jehovah and taken out of the nations to be a witness to Jehovah’s name are thus taken into the covenant with Jehovah God.
That is a covenant by sacrifice. Those who make a covenant by sacrifice with Jehovah choose to follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus, and they thereby agree to sacrifice every right and privilege that would conflict with Jehovah’s purpose. Since the selection of the faithful apostles of Jesus Christ and their anointing at Pentecost till now many persons have agreed to do the will of God, and have made a covenant by sacrifice. Those whom God has chosen for himself are those who have faithfully kept covenant with him. With the coming of the Lord Jesus and his enthronement as King, in 1914, Jehovah gives commandment in these words: “Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.”—Ps. 50: 5.
19	The Lord Jesus Christ gathers unto himself at the temple those who have made a covenant with Jehovah by sacrifice. The temple judgment beginning in 1918 has made manifest those who have shown their faithfulness and devotion to God and his kingdom, and this covenant people of Jehovah he has anointed and sent forth that they might “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness”, which offering in righteousness is the praise of Jehovah God and the testimony to his name by devoting themselves faithfully in obedience to his commandment to preach this gospel of the Kingdom. (Mal. 3:3; Heb. 13:15) The covenant obligations of each one thus taken into the covenant require faithfulness in proclaiming the name and the kingdom of Jehovah. They are truly ministers or preachers of this gospel.
HIS WITNESSES
20	Jehovah God takes out from the nations a people for himself; which means that those thus taken out are to be used and must be used for his purpose. His purpose is that his name shall be proclaimed throughout the nations before Armageddon and such proclamation must be made by those whom God has selected. They must tell the people that Jehovah is the only true and almighty God and that Christ Jesus is the King of The Theocratic Government, and that such government is the only hope for peace and life of the people. To that people thus taken out, who are in the covenant, Jehovah says: “Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he; before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no saviour. I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there was no strange god among you; therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God.” (Isa. 43:10-12) Among Jehovah’s faithful people there are no strange gods, either of men
182
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
or of angels. The faithful are devoted wholly to Jehovah, the only true and almighty God.
21	The nations of the world act by and through their governing elements, claiming the right to rule even though Christ Jesus the King has come. Those who are of Satan’s organization and under his dominating power are by Satan blinded to the truth. Hence they insist on ruling the earth contrary to the will of God. Regardless of whether or not they are sincere in their conclusions, they are in darkness as to God’s purpose. They have no knowledge or appreciation of his covenant. They have natural eyes and ears, but they cannot see and cannot hear, and do not give heed to the Word of God, and they have no vision of his purpose. Concerning them Jehovah says: “Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears. Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled; who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified; or let them hear, and say, It is truth.”—Isa. 43: 8, 9.
22	The time of climax has come, and now those who are devoted to Jehovah, and who therefore are his covenant people, must obey his commandments and boldly and fearlessly declare his name and his kingdom throughout the land.
ORDAINED
22	All of the covenant people, whom Jehovah has taken out for his name and sent forth as his witnesses, the Almighty God by his spirit has ordained or commissioned to proclaim his name and his kingdom. God has made them preachers or ministers of the gospel. Such are duly ordained ministers appointed and commissioned by the highest authority, regardless of what men may do, say or think. These are the words of ordination, commission and authority, which God has caused to be recorded for such covenant people: “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn.”—Isa. 61:1, 2.
21	Christ Jesus, the great Judge at the temple, as Jehovah’s Executive Officer, sends forth such ordained ministers with the order and command that they must declare the good news or gospel that the kingdom of Jehovah is here and that his kingdom is the only hope of humankind. Therefore Jesus commands: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.”—Matt. 24:14.
” This testimony to the name of Jehovah and to his Theocratic Government must be given by his ordained ministers immediately preceding the time of great tribulation, which is Armageddon. (Matt. 24:21) There is no distinction between male and female (Gal. 3:28), but all who are chosen of God and taken into a covenant with him and sent forth are ordained ministers to preach this gospel of the great Theocracy. No earthly power has any authority to set aside this high ordination and commission. The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, an organization acting in behalf of and with Jehovah’s witnesses in order to do things orderly and carry on the work in an organized and orderly manner, sends out such witnesses, and thus an earthly ordination is provided, but that is always subject to the ordination of the Almighty God. Such persons are the true representatives of the Lord and the true ministers of God on earth.
26	It is the express will of God that his covenant people are and must ever be separate and distinct from the world, that is, from the things and from the powers that attempt to rule this evil world. To such the Lord says: Ye are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.’ (John 15: 18,19) Jesus is the Faithful and True Witness of Jehovah; and all his followers,. taken out from the nations for Jehovah’s name, must likewise be faithful and true witnesses to the name and kingdom of God and therefore must keep themselves unspotted or separate from the world.—Jas. 1:27.
OBEY WHOM?
27	All the nations of the present world are against The Theocracy. There are amongst the nations of earth two mighty factions which claim the right to rule, and both of which are against the rule of the world by Christ Jesus, who is Jehovah’s King, holding full authority. The covenant people of God are on his side and entirely devoted to his purpose, and therefore must be and are at all times neutral in all things of controversy between the nations of this evil world If the nations of this world see fit to engage in war, that is for the nations themselves to determine and it is their responsibility. With such wars the covenant people of God have nothing to do, and in obedience to God’s commandment these must remain neutral, separate and apart. They must hold themselves aloof from all such wars and controversies and devote themselves to the service of the great Theocracy. The reason for such neutrality is discussed more fully and at length in The Watchtower 1939, pages 323-333.
“When the law of men, made by nations of the earth and put into force, commands the doing of that which is directly in conflict with the command
June 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
183
ments of Jehovah God addressed to his covenant people, what is the position of Jehovah’s covenant people with reference thereto? The apostles of Jesus Christ, Peter, John and others, were sent forth to preach and to represent The Theocracy, and, being in a covenant with Jehovah God and therefore governed strictly by the will of God, answered the foregoing question, and which answer is the one given by all of God’s covenant people to like questions. That answer is: “We ought to obey God rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) “But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.” (Acts 4:19) One’s obligations under his covenant require him to faithfully follow this divinely announced rule.
29	Those faithful apostles of the Lord, because they persisted in keeping their covenant with God and obeying God’s commandments rather than men, were arrested, ill-used, thrown into prison, and beaten. When released from prison they went straightway forward in preaching the gospel in obedience to God’s commandment. They did not fear what man might do to them. They feared God and obeyed Him. Suppose they had taken a compromising course by obeying the commandments of men, and had done so in order to avoid bodily punishment and yet preached the gospel on the sly, when rulers might not find it out. That would have been a course of compromise and would have constituted a failure to keep covenant with God. Such would have been breaking their covenant because of fear of men. The fear of man leads into a snare of Satan, which means everlasting destruction. That same rule applies to all of God’s covenant people today.—Prov. 29: 25; Rom. 1: 31, 32; Rev. 21: 8.
COVENANT-BREAKERS
30	A person who is not in a covenant with God is in a position far different from that of the person who is in a covenant to do the will of God. Those not covenant people of God are not here considered. Only those who have entered into a covenant to do the will of God are here considered. The obligation of such is that they must keep the terms of that covenant, the keeping of which is of vital importance. With Jehovah a covenant is a sacred thing, not to be broken or altered with impunity. How God regards and treats covenant-breakers may be correctly seen by reference to the treatment of such as is recorded in the Bible, some examples of which are cited here.
31	God made a covenant with the people of the nation of Israel. That people agreed to keep the terms of the covenant with Almighty God. (Ex. 19:5-8) God commanded that people to keep them
selves separate and distinct from all the nations that indulged in demonism or religious service of the demon gods, declaring unto them that serving such gods “will be a snare unto thee”. (Deut. 7:16) The nation of Israel was duty-bound to faithfully keep and perform the terms of that covenant. They failed to do so. They broke their covenant. “They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law. For their heart was not right with him, neither were they stedfast in his covenant. For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.” (Ps. 78:10, 37, 58) “And they served their idols; which were a snare unto them.” (Ps. 106: 36) “Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and hath done all these things, he shall not escape. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, As I live, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head.” —Ezek. 17:18,19.
32	God punished those covenant-breakers with destruction. (Amos 3:2) God pronounced the final judgment upon that nation breaking covenant, and the nation was left desolate. (Matt. 23:38) Thus the fixed rule of Jehovah is made known that covenant-breakers are worthy of death and suffer death, and one who willingly breaks his covenant or willingly avoids the obligation thereof puts himself in the way of complete destruction.
33	God made known first to Noah his covenant concerning the shedding of blood. (Gen. 9:6-16) It is the covenant of the sanctity of life and is an everlasting covenant, and by its terms this is announced: “Whosoever sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.” To all of his covenant people God commands: “Thou shalt not kill.” (Ex. 20:13) “Vengeance is mine; I will repay.” (Rom. 12:19) God’s law fixes the death penalty for anyone who willfully violates that commandment. His law provides for the execution of the violators of his law. Human life can be properly taken only by God’s specific provision. He has appointed his Executioner. The slaughtering of human creatures in war or otherwise is a violation of God’s covenant concerning the sanctity of life. That is an everlasting covenant, not subject to change.
The nations of the earth are bound to observe that covenant of blood because it is God’s law concerning life. Every nation has violated that everlasting covenant by killing many of God’s faithful servants and also by slaying many other innocents. Concerning the breaking of that covenant Jehovah God says: “Behold, the Lord maketh the earth
184
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
empty; and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof. The earth mourneth, and fade th away; the world languisheth, and fadeth away; the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.” (Isa. 24:1,4, 5) That state of affairs will be fully realized at Armageddon. These scriptures are cited to show that no one can break God’s covenant and escape the penalty prescribed for so doing. With stronger force does this rule apply to everyone who is taken into a covenant with the Lord God to be a witness to his name.
BECAUSE OF FEAR
” The Scriptures tell of men who broke covenant with God because of fear of man, and that such covenant-breakers suffered the penalty of death. One of such was the prophet Urijah. That prophet was deterred from performing his covenant obligations because of the threats made against him by men; and, fearing man, he fled. God did not protect him and he was seized and killed. Thus God shows that he does not protect covenant-breakers. —Jer. 26:20-23.
COVENANT-KEEPERS
ss In striking contrast to unfaithful Urijah is the prophet Jeremiah, who was a faithful witness of Jehovah. Jeremiah refused to compromise with the government of the nation of Palestine, and held fast to his covenant with Almighty Godk Jeremiah proclaimed the name of Jehovah and warned the people as God had commanded him to do. Even though he was repeatedly threatened with death, he steadfastly went on obeying God. In doing that work Jeremiah was a type picturing Jehovah’s witnesses now on the earth who declare the name of Jehovah and his Theocracy. The rulers of Jerusalem, including the religious teachers and leaders, sought to have Jeremiah put to death because he held fast to the performance of the obligations of his covenant with God. “And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the Lord.” The religious leaders had stirred up the people against him as an excuse to demand that Jeremiah be put to death. That part of the divine record referring to the same is: “Then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes, and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears. Then spake Jeremiah unto all the princes, and to all the people, saying, The Lord sent me to prophesy against this house, and against this city, all the words that ye have heard. As for me, be
hold, I am in your hand; do with me as seemeth good and meet unto you; but know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof; for of a truth the Lord hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears.”—Jer. 26:11,12,14,15.
57	Jeremiah stood firm and steadfast for God and faithfully served him. God provided protection of Jeremiah against the venom of the rulers, “that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death.”—Jer. 26:24.
FEAR GOD
” Jeremiah did not fear man nor what man might do unto him; and in this he pleased God, and God manifested his power in Jeremiah’s behalf. One who is in a covenant with God, and who fears what man might do to harm him, and for that reason yields to the point of violating his covenant, is unclean and cannot receive God’s approval. As is shown in the case of Urijah, so with all covenant-breakers. Such unclean ones must suffer death at the hands of Jehovah. God’s covenant people who continue faithful to the end in fulfilling their obligation are, of course, those who do not fear men. They do fear God. “The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever.” (Ps. 19:9) Those who have godly fear put their full trust in the Most High. All those who are in a covenant with Jehovah, and are therefore for The Theocracy, continue to fear God.
” God announced his rule concerning those who break their covenant, in these words: “Jehovah thy God is a devouring fire.” (Deut. 4: 24, A.R.V.) That means that those who because of fear of man fail or refuse to perform their covenant obligation suffer destruction at the hands of Jehovah’s Executioner. The faithful apostle repeated those words, which are addressed to all who are in a covenant with God for the Kingdom. His words apply to those who are assembled at the temple. They are addressed to God’s covenant people, applying at a time when all the world is in great distress and turmoil and at the time when God is permitting to be shaken out of his kingdom everything that can be shaken. These words thus recorded for the benefit of God’s covenant people are: “Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear: for our God is a consuming fire.”—Heb. 12: 28, 29.
40	As it was with Jeremiah, so it is now with God’s people on the earth who are in a covenant for the Kingdom. The worldly powers put forth strong endeavors to cause Jeremiah to violate his covenant by conforming himself to worldly ideas. Jeremiah
June 15, 1941
WATCHTOWER.
185
remained steadfast. Likewise today the worldly powers endeavor to force God’s covenant people to repudiate their covenant and to break the terms thereof by conforming themselves to the things of this world, and which things are contrary to Jehovah’s commandment. God’s faithful covenant people remain steadfast to Jehovah, faithful to the terms of their covenant and The Theocracy, regardless of all threats or acts leveled against them. Jeremiah’s experiences are recorded for the benefit of God’s covenant people now on earth.—Rom. 15: 4.
41	The totalitarian ruling powers, composed of Nazis, Fascists and big religious leaders, now stand where they ought not to stand, claiming the right to rule the world, and demanding that Jehovah’s covenant people shall hail and bow down to totalitarian rulers, join their armies, and fight under their banners, and when Jehovah’s covenant people refuse to do so they are imprisoned and many put to death. In the face of all this God’s covenant people stand firm on the side of The Theocracy even though they see other faithful ones being imprisoned and sent to death. The ruling powers of this world that oppose the totalitarian rule also demand of Jehovah’s covenant people that they, in violation of their covenant, enlist and fight under the banner of such rulers; and if Jehovah’s covenant people refuse to do so they suffer imprisonment or other harsh punishment, even death. Although the law of such nations declares that a minister shall not be required to do military service, the acting authorities who have to do with carrying the law into operation say to these faithful covenant people of God: "We do not recognize you as a minister, nor that you are a sincere, conscientious objector to engaging in war; therefore you must join the fighting forces and serve under our banner.”
42	The faithful covenant people of God answer: ‘’We cannot do so; we are in a covenant with Almighty God to do His will. To obey your commandment we must violate our covenant with God; and if we do so we shall suffer eternal destruction at the hands of Almighty God. We willingly conform ourselves to every law of the land that does not cause us to violate our covenant with Jehovah, as He has commanded. Almighty God has made us his witnesses and his ministers to preach this gospel of his kingdom by informing the peoples of the world of his name and his provision for peace and life for mankind. Almighty God has ordained us thus to preach. We have covenanted to do his will. To him we will remain faithful and true, regardless of what men may do to us. We do not wish to suffer imprisonment or other punishment at the hands of men. We know that the worst punishment to which we may be subjected by men of this world is death;
but that means only the death of our human life. If we suffer death because of our faithfulness to Almighty God and the terms of our covenant, we have the sure promise from God that he will resurrect us to eternal life. If we violate our covenant with Jehovah God we suffer eternal death, from which there is no resurrection. For us there is but one choice, and that is to faithfully perform our covenant obligations to Jehovah and his King. If you choose to punish us because of our faithfulness to God and our covenant, that is your responsibility, and you must bear it. Be assured of this one thing, however: if we suffer punishment at your hands because we stand firmly and perform the terms of our covenant with Almighty God, the Lord God will duly punish you and you will find no way of escape from that punishment. We will do harm to no one, but the Almighty God, whom we serve, will see to it that if we are wronged we shall be avenged, because he has so promised and he always keeps his promise.”—Luke 18:7,8.
43	That which is recorded concerning the firm, immovable stand of Jeremiah for Jehovah was there written and recorded for the purpose of encouragement to the covenant people of God now on the earth. (Rom. 15:4) The faithful covenant people of God now have in mind the words of Jesus Christ spoken for their comfort, to wit: “And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.”—Matt. 10: 28.
44	The faithful covenant people of God will not fear man nor what man can do. They do fear Almighty God, and obey him and serve him. The power of wicked men ends with death. The power of Almighty God is eternal. If one dies unfaithful to God, that is the everlasting end of him. If he dies because he is faithful to Jehovah and to the obligations of his covenant Jehovah will resurrect that faithful one to life eternal.
BY sacrifice
45	At the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple the words of Jehovah apply, to wit: ‘Gather unto me those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.’ What is the meaning of the words “covenant by sacrifice”! They mean the giving up of everything pertaining to the earth. They mean the sacrifice of the individual human will to the complete doing of the will of Almighty God. The man thus doing that knows that he is going right and walking in the way that leads to everlasting life. To those who will be of the Kingdom the covenant by sacrifice means the-giving up of the right to live as human creatures on earth. To such the assur
186
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ance is given that if he continues faithful in the keeping of his covenant he shall in due time receive from the Lord everlasting life in the spirit, and that he will receive at the resurrection. That faithful creature goes down into death a human, and God raises him up to life a spirit, to live forevermore. (1 Cor. 15:43-53) From the standpoint of the world the faithful covenant-keepers go into death in ignominy and dishonor. But Almighty God raises up such to life, honor and glory.
46	Why should a man hesitate to faithfully keep covenant with Jehovah, regardless of all human opposition or punishment, threatened or applied! The person who has not made a covenant with Jehovah God, and who therefore does not know God, cannot understand and hence cannot answer the question. The man who is in a covenant with Jehovah, and who has partaken of the knowledge of the good things to be given by the Lord, does not permit himself even to debate in mind as to whether or not he should obey man and thereby break his covenant. He is determined to keep his covenant obligations faithfully to the end, regardless of what may be done against him by any human power.
47	A striking and apt example of a faithful covenant-keeper is the apostle Paul, once a religionist and later a true Christian, following the lead of Christ Jesus. When becoming a Christian he soon learned that he would suffer persecution because of his full devotion to God and Christ. But that did not deter him at all or move him from his course of faithfulness. He said: “And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: save that the holy [spirit] witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.” —Acts 20: 22-24.
48	Because Paul kept the obligation of his covenant faithfully he suffered many stripes and imprisonment; but still he continued preaching Christ and his Kingdom, while he lingered behind prison walls. At one time he had much of this world’s goods and honor, all of which he gladly sacrificed, not counting even his human life as dear to him, in order that he might fulfill the terms of his covenant. To his fellow Christians also in a covenant with God he wrote: “But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them
but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith; that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead. Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.”—Phil. 3:7-14.
4’	Paul held fast his integrity, and when he came to the end of his earthly journey he said to his fellow covenant-keepers: “All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. . . . But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.” — 2 Tim. 3:12; 4:5-8.
60	Jehovah never breaks or even alters his covenant. Those who serve God faithfully, and who receive his everlasting blessings, must and will faithfully perform covenant obligations and will not break or alter the terms of that covenant. For the covenant people of God, both of the remnant and their companions, the Lord’s “other sheep”, the time of climax is here. Whether permitted to remain free to preach this gospel of the Kingdom as God has commanded, or restrained of all human liberty; whether walking through the land and doing that which God has commanded, or behind prison walls because of faithfulness to covenant obligations, the Christian in the covenant with God will regard but one thing worth while, and that is that under all conditions, and in whatever state, he will hold fast his integrity. There is but one thing for him to do. He will consider nothing else. That one thing is faithfully keeping covenant obligations prescribed by the covenant he has made with Almighty God, and to do so faithfully unto the end, having always in mind the precious promises of the Lord addressed to him, to wit: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.”—Rev. 2:10, Am. Rev. Ver.
SAFE HIGHWAY
( ( A ND an highway shall be there, and a way, and it ZA shall be called, The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those;
the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.” (Isaiah 35:8) The “highway” is the way out of Babylon, the Devil’s organization, and unto Zion, God’s organization.
The modern emphasized translation by Rotherham clarifies the prophecy somewhat: “And there shall be there a raised way, even a high road, and the Highroad of Holiness shall it be called, there shall not pass over it one who is unclean ; but He Himself shall be one of them, travelling the road, and the perverse shall not stray [thereinto]. There shall be there no lion, nor shall ravenous beast go up thereon, it shall not be found there; thus shall travel the redeemed.” (Vss 8, 9) This indicates that the Lord Jesus Christ as Jehovah’s representative is the One who takes the lead over that “highway”, leading all those who follow him. Manifestly no unclean one could follow the Lord Jesus into God’s organization, which is Zion, but such one must clean up before he enters the “highway”.
In support of this conclusion Isaiah 52:11,12 says: “Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence [Babylon], touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord. For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight; for the Lord will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward [rearguard].” This proves that those who follow Christ Jesus must be separate from the elements of Satan’s organization, and be clean before they Lear the vessels or truths of the Lord, and while marching in the way Jehovah God mil guard their rear from the enemy. Prior to the travail of Zion during the World War period of 1917-1919 the followers of Christ Jesus were compelled to mingle with the “Babylonians”, that is, the religionists of this world. Since then the Lord has revealed to his people the clear distinction between Babylon, Satan’s organization, and Zion, God’s organization, and has disclosed to his faithful remnant that they must separate themselves from Babylon and travel “the high road” to get into Zion. God’s remnant then saw Zion as God’s organization and immediately entered upon the “highway”, bearing the vessels of the Lord as witnesses of Jehovah.
There were those who preferred to remain where they were and hold on to the unclean things of religion. For instance, such claimed that “the higher powers” to whom God commands obedience, at Romans 13:1, are the rulers of Satan’s organization. Thus holding to Satan’s organization, such remained unclean and are not permitted to travel upon the “highway” and to return and come to God’s organization. Because of their unclean condition God will not permit them to get into his organization: “There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; but they which are written in the Lamb’s book of life.” “For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.” (Rev. 21: 27; 22:15) Those who would bear the vessels of the Lord must separate themselves from Satan’s organization, and thus be clean before they could travel over the “highway”.
When cleansed the faithful remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses travel over the highway in advance of those who come to the Lord later and enter his organization. The cleansing of this remnant begotten of God’s spirit is pictured, at Isaiah 6: 5-8, as being done by fire at the time of the Lord’s presence in the temple, to wit: “Then said I, Woe is me1 for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King: the Lord [Jehovah] of hosts. Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar; and he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged. Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.” Isaiah, Jehovah’s witness back there, pictured Jehovah’s witnesses of today. “These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him.”—John 12:41.
Until this cleansing took place the faithful remnant could not use the “highway” to Zion and be incorporated into God’s organization as his people. It was at that time that the Lord’s decree began to be enforced: “He which is filthy, let him be filthy still.” (Rev. 22:11) This shows that both the filthy and the unclean are to be barred from the “highway”. The fact that it is called “the way of holiness” proves that only those who are wholly devoted to Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government will be permitted on that “highway”. Such go upon the “highway”, under the leadership of Christ Jesus the King of that Theocratic Government. “He himself shall be one of them, travelling the road,” that is to say, the Lord Jesus Christ is the first one that travels “the high road”, and he travels as the Leader of God’s people. The faithful remnant, as members of “his body”, become a part of him by reason of being ‘the elect servant’ of Jehovah, and hence follow next to Christ Jesus and at the front.
“And the perverse shall not stray” into that highway, “perverse” meaning “always morally bad”. (.Rotherham, margin) (See Proverbs 1:7; 10:8; 10:14,21; 12:15, 14: 9 ) If the “unclean” are not permitted to pass over the “highway”, then surely the fools, perverse or bad persons would not get on it. There is no way for them to get on it. The words “the wayfaring man” (Leeser’s trans ) mean the one “travelling the road” and refer primarily to Christ Jesus himself, who is Jehovah’s chief representative and is a wayfaring traveler leading upon the “highway” those for whom the “highway” is provided. It leads to Zion, which is God’s organization. “The Lord loveth the gates of Zion.” —Ps. 87: 2.
The angels of the Lord are the door or gate keepers, and these faithful officers will see to it that none will enter upon the high way except in the right way, and clearly that way means that one must first be devoted wholly to God. (See Revelation 21.-12.) This being true, then, the perverse fools would not be permitted to enter, neither will it be possible for them to “stray” into the highway. The guards will prevent them. As long as one is a fool he will not consent to walk in the “way of holiness”, which is the requirement concerning those who are admitted to the “highway”.
187
188
3Te WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Safeguarding the welfare of all those who are upon the “highway” Jehovah says: “No lion [the Devil or his representatives] shall be there, nor any ravenous beast [devilish organization] shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there: but the redeemed shall walk there.” (Isa. 35:9) When Christ came to the temple in 1918 to judge his followers and gathered the faithful ones unto himself they were brought into “the secret place of the Most High”, as foretold in Psalm 91:1, and concerning such ones Jehovah promised: “Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder; the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet.” (Ps. 91:13) The remnant have Jehovah’s protection.
Concerning those who walk upon the “highway” Isaiah 35:10 then says: “The ransomed of Jehovah shall return and shall enter Zion with shouting.” (Rotherham) Except those wholly devoted to God no creatures on the earth are any part of God’s capital organization, that is, Zion. Those persons of good-will toward God put themselves under the protection of His capital organization. It was in 1918, amidst the World War distress, that Jehovah’s consecrated people were carried away forcibly as captive to Babylon by the enemy, the religionists and their political and commercial allies. In 1919 the faithful were delivered and began to return and come to Zion, as foretold at Micah 4:10: “Thou shalt go even to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered; there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.” The cleansing and the returning of such was foreshadowed by Isaiah, chapter six, quoted above, and also chapter twelve, verses one to four. These faithful ones then devoted themselves wholly and completely unto Jehovah and therefore abandoned religion and refused to ‘touch the unclean thing’, to wit, any part of Satan’s religious, commercial, political organization, and thus they came by “the way of holiness” through the gates of the Holy City and were gathered unto Zion. It was then that such entered into the joy of the Lord, which joy will be “everlasting”. Hence then such “come with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads”. Since then the remnant have continued with joy and gladness in God’s organization, and sorrow and sighing have fled from them; and they go forth as Jehovah’s witnesses proclaiming His works and singing His praises. They travel the pathway of life eternal with joy. (Isa. 12: 3-5; Ps. 16:11) This application of the prophecy concerning the highway to God’s remnant is further supported by the words of Isaiah 51:11: “Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.”
Jehovah definitely fixed the time when the remnant began to travel upon the “highway”, to wit, as “in that day”, meaning the day beginning with the setting up of the Kingdom under Christ and with his coming to the temple. Jehovah says: “And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, . . . And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.”—Isa. 11:11,16.
Prior to the coming of the Lord to his temple for judgment in 1918 the consecrated ones believed that God’s purpose was to save a few in heaven and to restore other obe
dient ones of mankind to live forever on the earth. They were blind to the fact of the two opposing organizations, Jehovah’s and Satan’s, and particularly to the fact that the greatest of all Bible doctrines is the vindication of God’s word and name by and through his kingdom, The Theocratic Government. When, at the Lord’s coming thereto, the temple of heaven was opened and the flashes of God’s lightning of revealed truth from the temple illuminated his faithful ones, then was fulfilled Isaiah 35:5: “Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.” This is further corroborated by Isaiah 29:18: “And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.”
Isaiah 35: 6 continues: “Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert.” Learning the great truth concerning the Kingdom those who had been spiritually lame, halting between two opinions and mistakingly thinking that the worldly rulers were the “higher powers” that must be obeyed (Rom. 13:1), even such now began to leap into the witness work with songs of praise to the Lord, and that which had appeared as a wilderness unto them as a result of the enemy action, and as parched ground, like the desert, became as a pool of fresh water, this picturing the clarifying of the truth. (Isa. 35:7) The remnant saw that Christ Jesus, God’s anointed King, was then laid as the Chief Comer Stone in Zion, God’s capital organization, as foretold at Isaiah 28:16, and that the time had come for the faithful to enter into “the joy of the Lord”. At Psalm 118:14,19-23 these faithful ones are represented as saying: “Jehovah is my strength and song; and he is become my salvation. Open to me the gates of righteousness; I will enter into them, I will give thanks unto Jehovah. This is the gate of Jehovah; the righteous shall enter into it. I will give thanks unto thee; for thou hast answered me, and art become my salvation The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner. This is Jehovah’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.”—Am. Rev. Ver.
The faithful remnant joyfully entered upon the great “high road” and returned to Zion, which is God’s organization, and have since been singing the praises to the name of the Most High. This is in exact harmony with God’s promise made at Isaiah 51:3, 4: “For the Lord shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places, and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. Hearken unto me, my people, and give ear unto me, 0 my nation; for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.”
Christ Jesus, the ‘elect servant’ of God, must be the first one upon the great “highway” of the King Eternal, because God has called “the Servant” and given him as a covenant to the people to lead them. So it is stated at Isaiah 42:1-6. Upon this “highway” God has made his ‘elect servant’ to be the “leader and commander” to direct the people: “Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.” (Isa. 55:4) The faithful remnant, serving Jehovah God and being a part of the “serv
June 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
189
ant”, must be a witness to the kingdom of God, and to do this they must go upon the “highway”.
Concerning Christ Jesus Isaiah 35:8 (Roth.) says: “He Himself shall be one of them travelling [on] the road”; or on the great highway. Behold now Christ Jesus leading his faithful remnant over the “highway” and singing praises to the name of Jehovah by continuing to give witness concerning the Kingdom. Therefore Christ Jesus is in the lead and the remnant is to the front, going joyfully on in obedience to God’s commandments. They are traveling the “way of holiness”, because they are wholly devoted to God. Jehovah now feeds his remnant people upon “food convenient for me”. (Prov. 30: 8) They are ‘drinking new in the kingdom’ the “wine that maketh glad the heart”, to wit, the joy of a share in the vindication of God’s name. To the remnant God gives commandment, saying: “Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.” (Isa. 62:9,10) This prophecy pictures the remnant as being the first to go up upon the “highway”, following the Lord Jesus, which “highway” leads out from Satan’s organization unto God’s organization.
God lays upon the shoulder of the remnant now the great privilege and obligation of taking the lead in declaring his mighty works and in preparing the way for the people by lifting up to all order-loving ones the standard of Jehovah’s truth and showing them the “highway” that leads to God and eternal life. “The highway of the upright is to depart from evil [by leaving Satan’s organization] ; he that keep-eth his [God’s] way preserveth his soul.” (Prov. 16:17) It is the privilege and duty of the remnant to show the people the wicked organization of Satan and to bid them to depart therefrom and become a part of God’s organization of righteousness. The gathering out of the “stones” is first for the benefit of the remnant themselves, that they may have a clear vision of God’s purposes, and then to show the truth to the people free from religious stumblingblocks. Every member of the remnant will faithfully perform his duty and hence will continue to bear the fruits of the Kingdom before the peoples of the nations that those of goodwill may see the “highway” and be benefited and enter upon it before the battle of Armageddon and may know that Jehovah is God.—See also Isaiah 62:11, 12.
The next in order to enter “the highway” after the remnant are those persons of good-will, who shall form the “great multitude” that survives the battle of Armageddon. They must be cleaned up, however, before they can enter upon the “highway”. They wash their robes and make them clean by faithfully devoting themselves to God and to Christ his King now before Armageddon, and this they must do before they enter upon the highway. (See Revelation 7: 9-17.) That the “great multitude” should go over the “highway” is proved by the fact that Revelation 7:16, 17 quotes from Isaiah 49:10,11, which reads: “They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them; for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them. And I will make
all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted.”
God’s remnant must truly be to the front, going first upon the “highway”, leading away from religion and Satan’s organization and unto God’s organization. Today the remnant are declaring the Kingdom message to millions of people on earth, and many of good-will are forsaking religion and Satan’s organization and are seeking the way that leads unto God. Now, before Armageddon, which is near, they have the opportunity of wholly devoting themselves to the Lord and entering upon the “highway”, and, continuing faithful, may “be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger” at Armageddon and thus be of the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors. Later, under the Kingdom, after those of the “great multitude” have filled the earth with a righteous race, will occur the general resurrection and those that are now dead in the graves will come forth at the Lord’s command and will be taught how to enter upon the “highway”. All those that get life must first completely devote themselves to God.—Isa. 19: 23-25.
All who enter into God’s organization must come by the “highroad” of the King and must first come clean from the Devil and his organization and turn their faces and their hearts to God and to his Holy City. (Jer. 50: 4, 5) The obedient people of the earth who come clean will enter upon the “highway” and travel to God’s organization, and then such too shall “obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away”.—Isa. 35:10.
The light from the temple of God now discloses that the “highway” foretold in Isaiah’s prophecy is the King's “highway” or “highroad” ; that it has been opened from and after the coming of the Lord to the temple of God in 1918 and the gathering together unto Him of his people, and the building up of Zion, his organization; and that now the remnant must travel both in ‘the narrow way’ and upon the King’s “highway”, because both that ‘narrow way’ and the King’s “highway” lead the spirit-begotten remnant unto heavenly life and immortality. (See Matthew 7:13,14) There is therefore no conflict or contrast between the two ways. The responsibility of the remnant by reason of God’s law concerning the “highway” is now greatly enhanced and accentuated. Christ the King is the great Leader, and the remnant, being next to him, must be at the front and remain there, and in obedience to the commandments of the Lord must now say to all who love righteousness: ‘Come, leave Satan’s organization and turn to the Lord Jehovah. Clean up yourselves from religion and forsake and flee for ever from Satan’s organization. Let him that is athirst come and partake of the water of life- freely.’-Rev. 18: 3,4; 22:17.
In obedience to God’s commandment this is exactly what the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses are doing today, and the devoted persons of good-will who join them as “companions” in such witness work come clean and travel with them upon the “highway” in obedience to God’s will and command. All such, the remnant and their earthly companions, must lift up God’s standard to the people, that they may see the way to God’s organization and the way that leads to life.
Sovereign Lord! a dwelling place hast thou thyself become to us tn generation after generation. Before mountains were born, or ever were brought forth the earth and the world—yea, from age even unto age thou art the Mighty One.—Psalm 90:1, 2, Roth. Pss.
WHO IS GOG?
Ezekiel’s prophecy, chapters 38 and 39, against those who support Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, and which movement is under the command of Gog, the Devil’s chief representative. Concerning this the Lord says: ‘Son of man, set thy face toward Gog, of the land of Magog, the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy against him, and say, Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I am against thee, 0 Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal: . . . Thou shalt come up against my people of Israel [the devoted people of Jehovah God; His witnesses], as a cloud to cover the land ; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen [the nations] may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, 0 Gog, before their eyes.’ (Ezek. 38: 2, 3,16) The land of Magog pictures the spiritual or invisible realm of Satan, and includes Gog, and all the wicked angels within his division of Satan’s organization, and which “bear rule over all the earth”. Gog forms and organizes the conspiracy against Jehovah’s devoted people on earth, into which conspiracy are drawn many other creatures, both men and angels, and including the religious, commercial and political elements on earth, as represented in Ezekiel’s prophecy by Persia, Ethiopia, Libya, Gomer, Togarmah, and the “many people with thee”. (Ezek. 38:4-8) All these conspire and come against Jehovah’s Theocratic organization, including His witnesses and their companions on the earth. Such conspiracy is carried out by the commission of overt acts against them.The horde of wicked ones will not succeed in their efforts to destroy those faithful to Jehovah God, but, on the contrary, Christ Jesus, as Jehovah’s Field Marshal, will gain the victory.
Up to this thirty-eighth chapter concerning Gog Ezekiel has prophesied against the religious, commercial and political elements of Satan’s visible earthly organization, and against Satan himself, but aside from Satan himself Ezekiel had uttered no specific prophecy against the invisible part of Satan’s organization, to wit, the wicked angels and officers in his invisible realm. These have had much to do with debauching the human race as they did in the days of Noah, and have had much to do with the ruling of the nations of the earth; and it is certain that they will be destroyed with Satan, because they are enemies of Jehovah God. It is therefore reasonable to expect to find in the book of Ezekiel some prophecy setting forth Jehovah’s judgment and its execution against those wicked angels or invisible powers, the demons. At Ephesians 6:10-12 the apostle Paul calls attention to the fact that in these latter days God’s people will be warred against by these invisible powers and principalities, saying: “Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.”
Satan is the “prince of this world”, mentioned by Jesus at John 12:31 and 14: 30, and is therefore the chief ruler of the entire wicked world and is the chief of devils, “the prinee of the demons.” (Matt. 9: 34; 12: 24, Am. Rev Ver.) This supports the conclusion that Satan has subrulers in his realm, which are invisible to men, and that one division thereof is especially assigned to give attention to the things
100
GERMANY’S dictator was put in power by the connivance and allied action of the religious politicians of various nations of the earth, many of whom were, like Germany then, members of the League of Nations. All of this movement, as facts since show, is a conspiracy against Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government. The religious, political, commercial elements supplied the brains and money to put the dictator into office, but the whole scheme originated with and was directed by the "god of this world”, Satan himself. It has been suggested that Adolf Hitler is Gog, the demon officer next to Satan, appearing in the flesh. Whether that is true or not, Hitler is an instrument completely in the employ and use of the Devil.
The Devil himself is the chief amongst the demons, and is debased and degraded beyond any possibility of recovery. He is totally depraved. He maintains his organization only by means of fraud, deception and other wicked machinations. That the Devil has and does maintain an organization which operates against God and all that serve Jehovah God is shown by the inspired Scriptures and by the facts, beyond any doubt whatsoever. As a Scriptural example, in the prophecy of Daniel (2:30-34) is the description of a terrible image, which in symbol discloses that the Devil is the head of a great and wicked organization, and that next to the Devil are spirit princes or rulers subordinate to Satan the Devil. At Daniel 10:13, 20 is the record designating some of these demons under the titles “prince of Persia” and “prince of Grecia”. Among these princes is Gog, Satan’s chief marshal. Next to the demon princes, according to Daniel’s prophecy, is another order or class of spirits, the wicked officers which “bear rule over all the earth”. (Dan. 2:39) Such rulers, invisible wicked spirit creatures, have immediate power or influence over the nations of the earth under the supervision of the principal power, that is, the Devil. Those nations are pictured by the feet and toes of the terrible image.—Dan. 2: 41-44.
The Lord God foretells of the demon influence upon the nations today, and particularly upon the political rulers, and what shall be the end thereof. Note the prophetic words recorded at Revelation 16:12-16, concerning Satan’s organization, which was symbolized by the ancient city of Babylon on the Euphrates river: “And the sixth [angel] poured out his bowl upon the great river, the river Euphrates ; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way might be made ready for the kings [Jehovah and Christ Jesus] that come from the sunrising. And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon [symbolizing Satan’s devouring organization and represented on earth chiefly by the religious element], and out of the mouth of the beast [the political state], and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, as it were frogs [loud-mouthed croakers] ; for they are spirits of demons [that is, visible representatives of demons], working signs; which go forth unto the kings of the whole world, to gather them together unto the war of the great day of God, the Almighty. . . . And they [the demon hosts] gathered them [the earthly representatives of the demons] together into the place which is called in Hebrew Har-Magedon [Armageddon].”—A.R.V.
That movement of the demons against Jehovah God’s people pictures the international movement, as described in
June 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
191
of the earth. And now since the setting up of Jehovah’s Kingdom by Christ Jesus in A.D. 1914, followed by the “war in heaven”, Satan and his demon angels have been cast out of heaven and down to the immediate vicinity of the earth. (See Revelation 12:1-12.) The apostle Paul’s words quoted above show that these wicked angels have a special grudge against Jehovah’s anointed witnesses and their earthly companions.
In Revelation 20:7, 8 the distinction is made between Satan and Gog and Magog, which shows that the particular prophecy of Ezekiel at chapters thirty-eight and thirty-nine is not directly applicable to Satan, but that it does specifically apply to one of Satan’s demon chiefs and those gathered under him in a division of Satan’s organization. Revelation 20:1-3 shows that Satan and all his demon princes will be bound at Armageddon. At the end of the thousand-year reign of the Theocratic King, Christ Jesus, they are released for a little season, and the Revelation specifically mentions Gog and Magog in connection therewith, which would mean the prince Gog and all the wicked ones that have operated in his division. The prophecy of Daniel mentions the prince of the kingdom of Persia and the prince of Grecia, with whom God’s mighty angel had to fight. (Dan. 10:13,20,21) It appears there are ranks of rulers in Satan’s organization.
Ezekiel’s prophecy shows that Gog controls a great military force which is covetous, preys upon and robs the helpless, and persecutes the apparently defenseless. (Ezek. 38:4,11,12) The fact that Ezekiel as Jehovah’s witness was directed to prophesy against Gog proves that the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses today, whom Ezekiel pictures, would not be left in ignorance concerning the anti-Theocracy conspiracy under Gog and the coming assault upon Jehovah’s organization which would be in the remnant’s time, and that the remnant would testify against the conspirators. Jehovah God is supreme, and he has anointed Christ Jesus as his Chief Officer, who will lead the fight of His forces at Armageddon. Since Satan has attempted to mimic God in everything else, and since Satan claims to be the supreme one or one equal to God, it is reasonable to conclude that Satan has appointed a special officer on his side to lead the fight at Armageddon. Since Gog is called “the chief prince”, or “prince of Rosh”, or “prince of the chief”, it is reasonable that Gog is the one that leads the fight at Armageddon, while Satan as the general sits in the rear and directs it, even as Jehovah directs Christ Jesus.—See Ezekiel 38:2 in the marginal reading and also the American Revised Version and Leeser’s.
In the army of Gog and under his command will be all the allies mentioned in the thirty-eighth chapter, including demons and men, and all pitted against God’s organization. A conspiracy, as here, is a wicked device formed to do injury to others. The prophecy indicates that the conspiracy is formed against God’s anointed witnesses and their companions for the purpose of destroying them. Ezekiel 38:10 declares: “Thus saith the Lord God, It shall also come to pass, that at the same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought.” This is evidence that the conspiracy against Jehovah’s people is directed by Satan through Gog. The evil spirits, like “frogs”, gather the forces to Armageddon. The croaking of the “frogs” has no
doubt much to do with the conspiracy. After the wicked device is hatched, the “frogs” do the propaganda work amongst the people and help set the stage for the fight. Then Ezekiel declares what that wicked thought of the enemy is:
“And thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates." (Vs. 11) This shows that the prophecy applies to the spiritual Israelites, the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses since the World War, and not the natural Jews back in Palestine. God’s remnant, as these appear to the enemy, are now without anyone to protect them; hence the enemy says ‘they dwell without walls, and have neither bars nor gates’. Satan’s organization, and particularly his chief instrument, does not give any heed to God’s words, and does not believe that God furnishes any protection for his people, as described at Psalm 147:12-15. The witness work and the spiritual prosperity and blessing on the part of Jehovah’s people raises the ire of the enemy and causes such to act. Gog fears for his proposed “new world order”. Gog and his allies are aware of the Kingdom message proclaimed over the radio, and by sound machines, and by the house-to-house testimony work which God’s remnant continue to do. Hence Gog acts.
The prophecy from Jehovah gives assurance that at Armageddon the enemy will be completely removed by destruction. Concerning the enemy forces under Gog Jehovah says: “And I will turn thee [O Gog] back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel [Jehovah’s people] : and I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand. Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field, to be devoured. Thou shalt fall upon the open field; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God. And I will send a fire on Magog, . . . and they shall know that I am the Lord [Jehovah].”—Ezek 39: 2-6.
The enemy is gathering all his forces against Jehovah’s government and the King thereof, and His faithful witnesses now on the earth. The enemy is turning the mass of earth’s population against Jehovah and his King, and this is done in preparation for the final showdown at Armageddon. The result at Armageddon will be such that the “stink” of the slain enemy shall be the greatest ever known: “And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel [thus memorializing the vindication of Jehovah’s name], the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea; and it shall stop the noses of the passengers ; and there shall they bury Gog, and all his multitude ; and they shall call it, The valley of Hamon-gog [meaning, Multitude of Gog], And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land. Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them ; and it shall be to them a renown, the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord God.” (Ezek. 39:11-13) There shall the greatness of the enemy cease for ever, and there the reproaches upon God’s name and upon his faithful witnesses in the earth will be taken away for ever.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PAVEMENT ACTIVITY IN ENGLAND
“A lady who knew me came up to me while street witnessing, with the remark: ‘What on earth are you doing!’ After explanation she went away with The Watchtower, promising to have it every fortnight. A few days later I saw her again. She was thrilled with The Watchtower. I arranged to go to her home for a model study. The daughter was at the study as well. They were so delighted that they did not want to wait until the following Friday to carry on, so I arranged to go Mondays as well. They also attended the Watchtower study and the study of Religion. Friday before 25 December the daughter asked if she could come with me and do the same work as I was doing. You can imagine my reply. We both had four days’ holiday from work, so both sallied forth. During these four days her report was: 120 booklets (12 sets of 7), 18 hours’ work, 2 magazines, and 4 back-calls. We now have rigged her up with a gramophone, which she took to two of her owm back-calls this week, and has now arranged a model study of her own. Grand, isn’t it! For quite a while now I have taken a model study and am now going through the book Salvation with an old man 84 years old. He has placed booklets with his friends only. So last week, when a party of us were working around his district, I asked him to come with us. He hesitated; so I said, ‘Well, come over the road and see Dad. He will take you to the doors.’ So out the old chap came. Dad kept telling the people he had his son with him that morning helping him in the Kingdom work.”
MODEL STUDY ACCOMPLISHMENT IN LONDON, ENGLAND
“During the past three years I have run about five or six model studies per week. When the people showed real interest, I linked them up into groups and started a study of the book Salvation. As they increased in knowledge of The Theocracy I invited them to join with me in the field service one morning a week and to attend the local service meeting and Watchtower study. Emphasizing to them the need to be always on the lookout for good-will interest, I started a group model study class to which these new publishers could bring any interested people, and allowed them to share with me in taking the model studies so as to gain experience. In this way about twelve new publishers took a stand for The Theocracy in my district. Last year I went farther afield and started the same procedure, which has resulted in formation of a small unit of fifteen publishers m that district. Of course, a ‘sifting5 work has been going on all the time. Eighty different persons passed through one of the studies. I have held 300 model studies during the past four months.”
BRINGS MQB TO POLICE STATION
“One afternoon as I was driving through Franklin, N. H., two French Catholic priests were walking along smoking cigars. One of them noticed me. He quickly took hold of his partner’s arm and pointed his cane directly at me. For a long moment both regarded me and the car. Next Saturday on the streets with my upright sign and magazines I saw trouble coming: a group of men, standing and blocking the way in front of me. I started to go through the midst, when one man, Peter Charland, a ‘boss’ in one of the mills, said: ‘What are you selling!’ I showed him the magazine. ‘How much!’ I told him. He was about to hand me
the nickel, when he suddenly withdrew his hand, and said: ‘Tell me first, what’s it all about!’ I saw his trick; he wanted to start an argument, and the mob surrounded me. I said, ‘Read it and you will find out.’ He asked again. I turned without answering. The men started to move toward me. Again Charland faced me: ‘Sell me a magazine.’ He held out the five-cent piece. I started to hand him the magazine, when he again withdrew his hand and said: ‘First tell me what it is all about!’ I replied: ‘If you continue to interfere with me I will have you arrested.’ He sneered: ‘Oh, you will! Well, go ahead.’ I said: ‘Come on; we will go to the police station.’ And we did, the mob of fifteen or more right at our heels. John Dodge, city marshal, two state troopers, and another man were there. I spoke to Mr. Dodge: ‘I want you to arrest this man. He is trying to incite a riot.’ Mr. Charland said: ‘It’s not true. I want to buy a magazine and he won’t sell it to me. Is that not true!’ speaking to the men packing the doorway and hall. ‘That’s right!’ they said. Again Mr. Charland turned to me and said: ‘Sell me a magazine.’ I smiled: ‘With pleasure, sir. Five cents.’ Again he said: ‘First tell me, what’s it all about!’ I did—it was the proper time for a witness. After talking for about five minutes, no one interfered. Mr. Charland was asking questions. After explaining that The Watchtower was a Christian publication, I said: ‘I will read some of it to you.’ 1 read the first two paragraphs. It seemed that was all they could stand. Later I left, rejoicing in my privilege.”
LOCATED BY SIDEWALK WITNESS
“Corner of Broad and Thomas Sts., Athens, Ga. A WPA worker stood near by, listening to what I was saying. Then he walked up and said: ‘Is that The Watchtower put out from Brooklyn, 117 Adams St.!’ Surprised, I answered, ‘Yes; do you take The Watchtower’ He said, ‘A man gave my girl some. She’s got a big stack of books wrote by the same man, J. F. Rutherford his name is, ain’t it!’ ‘Yes1 Do you and your girl like the books!’ ‘I can’t read them myself,’ said he, ‘but I got a girl, eighteen years old, she reads them—every one she can get ahold of, and likes them.’ ‘Have you ever heard J. F. Rutherford speak!’ ‘No, but 1 always have wanted to.’ ‘Let me have your name and address. We have several of his Bible lectures recorded and I can come and play them on the phonograph so you and your family all can hear him talk. How would you like that!’ Well, he liked that fine: ‘I sure want to hear that man talk.’ He lives out in the rurals, and it was some time before we rounded him up. He, his wife and all his children were most interested. A model study was started. Next day the little ones refused to salute flag at school. The boy received a whipping by the teacher. My own little girl was suspended from attending school most of this year on account of not saluting and is still imposed upon by the other children in school. Now this little boy champions her cause and takes up for her. He says: ‘She is not like the rest of you. You just let her alone.’ His sister took her Watchtower to school and tried to get her teacher to read it, saying also to the teacher and children in her room: ‘Jehovah’s witnesses came to our home last night and played the sweetest Bible lecture I ever heard and had a Bible lesson. They said we should study The Watchtower. I’m going to study it myself, arfd you ought to.’ ”
192
Vol. LXII
Semimonthly
No. 13
JULY 1, 1941
201
. 202
203
204
207
208
194
194
194
194
Assembly for Worship . ...
“His Chariot’7 .. .
A Witness Who Did Not See Death
Field Experiences ....
“Pure Language” Testimony Period ...
Opportunity for Service
Vacation
“Watchtower” Studies
CONTENTS
Those That Forget God
Israel .. ..
The Church
Worship
Knowledge and Experience Fighting God ..
193
195
196
198
198
198
199
201
. . .. 201
r ,lf
\v i !t'S ■
WATCHTOWfr
They shall know that I am Jehovah.”
Very Religious .
Evil Servant ..
Ungodly
Warning
Destiny .
-Etekiel 35:15.
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	» Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right U life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who win hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to "fill the earth" with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian_________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African_________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“PURE LANGUAGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The midsummer Testimony Period, as above named, will include all of August. The Lord now having turned to his devoted people the “pure language” of the truth of The Theocracy, it will be their privilege during August to publish the same with a “pure lip”, that a multitude of others may hear and turn from religion and join in the united service of Jehovah. Therefore during this Testimony Period the book Religion together with the latest published booklet will be placed with everyone possible, on a contribution of 25c. This, which is generally the vacation season and convention time, should allow for many newly interested ones to start out into the field activity, and for all veteran publishers to get in their full quota of hours. A good report is awaited from each and all at the close of August, marking the special blessing of the Lord upon all that “serve him with one consent”.
OPPORTUNITY FOR SERVICE
The Society may require the service of qualified brethren between the ages of 36 and 50. If you are free to engage in full-time service please write the Society’s office at Brooklyn for a questionnaire.
VACATION
The members of the Bethel family will enjoy their vacation this year from Saturday, August 2, to Wednesday, August 20, inclusive. This will afford them a change from their regular work at headquarters and the opportunity for a larger part in the increasing field work. The factory and office will be closed down during this period, and no books will be shipped nor regular mail answered. Hence all orders for literature should be sent in well in advance of August 2 to receive attention before closing down Order in sufficient quantity to carry you through the vacation period and the rest of August. Also as little correspondence as possible should be sent to the Society, with the exception of report cards and subscriptions.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 3: “Those That Forget God,” fl 1-15 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1941.
Week of August 10: “Those That Forget God,” fl 16-32 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1941.
Week of August 17: “Those That Forget God,” fl 33-51 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1941.
ANNOUNCING
Vol. LXII
JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
July 1, 1941
No. 13
THOSE THAT FORGET GOD
The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God."—Ps. 9:17.
TEHOVAH has made known his fixed rule, as set I forth in the above text, and which rule applies J to all persons or nations that at one time pretended or claimed to serve Him and then turned away from and against the Most High. The text, therefore, is a warning from Almighty God given to all those who have assumed the obligation of serving him. He compels no one to serve him, but when they undertake it they must bear the responsibility of fulfilling their covenant. One may enter into an actual covenant with God to do his will, while others may be in an implied covenant to do the will of God by reason of their information and outward claim of being the servants of God.
2	The “wicked” are those who have received some light of truth of and concerning Jehovah’s purpose and who by reason thereof start in the way of righteousness, and who then forsake the pathway of righteousness and turn to lawlessness. Lucifer was an enlightened one, made acquainted to some extent with the purpose of Almighty God; was appointed to a high position in the organization of Jehovah, and thereafter rebelled against God, and since then has pursued a way of lawlessness. For that reason he is called “the wicked one”, and bears the names “Satan”, “Serpent,” “Dragon,” and “Devil”, all of which bespeak wickedness. Because of his wickedness Satan is sentenced by Jehovah to everlasting destruction, which judgment will be executed in God’s due time. His fate or destiny is the fate or destiny of all men and nations that take a like course. God does not change, neither do his rules change. God is no respecter of persons. He makes known his rules, and the creature who agrees or undertakes to obey them must perform or take the consequences.
3	Set over in exact contrast with the wicked are those who have covenanted to do God’s will and who faithfully and steadfastly abide by that agreement and carry out their covenant; and concerning such it is written: “Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.” (Ps. 33:12, Am. Rev. Ver.) The destiny for such is life everlasting in peace, joy and glory forever in the presence of the Most High. That
blessed “nation” is the nation of which Christ Jesus is the Head, including all who are made members of God’s capital organization under Christ.
4	The purpose of Almighty God he works out and puts into operation exactly on time and in his due time. He first approved certain individuals who voluntarily and faithfully devoted themselves to him and shunned the course of lawlessness, and who were diligent to serve God. Then, as a people for his purpose, he selected the Israelites and made a covenant with that nation. Israel was a typical nation, and the course thereof foretold and foreshadowed God’s purpose of selecting from amongst men a people for his name, to be used with Christ Jesus in his kingdom, and which is God’s “holy nation”. The antitypical nation of Israel is the nation of God “chosen for his own inheritance”. Now God’s due time has come when he, by and through Christ Jesus, is gathering unto himself his “other sheep”, that is to say, that company of persons that shall form the “great multitude”. In view of this fact it is now of very great importance that those “other sheep”, known also today as “Jonadabs” and who shall form the “great multitude”, should be enlightened concerning what is required of all who undertake to be the servants of God and Christ. What God has caused to be written in his Word of and concerning others that have gone before serves to furnish a guide to those who are now seeking the way of faithful service and everlasting life. Hence The Watchtower briefly reviews the matter set forth in the Bible concerning God’s rule, which applies to those who claim to be walking in the way of righteousness as God’s servants. The warning given by Jehovah in his Word, and which has applied to others in times past, should now serve as a warning to the Lord’s “other sheep”, that they, having fled to the “city of refuge”, may keep themselves within bounds and faithfully serve the Lord.
ISRAEL
’While the descendants of Israel were domiciled in Egypt Jehovah God selected them as a people for his name and made a covenant with them and by the hand of Moses led them out of Egypt. At Mount
195
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
196
Sinai God confirmed that covenant, giving to the Israelites his law at the same time. Then God led them on a long journey to the land of Canaan, and, while on that journey, they were subjected to severe tests to determine whether or not they would love the Lord God, who had delivered them from Egypt. After reaching Canaan the nation of Israel was put to many other tests. When that typical nation kept covenant with the Lord and obeyed the Most High they were favored by him. That the Israelites understood that they were to be obedient to God’s law is clearly shown from the Scriptures. That nation had solemnly promised God to do and perform his will, and the Scriptures showed that they knew that they must do his will in order to receive his blessing. (Ex. 19:3-8) The Israelites knew that they could not forget God and their covenant with impunity. They were specifically warned against religion and told that they must keep away from and avoid such. That warning was to enable them to walk in the way of righteousness and receive God’s blessing.
6	When the Israelites refrained from having anything to do with the demon gods, or religion, and when they served God sincerely, they were free from taint; but as soon as they stretched out their hand to the religionists then they became defiled. In order to test their integrity God permitted them to suffer at the hands of religious practitioners and their persecutors. It was under such conditions that the following Psalm was written: “For the voice of him that rfeproacheth and blasphemeth; by reason of the enemy and avenger. All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way; though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death. If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange god [such as saluting flags or images, or giving praise and worship to creatures and things, indulging in religious formalism]; shall not God search this out! for he knoweth the secrets of the heart.”—Ps. 44:16-21.
7	Jehovah, thus dealing with his typical covenant people, made known to them his rule that discipline must be applied to all who receive his approval and that often that discipline brings a severe test upon his chosen people. Long thereafter the apostle restated that divine rule relative to discipline as applied to the antitypical or spiritual Israelites, showing that the rule applies to all who enter into a covenant to do God’s will. (Heb. 12: 5-13) The nation of Israel did forget God and their covenant with him. They failed to give heed to his warning concerning religion or idolatry. Their leaders turned to tradition and forgot and ignored the Word of God and
thus made God’s Word of none effect toward aiding his people. Hence Jehovah enforced his judgment against that nation by completely destroying it. (Ps. 106:36,37; Matt. 23:38) That nation, destroyed as such, never again can exist. There were some individuals amongst the Israelites, however, that remained true and faithful to God, and these were approved by him and shall have his everlasting blessing.
’ Israel’s destiny foreshadowed the destiny of “Christendom”, that is, the nations that call themselves “Christian”, because such nations openly declare themselves to be the servants of Almighty God. Such nations, therefore, are in an implied covenant to be obedient to God. The things that came to pass upon Israel, the typical nation, were ensamples, or types, of what must come to pass at the end of the world affecting particularly those nations that claim to be Christian nations. “Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that thinketh he stand-eth take heed lest he fall.”—1 Cor. 10:11,12.
THE CHURCH
’“The church of the living God” is the “church of the firstborn”, composed of Christ Jesus and the members of “his body” in glory. (1 Tim. 3:15; Heb. 12: 22, 23; Eph. 1: 22, 23) The church is the “holy nation” of Jehovah, devoted wholly and entirely to the service of Almighty God. It is the chosen inheritance of Jehovah which shall be forever to his praise. “But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light: which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God; which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.”—1 Pet. 2: 9,10.
10	That holy nation has but dne God, who is Jehovah, and concerning which it is written: “Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people whom he hath chosen for his inheritance.” Those who enter into a covenant to become a part of that nation must follow righteousness, and, they failing to do so, their destiny is destruction: “Righteousness exalteth a nation : but sin is a reproach to any people.”—Prov. 14: 34.
11	Companies or congregations of the church began to be established by the apostles of Jesus Christ, who went about and gathered together Christians that they might be instructed and grow up in a knowledge and wisdom of the Lord. Such companies or congregations met for study and worship in the private homes, and these companies were called “the church” because they were prospective members of the church: “Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church which is in his house.
WATCHTOWER,
July 1, 1941
And when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea.” (Col. 4:15,16) “Likewise greet the church that is in their house. Salute my wellbeloved Epaenetus, who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ.” (Rom. 16: 5; Philem. 2) These and many other scriptures show that the church of God is not an organization ruled by man or a company of men. Christ Jesus is the Head and Ruler of the church, by the will of Almighty God. The Lord Jesus began to choose the members of the church when he was on the earth in the flesh. After his resurrection and ascension into heaven he sent his apostles forth, who went about preaching the true gospel and baptizing those who came to the Lord and entered into a covenant to do his will. The apostles made no effort to organize and arbitrarily rule the body, which body should have its own fixed rules and regulations; but they did appoint servants in the congregation who were to aid, direct and comfort the congregation by and with the Word of God. It was after the apostles had finished their earthly existence that the organization became defiled and selfish men, called “the clergy”, were put in control.
12	“Catholic” means “general” or “universal”, and is not a name that properly belongs to a religious organization. For some time after the apostles’ time the term “Catholic” was applied to the entire body of Christian people who worshiped God in spirit and in truth. It then included all the Christian people throughout the earth. Later there was a separation between the western and eastern companies and the western division assumed the title “Catholic” and the eastern took the name “Orthodox”, and each became a religious institution in due time. It was after the Reformation that the organization at Rome asserted its claim to the exclusive use of the name “Catholic”. Undoubtedly in the earlier days there were genuine and faithful Christians in both the eastern and the western organization above mentioned. But gradually ambitious men came into power in the organization. The translation of the Scriptures into the Latin called “the Vulgate”, and which name means the “common” edition of the Scriptures, was done mostly by Jerome, a very devout man. It seems certain that he was devoted fully to the Lord God and to Christ Jesus. There must have been many others of such unselfish men during the early days of the Christian era. The Roman Catholic organization has since adopted the Vulgate as the official Bible of that organization; and the Douay Version, used generally by the Catholic organization, was translated from the Vulgate. No doubt there have been sincere men among the servants and priests of the Catholic Church organization, and which is called “the Catholic Church”, even though the name
197
“church” does not properly belong to that organization. It is the doctrines and practices of the Catholic organization that are in complete conflict with the Word of God, and for this reason attention is called to the same from time to time. It is never proper or right to ridicule any man or group of men because they are Catholic, but it is entirely right and proper to call attention to the fact that the Catholic organization has turned away from the Bible and forgotten God. The purpose of this is to enable those sincere Catholic persons to see and appreciate their piiv-ilege to flee from religion and flee to the Lord under the protection of the King of the great Theocracy.
13	The term “Catholic Church” strictly means the controlling or ruling body of authority, called “the Hierarchy”. That body of men in control was organized long after the days of the apostles and after the days of the early Christians. The many members of the Catholic Church organization are called “the children of the church”, and these have nothing to say about the government of that body. Ambitious men organized and gained control of the Roman Catholic organization, which is now devoted to religion and politics. Catholic doctrines and “Catholic Action” show that the organization as such has forgotten God. Sincere' Catholic men and women have separated themselves from that “church” organization and have freely set forth the facts showing the reason why a true and sincere Christian cannot remain in it. As proof that the Catholic “church” organization has fallen away from the Bible and forgotten God the following quotations set out below are taken from a book entitled “Rome Stoops to Conquer”, written by a sincere Catholic, Doctor Barrett, and published in 1935:
“A large proportion of Catholic Action partakes of politics, and is a political penetration, an infiltration into the political world of a new force and agency. . . . 'That the Catholic Church is, to say the least, certainly one of the major forces of the world ... is generally admitted.’ This ‘admittedly major force of the world’ is focused today on the problem of the future of this country. . . . Catholic Action ... in practice ... is the Catholic group fighting their way to control America. . . . There was a time —it is now past—when only pious Catholics took part in the work of the Church. But today many Catholics who cannot qualify as pious are busy about Catholic Action. Catholicism now is something that partakes of clannishness, and that is constituted in large part by social and political and ‘club’ affiliations.”
14	Then Doctor Barrett quotes from a high Catholic official these words, which appear in the New York Times January 7, 1935: “Catholic men should unite in order to be able to tell legislatures that they must not introduce bills which are inimical to the ideals of the family or the ideals of the Catholic
198
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Church. They should organize so as to be strong enough to insist that school teachers who teach ‘pernicious doctrines’ be removed.”
15	The Converted Catholic, a magazine published by sincere men who withdrew from the priesthood of the Catholic organization, in its issue of June, 1940, published the following: Tlitler’s “objectives are the same as those sought for four centuries by Jesuit-led Catholicism in its efforts to destroy the effects of the Reformation. Nazi-fascist dictators, all products of the Catholic Church, have supplied the means that are rapidly bringing these objectives to realization.” “In Germany and in Central Europe Hitler has undertaken to destroy entirely all freedom of the spirit, and his attack can be placed in the wTin column of the Catholic Church.” “Catholic Action in the United States is feverishly working for ‘the organization of a corporative movement and the creation of a corporative state’.” ’
WORSHIP
16	Compulsory worship is an abomination in the sight of God even as hypocrisy is abominable: “God is a spirit; and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.” (John 4:24) Because that old, religious system persecuted men in Europe and compelled them to indulge in formal religious ceremonies or suffer severe bodily punishment, sincere men and women immigrated to the new land of America, where they might worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience. Organizations composed of sincere believers in God and in Christ sprang up throughout America and then the nation advanced. States were formed and organized and in due time these states united in what is since known as the United States of America and became the nation where it was declared that every man has the right to worship God in his own way, which does not do injury to others. The states each adopted a constitution or fundamental law, in which Almighty God is recognized as supreme, and in which it is declared that the people have a right to worship God in spirit and in truth according to their conscience. The states separately and unitedly thereafter called themselves Christian, and the nation of America has since claimed to be a Christian nation. The highest court of America in terms declared: “This is a Christian nation.” By the course of action of the states and of the nation America became a part of “Christendom”, and is in an implied covenant to obey the law of Almighty God, and to refrain from enacting or enforcing any law that is contrary to the law of Almighty God.
17	Eminent law-writers have proclaimed the true doctrine that all laws of the nations find their authority only in the law of God. The constitution of the United States provides that Congress shall make no
law respecting the establishment of religion, thus recognizing that every man is free to worship or not to worship as he may be moved by his own conscience and sincere desire to serve God. But since the year 1914 the states and the nation have taken a contrary course. Many of the states attempt by law to forbid the freedom of worship in the manner God has prescribed in his Word and, contrary to God’s Word, attempt to compel the people to indulge in certain forms of worship. The states and the nation have clearly forgotten God and his law, which must govern all that are in an actual or in an implied covenant to do God’s law.
18	All the nations of Europfe have claimed to be Christian nations, and thereby all together form what is generally known as “Christendom”. In each and every one of these nations the Bible has been published and recognized for a time as God’s Word. By their claim and course of action such nations entered into an implied covenant and recognized and agreed to obey the law of God. All these nations, as the indisputable facts show, have forgotten God.
KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERIENCE
18	All the nations of “Christendom” have received the warning by and through the Word of God that “righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any people”. (Prov. 14: 34) Not only have the nations had the Word of God, by which they could have been properly guided, but they have had the history of the experiences of others that have gone before and have been destroyed because they had forgotten God and his Word. Jehovah God brought the flood upon the world, which destroyed all save eight persons, Noah and his family. This He did because that people pushed aside and wholly ignored God’s Word. This forms a warning to “Christendom”, but “Christendom” has forgotten to give heed to that warning. “Christendom” has forgotten that God vindicated his name by the flood and that he will likewise vindicate his name by destroying all who turn away from him. “Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.”—Ps. 28: 5.
FIGHTING GOD
10	The nations of “Christendom” have forgotten that God long ago declared his purpose to rule the world by his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, and that God gave warning to all rulers to receive and support Christ the King, or otherwise suffer the consequences: “Be wise now, therefore, 0 ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.”—Ps. 2:10-12.
July 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
199
21	Instead of supporting the King, the nations fight against him and against Jehovah and persecute those servants of God who tell the people of his righteous government, The Theocracy. In every nation of “Christendom” the servants of Jehovah and his King are persecuted, and the Lord Jesus Christ counts such treatment as done unto himself. Therefore God’s servants pray the prayer which he recorded in his Word and taught them to pray, to wit: “Arise, 0 Lord; let not man prevail; let the heathen be judged in thy sight. Put them in fear, 0 Lord; that the nations may know themselves to be but men. Selah.” (Ps. 9:19, 20) It is certain, therefore, that all nations shall soon know that Jehovah is the Mighty God and that puny man cannot successfully fight against him.
22	The “times of the nations” have come to an end, and of that all the nations that have had the Bible have received due warning. That end of the nations under Satan’s uninterrupted rule came in 1914, when Christ Jesus was enthroned as King of The Theocracy. (Luke 21:24) Christ Jesus, the great Judge, now has before him all the nations for judgment, and he is judging and separating the obedient from those who have forgotten God. By their course of action those opposing The Theocracy are all put on the side or in the group of those who have forgotten God.
23	Christians have been duly warned of the Lord to keep themselves separate and apart from the politics and commerce and military rule of this wicked world. The religious institutions that claim to be Christian have forgotten the Word of God concerning such, and which plainly states: “For the worship that is pure and holy before God the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and that one keep himself unspotted from the world.” (Jas. 1: 27, Syriac) “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.” (Jas. 4: 4) All the religious institutions today participate in the political affairs of this world, even though the Scriptures and the facts show beyond any question that Christ Jesus is now present putting his kingdom in operation.
24	The nations of Italy and Germany for centuries have claimed to be Christian nations, and within those nations there have been many faithful and true witnesses to the name and kingdom of Jehovah. Today those two nations are ultra-religious and are engaged, with the full co-operation of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, that old religious institution, in a wicked and bloody effort to compel all the people to come under dictatorial power. Falsely and arbitrarily those religious leaders claim to operate in the name of God, and yet they ignore entirely his Word and hesitate not to kill the servants of God. Not only do such nations prosecute a cruel and wicked war,
which has brought great suffering and mourning upon the people, but they blaspheme and reproach the name of God and his King. Those nations, together with the other nations that have claimed to be Christian, have forgotten God’s “everlasting covenant” concerning the sanctity of human blood. They go on, ruthlessly and wickedly, in the destruction of human life. Therefore says Jehovah concerning them: “The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.”— Isa. 24:5.
26	Many professed “Christian nations” provide their church basements with implements of war and destruction contrary to the Word of God. They join their forces with others engaging in mortal combat to gratify ambitious desires to gain power and control of the people. Such deplorable conditions Jehovah by his prophet long ago foretold, and that the net results would be as stated in the following texts: “The earth mourneth, and fadeth away; the world languisheth, and fadeth away; the haughty people of the earth do languish. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.”—Isa. 24: 4, 6.
VERY religious
26	Forgetting their covenant with God, the Israelites became very religious and turned to demon practices, and in this they foreshadowed “Christendom” and concerning which Jehovah says: “For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and buildeth temples; and Judah hath multiplied fenced cities [failing to rely upon God’s promise for defense and protection] ; but I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.”—Hos. 8:14.
27	A similar condition was also foretold by the apostle, which would obtain in the “last days”, where we now are, and this serves as a warning to the faithful that they should avoid all religious practices or demonism, to wit: “This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away.”—2 Tim. 3:1-5.
28	In these days of great world distress and suffering, made so by reason of the Devil’s activities as foretold by the Lord (Rev. 12:12), the religious leaders of the world, forgetting God’s commandment, set specific times for public prayers for peace. At these
200
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
appointed times they draw nigh to God with their mouths, but with no heart devotion whatsoever to Jehovah and his King. They desire to receive that which pleases them, but ignore God’s will. The Jew religionists did so, and now the religionists of the nations of “Christendom” do likewise. Therefore says the Lord Jehovah: “Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me [inside their cathedrals and temples], but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark [where conspiracies are hatched against the Theocratic servants], and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us? Surely your turning of things upside down [putting the state above God, and man’s law above God’s law] shall be esteemed as the potter’s clay [subject to the will of the potter]; for shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no understanding?” (Isa. 29:13-16) Therefore the nations and their religious, political leaders are made ‘vessels fit for destruction’ at Armageddon, as the Lord declares.— Rom. 9:22.
29	In these days of peril the religionists are exactly in a state like unto that of the Pharisees in Jesus’ time. (Matt. 15:1-9) The religious leaders convince themselves that they are right, and therefore rely upon their own wisdom, and this is due to the fact that they have forgotten God and his Word. Concerning such it is written: “There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.” (Prov. 14:12) “The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise.”—Prov. 12:15.
30	Pastors of religious organizations other than the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have forgotten that the only true guide for the Christian is God’s Word. Becoming wise in their own conceits, they turn to imperfect reasoning of men and proclaim man’s so-called “wisdom” in the place and stead of God’s Word. A well-known pastor of a religious organization recently, by radio, made a statement to this effect: “Christianity is progressive. The world is piogressing in Christianity and in due time will reach perfection.” Had he relied upon God’s Word he would not have made that statement. Christ Jesus is the great Christian, and hence Christianity is perfect, and not progressive. Christ is the “express image” of Almighty God, and all His works are per
fect and “done in righteousness”. All true followers of Christ Jesus are guided by the Word of God. It being perfect at all times, it is not progressive from a lower to a higher degree. Religious leaders, such as the pastor above mentioned, by relying upon human philosophy waste and destroy in the minds of others the Word of God; and concerning such it is written: “For the pastors are become brutish [wasters, destructive as by fire], and have not sought the Lord; therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered.”—Jer. 10:21.
31	The pastors or religious teachers claim to represent God and, instead of teaching the Word of God, teach the wisdom or tradition of men, and thereby not only have they forgotten God, but they do harm to those persons who stay under their teaching. They steal from the people the Word of God and substitute therefor the doctrines of men. It was so amongst the Israelites, and hence what God said to the pastors of the Jews applies with even stronger force now to the pastors of “Christendom”, who claim to teach the Bible and who ignore the same. Such pastors are called “prophets” because they proclaim, and concerning them it is written: “I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies? yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart; which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams, which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal. The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord. Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces? Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that steal my words everyone from his neighbour. Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that use their tongues, and say, He saith. Behold, I am against them that prophesy false dreams, saith the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies; and by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not profit this people at all, saith the Lord.”—Jer. 23: 25-32.
32	The Israelites were God’s covenant people, and they forgot God. “Christendom” claims to be God’s covenant people and has forgotten God. The Word of God spoken against those who forget him applies both to Israelites and to professed Christians: “Because my people [‘Christendom’, the professed people] hath forgotten me, they have turned incense to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in their ways from the ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast up; to make their land desolate, and a
July 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
201
perpetual hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and wag his head. I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; I will shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity. Then said they, Come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah [Jehovah’s witnesses, of which Jeremiah was one, and who foreshadowed the present-day witnesses of Jehovah]; for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet: come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.”—Jer. 18:15-18.
EVIL SERVANT
33	Christ Jesus tells of the action and the destiny of the “evil servant”. Such have forgotten God and his commandments. Once claiming to be for the Kingdom, now such show by their course of action that they have forgotten God, and to them Jehovah says: “But ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain [the Kingdom, The Theocracy], that prepare a table for that troop [Gad; a demon (see margin)], and that furnish the drink offering unto that number [Meni; a demon (see marginal reading)]. Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter; because when I called, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not.”—Isa. 65:11,12.
34	The “evil servant” smites the witnesses of Jehovah and thus fights against The Theocracy, and their destiny is the same as that of the hypocrites: “And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”—Matt. 24: 51.
UNGODLY
35	There are those who have had every opportunity to know the Word of God and have spurned it. The evolutionists, many of whom pose as preachers in some church organization, deny the Word of God and teach their students and parishioners at colleges and school to ignore the Word of God. They do not believe in God and His Word because they are wise in their own conceits. The day of judgment has come and Christ Jesus, the great Judge, accompanied by his host of angels, now judges the nations. (Matt. 25: 31-35) Concerning the same it is written: “And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all; and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.”—Jude 14,15.
36	The religious leaders, the “man of sin”, the “evil
servant”, the ungodly, and the sinners, utter cruel speech against the faithful servants of Jehovah who declare his name and his Theocratic Government, and bring much trouble upon such faithful servants of the Most High. Therefore it is written of them, and which applies at the present time: “seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled, rest with us; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.”—2 Thess. 1:6-10.
37	If any person thinks that the religious systems have not corrupted the nations of earth, that person is deceived. God has not left the matter in doubt. The religions of earth, the product of demons, have brought about great confusion; and hence demon organizations, with religion riding on the top, are called “Babylon”; and concerning this it is written : “Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord’s hand, that made all the earth drunken; the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are mad. Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed; howl for her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country; for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.” (Jer. 51:7-9) In further support of that conclusion the Lord says: “And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues."—Rev. 18: 2-4.
WARNING
” This warning is sounded by the Lord for the benefit of all persons of good-will toward The Theocracy. Such as heed the warning will speedily flee out and away from religious organizations and find safety under the Lord Jesus Christ. Those who believe God and his Word should now see and understand that God is not a respecter of persons or na
202
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tions, and that all who have learned of Jehovah and his kingdom and have then forgotten God and turned away to the “beggarly elements” of the world, and also all who fail and refuse to hear and obey God and his King, shall go down at Armageddon, which is near. God’s judgment is written, and it is certain to be executed.
39	But before the execution of his judgment the Lord sends forth his witnesses to declare his name and his kingdom throughout the earth. This he does for a witness, in order that the nations may have no excuse for their course of action and end. They fix their own destiny. Therefore the Lord sends forth his servants with this commandment, which they must obey: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.”—Matt. 24:14.
40	The fact that in all the nations Jehovah’s witnesses are now hated and persecuted is strong circumstantial evidence that the witness work is about completed and that Armageddon is very near. Because many have forgotten God and become enemies of God and of his servants the words of the prophet now apply to them, to wit: “My zeal hath consumed me; because mine enemies have forgotten thy words. Thy word is very pure; therefore thy servant loveth it. I am small and despised; yet do not I forget thy precepts.”—Ps. 119:139-141.
“ With the zeal that belongs to the “house [or organization] of the Lord” the faithful remnant and their companions now say, as God has taught them: “0 worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness; fear before him, all the earth. Say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth; the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved; he shall judge the people righteously.” (Ps. 96:9,10) Those who are of good-will toward God will now hear the glad news and hasten to the Lord that they may have a share in proclaiming his name and his kingdom.
42	The remnant of God’s “holy nation” still on the earth have not forgotten God. The “other sheep” of the Lord now fleeing to the antitypical “city of refuge” do not forget God and his “wonderful works to the children of men”. Such “other sheep” continue faithful and in due time will form the “great multitude” and constitute the “nations” that shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth”. Therefore Jehovah now says to the remnant and to his “other sheep”: “Rejoice, 0 ye nations, with his people; for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.”—Deut. 32:43.
43	The “great multitude” is taken from the various nations, kindreds, people and tongues and shall form the new nations of the earth. God’s spiritual class, now with Christ Jesus, and having in mind at all
times the name of Jehovah, sing: “Who shall not fear thee, 0 Lord, and glorify thy name! for thou only art holy; for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.” (Rev. 15:4) Those who are of good-will toward God hear the glad song and hasten to join the singers in doing service to the Lord.
DESTINY
44	The judgment of the nations is now in progress, and hence all are before Christ Jesus, the great Judge. The religious organizations claim to serve God, but they have forgotten him and his Word and have turned entirely to the things of this world. Such religious institutions join forces with political and commercial strong men, and together they say, <r\Ve will rule the earth.” They have forgotten that Jesus directs all Christians to pray for the coming of The Theocracy, which shall rule the world in righteousness. (Matt. 6:10) Religious great men and their political allies assert their claim to rule the world, and thus, together, they constitute “the abomination of desolation”. This truth now plainly appears to all persons of good-will, and to such the Lord now says: “But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the mountains.”— Mark 13:14.
45	The Lord here also warns those who start to flee that they must not turn back, and that if they do turn back and forget God and his provision for them their destiny will be the same as that of others who forget God. Such are put in the same class with the wicked, the “evil servant” and the hypocrites, and the destiny of such the Lord declares in these words: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.” (Ps. 9:17) “The Lord pre-serveth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.”—Ps. 145: 20.
46	Those who are of good-will toward God and who desire life must now flee: “For the day of the Lord [Armageddon] is near upon all the heathen [the nations that are against The Theocracy] ; as thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon thine own head. For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the heathen [the nations that are against The Theocracy] drink continually, yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow down, and they shall be as though they had not been.” —Obad. 15,16.
THE“OTHER SHEEP”
4T	Those of good-will, the “other sheep” of the Lord, who will form the “great multitude”, must be faithful, and will be to the everlasting praise of Jehovah and the vindication of his name. All such, who have
^He WATCHTOWER.
203
July 1, 1941
now taken the step to put themselves on the side of the Lord, must see to it that they do not forget God. What must one do to avoid that calamity! Shun religion, because it is demonism. Avoid the vain babblings of so-called worldly “wise men” and study to show yourself approved unto God. (2 Tim. 2:15,16; 1 Tim. 6:20,21) Do not lean to your own selfish reasoning, nor to that of any man: “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.” (Prov. 3:5,6) That means, in everything you have, acknowledge the Lord God and, in everything you receive at his gracious hands, acknowledge him and give him the thanks for the same.
48	To “seek meekness” means to be willing to learn and diligent to ascertain the will of God; and this you must do by continuously applying yourself to the study of God’s Word. It is of vital importance that you learn God’s way, because that is the way of righteousness. “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.”—Ps. 25: 9,10.
49	The enemies of all of God’s people are many. Satan, the chief of demons, leading a host of demons associated with him; the religionists of earth, who practice demonism; and all who are under the influence and power of demons, are fighting against the covenant people of God. All such hate those who have declared themselves for Jehovah and his Theocracy. If you have taken your stand on the side of God and his kingdom, see to it that you are continuously loyal and faithful to The Theocracy, walk in the way of the Lord, and continue to pray unto God through Christ Jesus. An appropriate prayer the Lord has put before all who have agreed to do his will, in these
words: “Consider mine enemies; for they are many: and they hate me with cruel hatred. 0 keep my soul, and deliver me; let me not be ashamed; for I put my trust in thee. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on thee.”—Ps. 25:19-21.
80	There is but one way to heal the people of the nations which are now desirous of being healed, and that is the way which Jehovah God has provided. Christ Jesus is at the temple of God, and his “holy city”, Zion, is builded up, and out from the holy city begins to flow the water of life, that all who will may partake thereof and live. (Rev. 22:17) The remnant were first permitted to see and appreciate the water of life coming from the throne of God, after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple. Now the “other sheep” have the privilege of seeing and partaking of the blessings thus provided. Concerning this it is written : “And he showed me a river of water of life, bright as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb, in the midst of the street thereof. And on this side of the river and on that was the tree of life, bearing twelve manner of fruits, yielding its fruit every month; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.” (Rev. 22:1,2, Am. Rev. Ver.)—See Light, Book Two, page 254; Vindication, Book Three, page 303.
61 Christ Jesus, with his own precious lifeblood, has bought the human race, and those who believe in God and Christ and devote themselves to the Lord and obey his rules shall have the benefit of the means God has provided to give them life through Christ Jesus. There is no other means of salvation. (Acts 4:12) Demonism, religion, and human philosophy are altogether in vain. Jehovah God is the “fountain of life”, and he ministers life by and through Jesus Christ, and administers that life and attending blessings to those who faithfully obey and serve him.
ASSEMBLY FOR WORSHIP
ALL Christians worship Jehovah God in spirit and in truth. All such love Jehovah and Christ his King and love those who truly worship Jehovah and the King. It is a joy to such and a source of great spiritual strength to assemble together to worship the Lord, and it is certain that such is pleasing to the Most High.
The evidence is certain that Jehovah is guiding his devoted people at the present time and that he is leading them to one place that they may there assemble and worship Almighty God as he has commanded. For the year 1941 it appears to be pleasing to Jehovah to have his people assemble at St. Louis, August 6-10 inclusive. The place of assembly will be at The Arena, 5700 Oakland Avenue, where space is provided for the assembly and accommodation of approximately 75,000 persons. If a greater number than that attend additional space can be readily provided.
Just why Jehovah is leading his covenant people to the
Missouri city it is not necessary now for us to know. In his due time he will make that clearly to appear. It is sufficient now to know that the spirit of God leads his people there. All who love righteousness and hate wickedness, and who strive to do right, will be welcome. That means all persons who are of good-will toward the great Theocrat will be welcome, and it is hoped that as many as possible will attend.
Throughout the entire earth the people now mourn and many are seeking that which would bring them comfort. Jehovah has commissioned his people to “comfort all that mourn”. All who are fully devoted to Jehovah will be diligent to fulfill that divinely given commission. As the consecrated journey to and from the convention, and while there, each one should be diligent to render comfort to those who have a hearing ear, desiring to know of God’s gracious provision.
At other times many cities have been tied together with
204
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
land wires and by radio and all have participated in one convention though gathered together at many different points. This year it appears to be Jehovah’s will that all who can do so shall personally attend at one point. That fact calls to mind the Scriptures concerning “the general assembly ... of the firstborn”, which assembly may be quite near. For many who attend there will be some inconveniences and some hardships, no doubt, but all such will remember the words of the apostle recorded at Acts 14:22.
The joys and attending blessings will far outweigh all inconveniences. The Almighty God and His King will make all necessary provision for the protection and blessing of those who are devoted to The Theocracy. Let all such now turn their hearts and faces toward the convention of August 6-10 and keep before the Lord in prayer and supplication that coming assembly, that Jehovah may there pour out a great blessing upon all who love and serve Him that these may have a part in the vindication of his name.
"HIS CHARIOT”
^V^^THO maketh the clouds his chariot.” “The char-\X/ iots of God are twenty thousand, even thou’ ” sands upon thousands: the Lord is among them.” (Psalm 104: 3 and 68:17, Am. Rev. Ver.) Chariots are symbols of war, and the mention of them in prophecy suggests that the day of God’s wrath and the execution of his judgment against the enemy has come. That in the Scriptures chariots are used to symbolize war equipment, and the preparation for war as well as war itself, note Isaiah 66:15,16: “For, behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh; and the slain of the Lord shall be many.” This text and others prove that the fight at the universal war of Armageddon will not be merely a symbolic affair, because Jehovah God announces his purpose to clean Satan’s organization off the earth. Let those who would put on the soft pedal concerning that wicked organization of the Devil, visible and invisible, beware. The invisible army of the Lord God is marching on to victory. Jehovah marches to war with his “thousands upon thousands” of chariots of war. Knowing in advance that this victory is certain is a source of great courage and strength to all who love righteousness.
Hundreds of years before Christ the prophet Zechariah was given a vision of the militant organization of Jehovah. The prophet looked again, and tells what he saw: “And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains; and the mountains were mountains of brass.” (Zech. 6:1) “Chariots” here are symbols of Jehovah’s great war organization, and there being four chariots means that God’s organization is a four-square one, fully equipped to push the enemy from every point and to completely defeat and destroy him. The fact that these chariots come out from between two mountains of brass symbolically says that they are exceedingly strong. “And the mountains were mountains of copper.” (Leeser’s trans.) Gold, silver and copper are classed as “noble” metals, and hence their coming out from between mountains of copper or brass shows they are beyond the earthly quality, therefore superhuman, and are sent by Jehovah God and hence are in no way a part of Satan’s visible, earthly government. .These chariots picture the fighting organization of Jehovah God under the leadership of Christ Jesus.
The ancient Israelites misused and abused Jehovah’s, temple at Jerusalem, and Jehovah therefore caused the
prophet Ezekiel to prophesy of the destruction of Jerusalem. “Christendom,” or “organized Christianity”, and which is the nominal spiritual Israel, has misused and abused God’s true spiritual temple, and God’s judgment of destruction against it is recorded in the Scriptures and is now being pronounced by "his witnesses on earth. The first chapter of Ezekiel’s prophecy is a description of Jehovah’s organization as it appeared under symbols to the prophet. This vision of Ezekiel shows the Lord God Almighty sitting upon his throne over and above all the forces of his organization and coming “out of the north” and moving forward to the destruction of the unfaithful city Jerusalem, picturing “Christendom” of today.
Jehovah God has a universal organization. He has always had an organization, and from time immemorial his only begotten Son, The Logos or Word of God, was the chief officer of Jehovah’s organization. Because of the rebellion of Satan and the resulting fall of man, Jehovah God made the Logos a man upon earth. At the time of Jesus’ baptism in the Jordan, there began God’s “new creation”, which He will use in the vindication of His name and in dealing with mankind, “reconciling the world unto himself.” Jesus Christ was put to the test, and proved faithful and true, and was exalted to the highest place in heaven next to Jehovah God himself and was made the Head of God’s capital organization, Zion, for ever. And this was in fulfillment of prophecy.—Ps. 110:1-4; Heb. 7:17.
With the Israelites of old Jehovah God organized typical Zion, which was prophetic of the real Zion to come. He then organized the real Zion, with Christ Jesus as Head, and which is therefore God’s organization real. The faithful followers of Christ Jesus, finally 144,000 in number, are built up in Zion and made a part thereof. (Rev. 7: 4-8; and 14:1-3) The exalted Lord Jesus, as God’s executive officer, prepares a place for his faithful followers in that capital organization.—John 14:1-3.
The prophet Ezekiel, when sent to prophesy concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, was caused to write down his vision of God’s organization, as depicted on the front-cover page of this magazine, which please see. (Ezek. 1:4-28) He writes: “And I looked, and behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire.” In that vision there now appeared four living creatures, every one of which had four faces and four wings. Ezekiel writes: “Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four
July 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
205
living creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the likeness of a man. And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings. And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf’s foot; and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass. And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides ; and they four had their faces and their wings. Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward. As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the face of a man, and the face of a lion on the right side; and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an eagle.”—Vss. 4-10.
Many centuries later the apostle John in exile had a like vision of four living creatures attending upon the Lord at his temple. John writes of his vision: “And before the throne [there was] as it were a sea of glass like unto crystal; and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, four living creatures full of eyes before and behind. And the first creature was like a lion, and the second creature like a calf, and the third creature had a face as of a man, and the fourth creature was like a flying eagle. And the four living creatures, having each one of them six wings, are full of eyes round about and within: and they have no rest day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who is to come.” (Rev. 4: 6-8, Am. Rev. Ver.) Christ Jesus is “in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures”. (Rev. 5: 6, A.R.V.) He is the first of God’s organization, and all other creatures therein operate around his throne. The four living creatures, or living ones, therefore represent the foursquareness or completeness of God’s organization. These are “full of eyes before and behind”, showing that those of God’s organization are ever on the alert beholding His hand that they may do his will as he indicates, and hence are guided by divine wisdom.—Ps. 123:1-3.
John’s description of the four living creatures, that is, of God’s organization, follows, and the first one is “like a lion”, denoting courage and royal justice. (Ps. 89:14; Ps 9:4) Justice holds the place of first importance. The second living creature resembled an ox or “steer”. (Diaglott trans.) In the prophetic temple built by King Solomon the copper laver or “molten sea” rested upon twelve oxen. The ox denotes power and strength, and the symbol seems to say: Almighty power and strength supports the divine organization, and God will accomplish his purposes by and through his organization.
The third living one or creature had the face of a man, which depicts love as the motive. “God is love”; and man is described as being made in the image of God. The man Christ Jesus said: “He that hath seen me hath seen the Father,” because he is perfect in love. Every action in God’s organization is prompted by love. Nothing else could be in harmony with him or pleasing to him. It therefore shows that those who are privileged to have any part in his organization must be prompted wholly by unselfishness.
The fourth living creature was “like a flying eagle”; which depicts far-sightedness, exalted wisdom and swiftness in action: “Swifter than the eagles of the heaven.” (Lam. 4:19) “Fly away, as an eagle toward heaven.” (Prov. 23:5) “Wisdom is too high for a fool.” (Prov. 24: 7) The
eagle flies high, and wisdom is never dimmed by age. “Thy youth is renewed like the eagle’s.” (Ps. 103: 5) Every part of God’s organization is swift to obey his commandments, and they are guided by divine wisdom.
The four living creatures John saw had each six wings. The three pairs of wings had by each would suggest that the possessor can fly and provide protection at the same time, therefore that the creatures of God’s organization move swiftly without hindrance in the performance of Jehovah’s purposes and at the same time full protection is provided for those members of his organization that are on the earth. Their protection, of course, is provided by invisible members of the organization. These creatures never rest, showing that the organization of Jehovah is always alert and on the move. Nor do those of the organization keep silence lest they should disturb the peace of some of Satan’s organization. (Isa. 62: 6, 7) Continuously they sing praises to the name of the eternal King, saying: “Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.”
The four creatures that the prophet Ezekiel saw had each the four faces of the four living creatures seen by the apostle John: “Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward; two wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their bodies. And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was to go, they went; and they turned not when they went. As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps; it went up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.” (Vss. 11-13) “And there appeared in the cherubims the form of a man’s hand under their wings.” (Chapter 10, verse 8) The form of a man’s hand under the wings of these living creatures seems to say that God has used the hand of human creatures to bear the coals of God’s message of fiery indignation which the Lord will use against the enemy organization.
By each of the living creatures which had four faces there appeared in the vision also one wheel upon the earth, all four wheels being of one likeness and being related to one another like the wheels of a four-wheeled chariot. “And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning. Now, as I beheld the living creatures, behold, one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four faces. The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the colour of a beryl; and they four had one likeness: and their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel. When they went, they went upon their four sides; and they turned not when they went. As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful; and their rings were full of eyes round about them four. And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them; and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up. Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels. When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels. And the likeness of
206
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the firmament upon the heads of the living creature was as the colour of the terrible crystal, stretched forth over their heads above. And under the firmament were their wings straight, the one toward the other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side, their bodies.”—Ezek. 1:14-23.
Thus there appeared over the heads of the living creatures a great expanse like terrible crystal to look upon. Under the expanse were the wings of the living creatures, each having four wings, two on each side of the body. When these creatures went, the sound of the wings was like the sound of many waters. “And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an host: when they stood, they let down their wings. And there was a voice from the firmament that was over their heads, when they stood, and had let down their wings.” (Vss. 24, 25) Thus the Lord calls attention to his coming in the most impressive manner, causing his message to be given a far-sounding proclamation. The world sees not his coming; but his faithful witnesses discern it and are caused to give proper announcement thereof.
Then the prophet beheld in the vision a firmament, and above the firmament and above everything animate and inanimate there appeared the likeness of a throne upon which a glorious person sat enshrined in perfect light: “And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone; and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it. And I saw as the colour of amber, as the appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about.”—Vss. 26, 27.
Thus above the expanse or firmament was the likeness of a great throne having the appearance of a sapphire stone, and upon the throne was one having the appearance of a man. There was the appearance of fire round about and within it, and the color was of amber. After describing the appearance of the one on the throne, then the prophecy adds: “As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud m the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake.” (Vs. 28) Ezekiel was there given a vision of Jehovah’s mighty organization and he fell upon his face. The vision pictured Jehovah’s superiority over his organization. God’s faithful remnant of witnesses on earth, whom Ezekiel foreshadowed, now must recognize Jehovah’s great organization and show proper veneration for it. They must worship and be fully obedient to “The Higher Powers”, to wit, Jehovah God and Christ Jesus.—Rom. 13:1.
Thus it is seen that the prophetic description is one fitly representing a mighty war chariot The number “four” appears prominently therein and is a divine number representing completeness. The vision, therefore, speaks prophetically of something complete, and is a prophecy to have a fulfillment in due time. The living creatures and the inanimate objects, or instruments, appearing in the vision, together give the appearance of an enormous living chariotlike organization extending high into the heavens, and over all of which Jehovah God presides. In that organization, and appearing next to Jehovah, is his great High Priest and Executive Officer, Christ Jesus. With him in heaven, and forming a part of the great living organization, are those faithful followers of Christ Jesus, including the apostles, who died and for whom the Lord prepared a place in God’s organization, and who had their resurrection to life in the spirit and were put in their places when the Lord Jesus came to his temple in 1918 for the judgment of his followers and the nations. Such resurrected ones are part of “the body of Christ”.
In that organization are also seraphim. There appear in the organization cherubim, who are executive officers of Jehovah and therefore members of the organization. Then appear legions of pure and mighty angels who have their places in the organization and perform their respective duties. Down on the earth are the anointed remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses, who constitute the “feet of Him”, which means the last members of the “body of Christ” on earth and for whom the Lord has prepared a place to stand and walk about in God’s organization; and these do what the Lord has for them to do, and they are a part of his organization. Now also a multitude of persons of good-will, who shall form the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors, become companions of the remnant in the Lord’s witness work, and thus become associated with God’s organization.
The entire organization, represented by the symbols in the vision, revolves within a circle of divine wisdom, represented by “eyes”, and is directed by the perfect wisdom that is from heaven above. The vision, therefore, speaks prophetically of God’s perfect and mighty organization. The prophet says that in the vision “out of the fire went forth lightning”. That must mean that Jehovah sends forth his truth through his organization, and that the “lightning” represents the illumination of that truth which comes from Jehovah.
The vision is a prophecy now in course of fulfillment, because that Theocratic organization is functioning since Jehovah by his representative Christ Jesus came to his temple. Furthermore, the coming of the Lord to his temple indicates that the time of hostilities for the destruction of Satan’s organization in heaven and earth has arrived, by reason of the fact that Jehovah is accompanied by his living creatures of his great organization and it moves in a great chariot-like formation prepared for and advancing for war, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty.”
Keep not thou silence, 0 God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, 0 God. . . . Let [thine enemies] be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish: that men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over aU the earth.—Psalm 83:1,17,18.
A WITNESS WHO DID NOT SEE DEATH
ABOUT two hundred and fifty years after man went wrong a grandson of Adam, named Enos, was born. By that time, as far as the Scriptures disclose, every man on earth was following the course of wickedness. This, of course, warrants the conclusion that all the human race was by that time under the control of man’s enemy, the Devil. This one must have thought that he had succeeded in having all men worship him and that he had turned them all away from their Creator; and therefore he set about to mock God by establishing a system of hypocrisy. It was in the days of Enos that hypocrisy began to manifest itself for the first time, and then in connection with a form of worship called religion.
In the Record it is written, at Genesis 4:26, marginal reading: “And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began men to call themselves by the name of the Lord [Jehovah].” Why should they desire to call themselves by the name of the Lord if they were wicked? The answer is, that such was a scheme of the great slanderer, or the Devil, to have the people pretend to be sons of God and yet to pursue a course in exact opposition to God, and thereby to ridicule and reproach God and hold his name up to scorn.
This ancient occurrence discloses a scheme of Satan the Devil which he has practiced ever since, namely, to have as a part of his visible organization amongst men some kind of organized system of religion, such as “Christendom”, by which he could bring ridicule and reproach upon the name of Jehovah. Furthermore, Satan knew that man was so constituted that he would need to worship someone higher than himself. Satan, of course, wished to keep man always under his control and have man to worship him; but should he not be able to keep man completely under his control and have his worship, then he would establish amongst men hypocrisy, and thus, while they would pretend to worship their Creator, they would be unfaithful to God. This practice of hypocrisy, or religion, would be a reproach upon the name of Jehovah and a ridicule of God. Later a few men did turn to the worship of the true God, but it is observed that throughout the ages the major portion of men’s worship has been religion, which is in reality demonism.
After Abel the first man mentioned with favor in the Scriptures was Enoch. He was of the seventh generation from Adam. (See Jude 14.) Enoch is held forth in great contrast to Enos and other men of his time. Aside from Abel every man from Adam down to the birth of Enoch was undoubtedly evil. The human race was going the road of corruption. Enoch was the exception. He believed in Jehovah God. He believed that some day God would reward all those who would obey Him. So active had Satan the Devil been that the people of earth by that time even doubted the existence of Jehovah God. It was necessary for Enoch to exercise faith that God actually exists. This was necessary in order for him to please God. As written at Hebrews 11:6: “Without faith it is impossible to please God; for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.” That Enoch pleased God is shown by the following record, at Genesis 5:24: “And Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God took him.” To the same effect Hebrews
11:5 testifies: “By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God.”
Enoch was a witness on the earth for Jehovah God. Surely he was known amongst the other men and known by the fact that he believed on God and served him, while all others were against Jehovah. Such faith under such adverse conditions was pleasing to God, and God rewarded that faith by translating Enoch. In those days it was usual for men to live for seven or eight centuries. Enoch lived only three hundred and sixty-five years, and then God took him away. No one saw him go, no one buried him, and no one knew where he went.
Satan the Devil had the power of death, and without doubt he would have killed Enoch had not God prevented him from so doing. Of course, God has the power of death, but he did not put Enoch to death for any wrongful act on Enoch’s part. Nor did Enoch die because of sickness, the result of the inheritance from Adam, his grandfather The Devil had nothing to do with putting Enoch to death. Enoch was a young man compared with his father Jared, who lived 800 years after he begot Enoch. While in the vigor of youth and while he walked with God and joyfully conformed himself to God’s righteous law, the Lord manifested his pleasure in the faith of Enoch by taking him away, by putting him to sleep without his having to pass through the bitter waters of a lingering or agonizing death
It seems reasonable that Enoch never saw anyone die, because the inspired apostle Paul testifies that Enoch did “not see death”. This same apostle, after enumerating a number of faithful men of old, including Enoch, states: “These all died in faith.” (Hebrews 11:5-13) It follows, of course, that Enoch was not taken away to live on some other planet, but that God took him by quietly and suddenly putting him to sleep without pain or anguish and without fear of the terrible monster death. Here God began to indicate that at some time he would destroy death and deliver all those who have faith in him from all their enemies, including the enemy death.—1 Cor. 15: 26.
Jude 14,15 records that Enoch prophesied that in some future time the Lord would come with a mighty host of holy ones and execute judgment upon the ungodly. Of course, he would give utterance to this prophecy in the presence of other men, and they would mock and jeer and taunt him, and then the Devil would use every power at his command to destroy Enoch. But Jehovah God held his hand over Enoch. It is evident that God had told Enoch, or by some means had put it into Enoch’s mind, that sometime in the future he would send His mighty representative, Christ Jesus, to execute judgment upon all the enemies of Jehovah God and deliver the people of good-will from bondage. The spirit of the Lord moved upon Enoch’s mind and caused him to prophesy, because his heart was right toward God. Enoch’s was the first prophecy by man of a coming Deliverer.
Thus, by these two men, Enos and Enoch, are made manifest religion, a detestable and hypocritical thing in the sight of Jehovah God, and the opposite, true faith, which is pleasing to Him.
207
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEERING IN EGYPT
“I was giving explanation of the Bible to about ten listeners, Italians, Mohammedans and Copts. Suddenly a Coptic priest came, the people giving him honor, a seat, and kissing his hands and offering him cigarettes. He asked what I was doing there. I started to give him the message. Astonished, he confidentially whispered: 'Where did you study such things ?’ I then said loudly before all listeners: ‘If you will also study such things, you have to take off your robe and follow Christ and his teachings.’ Mortified, he asked the grocer for his Bible so that I could prove to him the passages concerning the clerics. I asked him to read Matthew 23. Not knowing its contents, the clergyman took a grand position, pulled up his wide sleeves and started loudly to read in front of all listeners the passages thereof, while all were laughing at seeing him swallowing hard his spittle and uttering the words identifying himself in the passages he was reading; so he said: ‘Enough, please.’ At this I greeted them friendlily and left. For a week-end I had opportunity to go to Minia, Upper Egypt, and took some literature with me. In four days I distributed about 27 books and 81 booklets, and this very easily. Sunday I decided to distribute literature in the St. Tadros Coptic church. I sat beside a well-dressed lady, asking when the service would end. I asked what does the priest explain. She said she did not really understand. I then said I had books which translate the Scriptures properly, and attracted all her attention. She took eight booklets on a contribution. The collection of the church came along, one following the other, and the fourth was at the end a demonstration of beggars. I saw through a window there was a room attached to the auditorium of the church, in which a priest was sitting, the collectors giving him their collection. I rushed to this room, asking the priest to permit me to distribute some booklets on the Bible. He agreed, called me inside the church, set a desk for me, boys took my bag and spread its contents over the desk, I gave a little witness, and in about ten minutes all my literature was distributed in the very heart of this church. I gave a booklet as well to the priest, thanked him and went out. Next day I had to leave Minia by 5 a.m. train for Port Said, nine hours of continuous travel on express. In the train was a crowd of British soldiers coming from service for the week-end. I gave them the message, unfortunately having no books with me except a few Consolation. They took them happily. At Port Said I went to pay a visit to the sub-commandant and the commandant of the police, both British. We have long known each other. Though German-born I never cared about my own people, as I experienced from them the worst behavior a human could experience. I took with me the gramophone with the entire speech of Judge Rutherford, ‘Government and Peace.’ The commandant objected, but, after seeing the sub-commandant insisted, he consented, and they with their families listened to the whole speech and appointed me to come and get the gramophone two days later. Three days after, I called at their office, and they asked me to leave it another day for some others to listen to the speech in their houses. I asked the sub-commandant kindly to note the listeners in order to report to you the number of attendance.’’
208
PIONEERS CARRY ON BY BACK-CALLS
“Working in this district for some time prior to the outlawing of our organization, we had met a number of people of good-will and at that time were carrying on back-calls and model studies. We kept in touch with every one that showed the slightest interest, realizing that ‘this gospel of the kingdom must continue to be preached’. From personal experience, we cannot say too much in favor of obeying instructions published in the Informant. One point that helped us very much was to remember that ‘every call was a prospective back-call, every back-call a prospective model study, every person attending the model study a prospective publisher’. Indeed it has worked out that way in this district. There has been an increase of twenty-five active publishers, the direct result of back-calls and model studies; while others just coming in are showing evidence of desiring to have a part in the work. Some who have been identified with the organization for some time and who were rather reluctant to have a part in the work ‘while the dew was on the ground’, were encouraged when they saw the zeal of the new publishers, and have put forth greater efforts in the service. It naturally follows that we have had the Lord’s blessing in this district; the fellowship enjoyed by all is a joy to our hearts in spite of the element of danger we feel every time we go forth to ‘sow seed’. Again we say with heartfelt thanks to Jehovah for his goodness, ‘Obey instructions for results.’ ”
PIONEER BEFORE A TEXAS GRAND JURY
“A man acted very rudely, cursing, tried to push me off the porch, threw my book satchel into the yard and scattered my books. We went to the police. They sent us to the district attorney. One of his assistants filed the case, which was stopped immediately. We then followed instructions from the Lord’s organization, made out affidavits stating what had happened and mailed them to the proper authorities. I received a letter from the district attorney asking me to come to see him. When I asked why the filing of the case had been stopped he said they handled cases different ways and he preferred to let me appear as a witness before the grand jury and state the case to them. January 17 the grand jury was in session. I appeared. The foreman asked me to tell just what happened. I gave name, address and identification card and said I was consecrated to do God’s will and obey his commandments as stated in Isaiah 61:1, 2. I started to quote, and the foreman said: ‘We don’t want any preaching now.’ I said: ‘I’m not preaching. It is necessary to cite the scriptures to show why I was doing this work so you may understand the case better.’ He said, ‘Go on!’ So I did, quoting Matthew 24:14 and other scriptures. Then I stated what happened. The foreman said, ‘Just show us exactly what happened.’ So I opened the phonograph and demonstrated the doorstep method. After I finished, the foreman said, Tjet’s hear what the record says.’ After the record finished there was an entirely different attitude. The others asked questions, and I showed the literature and explained about the coming of the Kingdom, witnessing for the name of Jehovah and his King, Christ Jesus. I left them twelve copies of The Watchtower and some copies of Satisfied and Kingdom News. It was wonderful to get to witness before a grand jury, and especially to play the phonograph.”
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E, Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God. is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come tmly by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United Statzs, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian ......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. IV., Australia
South African .......  -......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AU sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The "Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tlie needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn. N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1875.
“PURE LANGUAGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The midsummer Testimony Period, as above named, will include all of August The Lord now having turned to his devoted people the “pure language” of the truth of The Theocracy, it will be their privilege during August to publish the same with a “pure lip”, that a multitude of others may hear and turn from religion and join in the united service of Jehovah. Therefore during this Testimony Period the book Religion together with the latest published booklet will be placed with everyone possible, on a contribution of 25c. This, which is generally the vacation season and convention time, should allow for many newly interested ones to start out into the field activity, and for all veteran publishers to get in their full quota of hours. A good report is awaited from each and all at the close of August, marking the special blessing of the Lord upon all that “serve him with one consent”.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 24: “The Wise,” fl 1-30 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1941.
Week of August 31: “The Wise,”
fl 31-55 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1941.
VACATION
The members of the Bethel family will enjoy their vacation this year from Saturday, August 2, to Wednesday, August 20, inclusive. This will afford them a change from their regular work at headquarters and the opportunity for a larger part in the increasing field work. The factory and office will be closed down during this period, and no books will be shipped nor regular mail answered. Hence all orders for literature should be sent in well in advance of August 2 to receive attention before closing down Order in sufficient quantity to carry you through the vacation period and the rest of August. Also as little correspondence as possible should be sent to the Society, with the exception of report cards and subscriptions.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
SfeVACHTOWER.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	July 15, 1941	No. 14
THE WISE
"The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath."—Prov. 15:24.
JEHOVAH has made plain his purpose to permit men to choose the way of life or choose the way of death. Having created Adam, God placed before him the way of life and the way of death. God informed man that he must obey if he would live, but if he should choose to disobey he must die. (Gen. 2: 17) If Adam had always looked to God and obeyed his law he would not have died. Adam chose the opposite course, with the result that he died and all other of humankind came under condemnation by inheritance. Therefore all the race in due time must die, and all do die and remain dead except those who choose the way of life and conform to the rules which God has laid down, pointing out the course that they must take.
2	For his name’s sake Jehovah set before the Israelites the way which that people must go if they would live; that is, he set before them life and death and gave them the opportunity to choose. To that covenant people he said: “I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live.” —Deut. 30: 19.
3	After Joshua had led the Israelites into Canaan, and after by the grace and power of Almighty God he had gained many victories over the enemy, and even though God had marvelously shown his favor toward the Israelites under Joshua, yet many of them were disposed to go after demon religion. Time and again they had been warned, and now Joshua had about finished his course and under the direction of the Lord he stood before the Israelites and pronounced the admonition to make their choice whom they would serve. At the same time Joshua declared his purpose of making a wise choice. “And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.” (Josh. 24:15) Therefore God’s Word, emphatically stated at Proverbs 15:24, informs man
that in order for him to escape death, described in that text as “hell”, which is the grave, he must look above. That means that he must look to Jehovah for guidance in the way of life if he would become wise in God’s way. The wise man will look to God and continue to seek instruction from him: “Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom. But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.”—Jas. 3:13,17.
‘From Abel to John the prophet, the forerunner of Christ Jesus, there were a few men who became wise and pursued a wise course. In due time Jehovah sent his beloved Son Jesus to the people of Israel to deliver to them His message of truth by which they could become wise and find the way of everlasting life. This God did for them after they had repeatedly pursued a course of foolishness. For more than three years Jesus confined his teachings to the Jews, instructing them in the right way, but only a small number of them chose the wise way. When he had completed the work which Jehovah assigned him to perform exclusively amongst the Jews, Jesus made this announcement, which is addressed to all persons who desire to choose the wise way: “And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”—John 17 : 3.
5	For the past 1900 years approximately God through Christ Jesus has caused the good news of and concerning The Theocracy and the means of salvation for man to be proclaimed throughout the earth. Of the many millions who have heard that message only a small number have chosen the course of wisdom, and this in the face of the fact that God’s Word frequently admonishes men to consider the great importance of taking the wise course: “Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice gold. For wisdom is better than rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it.”—Prov. 8:10,11.
211
212
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
• Within those 1900 years God has taken out from the nations of earth a people for his name, which people shall become a part of his Theocratic Government. God limited the number of those who shall be associated with Christ Jesus in His government. Each one of these chosen ones must take the wise course and continually and faithfully walk therein even unto death. It appears that the greater number of those who have taken the wise course, and have been taken out by Jehovah for his name, have finished their earthly course and that only the remnant now remain on earth; and to such remaining ones God has assigned the duty and privilege of bearing testimony to his name and to his kingdom, which they must do until his due time to exercise his supreme power against the adversary and the adversary’s entire organization.
7	The due time is now present when the Lord is gathering to himself his “other sheep”; and those thus gathered, and who prove faithful and maintain their integrity toward God and his King, shall in due time form the “great multitude” that will live forever on the earth by the grace of God and will be permitted to carry out God’s purpose. Unlike those sheep who compose the “little flock”, the “great multitude” is not limited as to number. Jehovah God is now doing his “strange work”. He is exposing the fallacy and hypocrisy of religion and setting before the world his message of truth, which plainly announces the way of life. This message is not limited to a few, but all who will hear are given the opportunity. The Lord Jesus, at the direction of Jehovah, now says to the people of good-will now on earth: 'Let him that hear-eth, . . . and whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of life freely.’—Rev. 22:17.
8	Who will hear, give heed, understand, and choose the way of life 1 Jehovah’s answer is: “The wise shall understand.” God’s Word shows that there are two classes of people now on the earth, to wit: those who will be wise and shall find the way to righteousness and life, and the other class, which continues in wickedness, darkness and religion, and remains under condemnation and suffers eternal death. The present is “the time of the end”, that is, the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule; and such is the due time for those who are wise to understand the purpose of Jehovah and take the course that leads to life everlasting. Daniel, the faithful prophet of God, heard and uttered the prophetic message of Jehovah, but he did not understand, for the reason, it was not then God’s due time for man to understand. Mark these words of Daniel in respect thereto, and the response to him from Jehovah: “And I heard, but I understood not; then said I, 0 my Lord, what shall be the end of these things? And he said, Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are closed up and sealed till the time
of the end. Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.”—Dan. 12: 8-10.
’ Now is the due time when those who shall form the “great multitude” must hear and choose wisely, and will understand. For this reason the Lord is causing the message of The Theocracy to be sounded in the earth. The demons, under the leadership of their chief Satan, know that the crucial hour is here; hence all the wicked of the spirit and human creatures desperately fight against the witnesses of the Lord. They hate Jehovah and his Theocratic Government, and hate those who announce it. But the remnant, together with their companions who have fled to the Lord for safety and protection, must continuously proclaim the message regardless of all opposition, and which, by the grace of God, they will do. As others of good-will hear and choose the wise way they too will join in the proclamation of the kingdom of God under Christ as the only hope of human life.
BLIND GUIDES
10	The teachers of Israel were the learned men of that people. They were made up of the Pharisees, priests, and doctors of the law. They instructed the people in the way that they should go, but, although to them had been committed by the Lord the duty and obligation of reading and explaining the law of God to the people, those self-constituted wise men taught the traditions of men. When God sent his beloved Son to them they fought against him because he told them the truth. To such Jesus said, “Ye fools and blind”; which words, without a doubt, meant that by their course of action they had ignored God and in their heart said, “There is no God,” and had become blind as to his purpose. Further addressing them Jesus said: “Ye blind guides! which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.”—Matt. 23: 24, 28.
11	To his faithful disciples Jesus said concerning those blind religionists and scientists: “Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.” —Matt. 15:14.
“ Those teachers in Israel thought they were wise, but their wisdom was not from above. They had neglected to look above for instruction, and failed to follow the instructions from the Lord. Those were perilous days for the Jews, and all of the blind did fall into the ditch, as the Lord Jesus foretold.
18	The present is the time of even greater peril. (2 Tim. 3:1) Today the schools, colleges and universities instruct the students in what is called “the
THE WATCHTOWER.
213
July 15,1941
science of evolution”, which teaching emphatically denies Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and completely pushes aside and shuns the Bible. Concerning such instruction the Word of God says: ‘Avoid profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so called.’—1 Tim. 6: 20.
14	At the present time pastors and clergymen, who claim to represent God and Christ, have little if anything to say about the Bible. The great majority of them teach for doctrines the traditions of men and will not hear and ‘endure sound doctrines’, which are set forth in the Bible. They ignore the Scriptures and oppose the kingdom of God and deny the blood of Christ Jesus as the purchase price of mankind. Desiring the approval of men rather than God’s approval, they turn to fables. They too are blind guides of the people, yet they regard themselves as wise, and their dupes that follow them likewise regard them as wise. But they are wise according to worldly wisdom. The Lord’s Word foretold this from above, and now we see it about us: “For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.” (2 Tim. 4: 3,4) Those who desire to live must ignore such teachers and receive the instruction set forth in the Word of God.
WAY TO LIFE
15	They that be wise look up to Almighty God, who is above, and pray him to guide them into the way of life everlasting: “For with thee is the fountain of life; in thy light shall we see light. 0 continue thy lovingkindness unto them that know thee; and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked remove me.”—Ps. 36: 9-11.
16	The same rule must apply to everyone who shall have any hope of life. The “other sheep” of the Lord now recognize that the words of Jehovah, uttered by God’s prophet, apply to Israel and at the same time and with stronger force now apply to those of “Christendom” who profess to be for God, and who are not, to wit: “For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.” (Jer. 2:13) “0 Lord, the Hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters.” (Jer. 17:13) That which is today called “Christendom” is the antitype of the Israelites. Both have turned to religion; both have forsaken the fountain of living waters, and drink at the fountains of so-called “wise men”, who teach
tradition, and which waters not only are brackish but contain the poison that leads to death.
17	The wise man takes the Bible for his guide because it is the only thing that illuminates his pathway. (Ps. 119:105) He hears and believes the words uttered by the Lord Jesus, to wit: “And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” (John 17: 3) Thus it is announced that to know God and Christ is the way to life. Knowledge of God and Christ is absolutely essential to all who would be wise; and that knowledge is to be found in the Word of God alone. Receiving such knowledge the wise will be diligent to give heed thereto and walk in the way God leads. “He is in the way of life that keepeth instruction: but he that refuseth reproof erreth.” (Prov. 10:17) “In the way of righteousness is life; and in the pathway thereof there is no death.”—Prov. 12:28.
18	It is a grievous mistake for one to conclude that he may walk in the way of righteousness without first receiving some knowledge of God and of Christ. The way that God has provided is strait, or narrow, because it is the righteous way: “Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life; and few there be that find it.”—Matt. 7:13,14.
HOW TO BEGIN
19	Every intelligent creature obtains information either from others or by his own observation of the things that are about him. The visible things of creation impart information to man. The mountains, the rivers, the trees, and divers like things of the earth, inform man that these things come from some greater power. The stars and the planets bespeak a power back of them that is far greater than they. This information which man gets from observation he knows is true, because he sees it with his own eyes; and therefore he has knowledge of the existence of the same. “Knowledge” means to receive and perceive the truth. From the information and knowledge which the man has he knows that there must be a power greater than himself, and a power greater than the things that he sees about him. That greater power is the Creator, the Almighty God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” who is invisible to the creature, and “whom no man hath seen nor can see”. (Ps. 83:18; 1 Tim. 6:16) The man who desires to know the truth recognizes that there must be an invisible power far greater than man. The same man desires to live. He hears then the words uttered by Jesus, the only great man that ever was on the earth, to wit: ‘This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.’ He
214
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
discerns that he must have a knowledge of the truth concerning the Creator as far as such information is revealed. How does he begin to obtain such true knowledge? The Scriptures answer: “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge.”—Prov. 1: 7.
20	The Lord, the Almighty God, whose name is Jehovah, is the Creator. The same man perceives the truth that the great Creator is One in whom resides all power over life, and therefore he fears to take any course contrary to the will of the Almighty God, who gives life. He having such proper fear, that marks the beginning of knowledge of the truth with that man. Where does he go to obtain more knowledge of the truth concerning Jehovah? Jesus answers: “Thy word [which is expressed in the Bible] is [the] truth.”—John 17 :17.
21	The man who sincerely desires to be wise desires to take and does take the proper course. Fearing God, and fearing to go in the wrong way if he follows his own inclinations, that man seeks to learn what is the will of God concerning him, and he goes to the Word of God, which is the Bible, to find out. It is his genuine fear of Almighty God that starts him in the way of wisdom: “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and the knowledge of the holy is understanding. For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased.”—Prov. 9:10,11.
22	The course of the wise, therefore, is progressive in this manner: First he obtains information and knowledge; and applying that knowledge properly, he chooses to be guided by the Word of God. The fear of God is the beginning of knowledge, and also the beginning of wisdom with him; and being guided by God’s Word, he begins to have an appreciation of his own relationship to the Almighty God. He sees that Jehovah, the Almighty God, is all-powerful and all-wise, that justice is the foundation of his throne, and that “God is love”, meaning, that he is wholly unselfish. The man sees that he is wholly dependent upon the great, eternal God; and rendering himself in obedience to God, he is assured of God’s blessing. Now he is getting some understanding, that is, beginning to have a proper appreciation of his own relationship to the great Creator. “Understanding” means that the creature has an appreciation of his own relationship to the Creator.
23	When one starts in the right way, which is the way of wisdom, if he really desires to be wise-he will continue to grow in knowledge, wisdom and understanding. The fear of God is the beginning of knowledge and wisdom, and the wise man always fears God. He will not content himself by starting to serve God, and then become indifferent. Some persons conclude that, they having taken the step of consecration and agreement to serve God, nothing further is need
ful. That is a very erroneous position to take. The wise man continuously searches the Bible and carefully and prayerfully meditates upon and studies it that he may keep in the way that leads to life everlasting. This instruction is given to all who will walk in wisdom: “Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.”—2 Tim. 2: 15.
24	If one follows this admonition he gains understanding. He must walk in the way of wisdom in order to gain understanding. “Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding.” (Prov. 4:7) In no other way can man have a proper appreciation of his own relationship to the almighty Creator. Therefore, with all his getting he is admonished to get understanding.
25	To the one who thus turns his steps to the Lord, and agrees to do God’s will, sincerely desiring to go in the way of wisdom and righteousness, the Almighty God addresses these words: “My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee; so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding; yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding; if thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. For the Lord giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding. He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly. He keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his saints. Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea, every good path When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul, discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee: to deliver thee from the way of the evil man. from the man that speaketh froward things; who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness.”—Prov 2:1-13.
26	The wise man knows that the will of God is perfect and if he would continue to walk in wisdom and to increase in understanding he must learn the will of God concerning himself and then he must strive to do God’s will. The wise man therefore turns to Jesus, the perfect One, who is also above, and looks up to him that he may learn by studying the course which Jesus takes. He hears the words of Jesus, which say: “I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart.” (Ps. 40: 8; Heb. 10:7) He immediately sees the necessity of his own acknowledgment of God and his agreement to do His will.
27	The wise man quickly learns that he is a sinner because he was born such. (Rom. 5:12) He learns
July 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
215
that Jehovah God is the fountain of life. (Ps. 36:9) He desires to enter life, and now he must find that way. And how shall he go about doing so! The answer is found in the words of Jesus: “Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.”—John 14:6.
21 Jehovah God is the fountain of life, which life he gives to those who obey him, and his provision is that life shall be administered unto the obedient of mankind by and through Christ Jesus, who purchased the human race with his own precious blood. Therefore man can come to God only by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ as his Redeemer and Savior. (John 3:16) To “believe” means to take a course in harmony with that mental conception; hence the wise man consecrates himself to God and Christ Jesus, and does so by solemnly agreeing to do the will of God, and so thereafter he can say, “I delight to do thy will, 0 my God.”
22 Though man is born in sin, and hence a sinner by inheritance, he learns from God’s Word that, if he has and exercises faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus as his Redeemer and then fully consecrates himself to do the will of God, then God will teach him the right way; and so he finds this information in God’s Word, to wit: “Shew me thy ways, 0 Lord; teach me thy paths. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation; on thee do I wait all the day. Good and upright is the Lord : therefore will he teach sinners in the way. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. What man is he that feareth the Lord! him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth.”—Ps. 25:4, 5, 8-10,12,13.
30 Not only does the wise man desire the will of God to be done in him at all times, but his prayer to God is, “Make me do thy will.” This he can do because he knows that the way of Jehovah God is right and if God makes him do His will he will go in the right way: “For thou art great, and doest wondrous things; thou art God alone. Teach me thy way, 0 Lord ; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name. I will praise thee, 0 Lord my God, with all my heart; and I will glorify thy name for evermore.”—Ps. 86:10-12.
EVOLUTION
31 Is the university professor, who teaches the doctrine of evolution, a wise man? He is not truly wise. No doubt he is wise in his own conceits and wise in the eyes of his fellow worldly men; but not in God’s way. The doctrine of evolution denies the existence of Almighty God, the Creator; and he who teaches
that man is a creature of evolution, who can and will gradually evolve into a greater creature, is woefully deceiving himself. In the sight of God that man is a fool, which is the very opposite of a wise one. “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt; they have done abominable works; there is none that doeth good.”—Ps. 14:1.
22 He does not need to say to others, “There is no God,” but by his very course of action, and by teaching doctrines contrary to the Word of God, he testifies that he does not believe in the existence of the Almighty Jehovah; and therefore Jehovah says, ‘That man is a fool.’ The theory of evolution leads to death. All human creatures are born sinners, and must die unless redeemed by the blood of Christ Jesus. Evolution does not teach one to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. Evolutionists are those who teach others not to believe in God and in Christ. Concerning these the Scriptures are explicit: “The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.” (John 3: 35, 36) A wise man shuns “evolution”.
VAIN BABBLINGS
22 Does religion hold anything of hope for mankind ? Nothing whatsoever, but, on the contrary, religion is against God and leads to destruction. There are hundreds of religions taught by men and practiced by many, all of which are contrary to the Word of God. The religious teacher selects a scripture text upon which he is supposed to base his sermon and then he immediately departs from that text and devotes his speech to things pertaining to men, whom he calls “great”, and to politics of this world, and to such things as “individual development”. In all of these things he ignores the Word of God. The religionists teach the “inherent immortality of man”, which denies the Bible statement of man’s creation and makes God a liar. The same denies also the ransom sacrifice and the resurrection of the dead. Concerning all such, he who is wise will give heed to and follow the instruction given to him in God’s Word, to wit: “But shun profane and vain babblings; for they will increase unto more ungodliness: and their word will eat as doth a canker; of whom is Hymenseus and Philetus; who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some. Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.” (2 Tim. 2:16-19) The babblings in which the religious teachers indulge are vain, and hence lead men away from the path of truth and life.
216
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
84	Without faith it is impossible to please God. (Heb. 11:6) Religious teachers have no faith in God and in his Word. Such teachers advance their own learning and human wisdom in the place and stead of God’s Word, and concerning them the Scriptures say: “Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.”—1 Cor. 1: 20, 25.
S5	The way of life is by faith in God and in Christ Jesus. Faith must be based upon knowledge, which knowledge proceeds from a truthful source. The opinions and doctrines of imperfect men concerning the way of life have no truthful source. True knowledge comes only from the Word of God. Faith comes by hearing and by relying upon the Word of God. (Rom. 10:17) He that advocates or preaches any doctrine that is contrary to the Word of God is without faith. Teaching and following traditions of men make the Word of God of none effect toward men; hence the wise man shuns religion as a deadly thing. (Matt. 15:6-9) When he is asked to hear the babblings of religious teachers he immediately recognizes that such are vain and he quickly turns away from them and shuns them. He will not permit his mind to be filled with things that destroy faith in God and in his Word.
SHUN EVIL
36	“Evil” is that which brings injury to the one who suffers it. False doctrine, based upon the traditions of men, leads men away from life, and is therefore evil. Those who are wise will shun evil and give their attention and devotion to God and his Word. “Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.”—Ps. 34:11-14.
37	Today the Lord is gathering unto himself his “other sheep”, that is, those who love righteousness and who hate evil. To such this instruction comes from God’s Word, and is given to such sincere ones: “For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.” (1 Pet. 3:10,11) That rule applies both to the remnant and to the “other sheep” of the Lord.
BASIS OF HOPE
38	All creatures who deny the lifeblood of Christ Jesus as the purchase price for humankind have no hope of life. Such are without God and Christ and
without hope in the world. Life is the gift of Jehovah God through Christ Jesus. (Rom. 6: 23) There is no other way whereby man can be saved. (Acts 4:12) Christ Jesus, by the willing sacrifice of himself according to the will of God, provided the price and paid it over as the purchase price for mankind who will render themselves in obedience to God’s law. There is no other basis for hope of life. They being born in sin and shapen in iniquity, the only means of escaping eternal death is by faith in God and in Christ and then by full obedience to God’s law. Evolutionists and religionists boast of their wealth and wisdom, according to this world, but that cannot provide salvation for themselves or anyone else; as it is written: “They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches; none of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him; (for the redemption of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth for ever;) that he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.” —Ps. 49: 6-9.
38	Religionists, evolutionists, professors, great politicians, and men of fabulous material wealth disregard God’s Word and expect to find some special place provided for them whereby they may be favored above others. In this they are doomed to certain disappointment. The rich and worldly-wise are catered to by the religious leaders, and all such are honored in the sight of and by other men and are commended because of their apparent greatness. God says of such: “For when he dieth, he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after him. Though, while he lived, he blessed his soul; and men will praise thee when thou doest well to thyself. He shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see light. Man that is in honour, and under-standeth not, is like the beasts that perish.”—Ps. 49:17-20.
40	God in his loving-kindness, and for his own name’s sake, has made provision for faithful and obedient men to live, and that provision is by and through Christ Jesus. This he has made plain in the following words: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever be-lieveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved. The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”—John 3:16,17, 35, 36.
41	If one does not believe that Jehovah is the Almighty God and that Christ Jesus is the Redeemer of obedient men, then there is no hope for him to have life everlasting.
July 15,1941
WATCHTOWER-
217
41 Redemption is not for every man whether that man believes or does not believe. Redemption is only for those who believe on the Lord and who obey his commandments. While it is true that Christ Jesus ‘tasted death for every man’ (Heb. 2:9), that means for every man who wyill obey the Lord. God is no respecter of persons, and his rules apply to all; therefore the ransom sacrifice is for all men that believe and obey the laws of God. The Scriptures state the matter in this way: “Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.” “Therefore, as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.”—Rom. 5:12,18,19.
43	It is impossible for a free gift to be bestowed upon any person when that person shuns or refuses to accept the gift of the prize offered. God offers life to man as a free gift, upon condition that he be required to believe on the Lord and to obey. The man who by his course of action says, ‘I don’t believe there is an Almighty God, and I don’t believe that Jesus Christ bought the human race with his own precious blood,’ that man refuses to accept the gift of life, and the condemnation resulting from Adam’s disobedience remains upon that man; which means everlasting death.
44	God does not compel anyone to believe, nor does he bestow life on anyone contrary to that person’s desire. “God is love”; which means that God is entirely unselfish. God is self-contained and he needs nothing from any creature, but is entirely unselfish, and in his loving-kindness he has provided a way for man to escape eternal death and receive life everlasting, and that way is by always looking up. “In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. And we have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.”—1 John 4: 9,14.
45	Those who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and who render themselves in obedience to his commandment, are designated by the Lord his “sheep”, because such word is used as a symbol of obedience. Therefore Jesus says: “The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”—John 10:10,11,16.
40	The wise man looks up and believes this state
ment, and deports himself accordingly. The present is the time when the Lord is gathering unto himself his “other sheep”, and all persons who are now of good-will toward God, who have faith that Jehovah is the Almighty, and the Giver of life, and who then show their faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus by fully devoting themselves to the Lord, may now be gathered unto the Lord as of his “other sheep”.
CONSECRATION
47	The man of good-will must do what! He must consecrate himself to the Lord. That means that he declares he believes in God and Christ and he solemnly promises and agrees that he will be obedient to the will of God and Christ. He flees every worldly influence and organization and flees to Christ, the Head of God’s organization, and there he finds safety and protection. Doing so, he enters into a covenant or agreement to do the will of God. Now he must perform that agreement; and that he does by obeying God’s commandment as written in the Scriptures. He ascertains the will of God concerning himself by diligently studying what is written in God’s Word; and thus he seeks righteousness and meekness. His desire is for that which is right, and he seeks to learn what is right; and this he learns from the Word of God. He desires to learn the only way that leads to life; and there is but one way, and that is God’s Word. Doing thus, he seeks meekness, and now the Lord says to him: “Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness ; it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.” —Zeph. 2:3.
48	The man who seeks righteousness and meekness that he may find life everlasting looks above for his guidance. God’s Word is the lamp of truth that lights his pathway. Such is the path that Jesus trod; and hence the wise man knows that this is the right way that leads to life, and he follows in it. Jesus always is diligent to do the will of God. The one who walks in the way of life must do likewise. Jesus not only declared himself as being consecrated to Jehovah and the doing of His will, but symbolized that agreement by being immersed in water; and thus he testified to others. (Matt. 3:13-17) It is therefore the proper course of the man of good-will who now consecrates himself to God to symbolize that agreement to do God’s will by water baptism. Thus he shows that he believes on the Lord, and gives public testimony that he is on the Lord’s side, walking in the way of wisdom that leads to life. Having agreed to do the will of God, such man is not ashamed to so state, but delights to give testimony that he is for Jehovah and his King and kingdom. That testimony he gives both by his course of action and by the words that he speaks for
218
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the Lord and by publishing the message of The Theocracy: “That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.”— Rom. 10:9-11.
INTEGRITY
49	The man of good-will, having fled to the Lord and having declared himself on the side of The Theocracy, must now maintain his integrity toward the great Theocrat and His King. This he does by obeying the commandment of God, as written: “If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.” (Matt. 19:17) That means to do what God has commanded must be done by all who shall receive his approval. It is the will and hence the commandment of God that every person who takes his stand on the side of God and Christ shall, by his course of action and conduct, and by his words, bear testimony to the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. All who are of God’s capital organization must be witnesses to the name of Jehovah. (Isa. 43:10-12) All who come under God’s organization must likewise bear testimony to his name. To fail or refuse to be a witness for Jehovah means that such one is not maintaining his integrity toward God.
50	The Lord Jesus Christ, that great Spirit and Head of Jehovah’s capital organization, is now judging the nations of the earth. His “other sheep” are now undergoing trial and judgment. To obtain his final approval they must maintain their integrity by obeying his commandments. Concerning the obligation to bear testimony to the name and kingdom of God it is written: “And he shewed me a pure river of water of life [which since 1918, when Christ Jesus began judgment at the temple, has been flowing], clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne [judgment seat of The Theocracy] of God and of the Lamb.”—Rev. 22:1.
51	In symbolic language, that describes the water of truth that makes- clear the way to life. All who see and appreciate this hear the words of the Lord, as written: “And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” (Rev. 22:17) Thus to whosoever will obey the Lord the way is opened to come and partake of the water of truth, the water of life, and to do so “without money and without price”. —Isa. 55:1.
52	The man of good-will who takes his stand on the side of the Lord God and his kingdom is the man
who fears God and obeys him, fearing that he might come short and fail in the way of life unless he is diligent to obey. He continues to increase in knowledge and wisdom, and thus his appreciation of his own proper relationship to God and Christ increases, and therefore he has understanding. Concerning such the Lord says: “Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding: for the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her. Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is every one that retaineth her.” (Prov. 3:13-18) As he grows in knowledge and understanding he sees and appreciates the truth, as it is written: “In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence; and his children shall have a place of refuge. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.”—Prov. 14:26,27.
reproaches
“ As long as the Devil is in existence and his organization operates every person who is diligent to maintain his integrity toward God and his kingdom will be the object of persecution by the blind guides of men and by all others of Satan’s instruments. The Devil is bent on opposing God, and in doing this he leads men into darkness and they remain in darkness. He induces men to look to their own greatness and to shun the Word of God and then induces such dupes to persecute all those who are for God and his King, thereby expecting to make the service of God a very unpopular and undesirable thing. The reason that religionists oppose and persecute the servants of Almighty God and his King is, because they are blind to the truth and are under the influence of the demons. Never has the world been so completely under the control of demons as at the present time.
54	The evildoers are headed for destruction. The lot of the evil or wicked is most undesirable and is shunned by all persons who desire righteousness. The end of the wicked is near. Their time is short. The day of Armageddon is near, and at that time all who remain on Satan’s side shall suffer destruction. The lot of those who have fled to the Theocratic Organization is the blessed one. Finding refuge there and then remaining steadfastly on the side of the Lord, such person pursuing the wise course is diligent to continuously do the will of God. Thus continuing faithful, the “other sheep” of the Lord shall be brought through Armageddon and find everlasting life on the earth. To those who are now obeying the
THE WATCHTOWER
219
July 15,1941
rules of the Lord and are in the antitypical city of refuge, the following scripture will be a real comfort: “Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass: and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him; fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thyself in any wise to do evil. For evil doers shall be cut off; but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be; yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace."—Ps. 37 : 4-11.
55	The wise man does not desire to follow his selfish inclinations. He has chosen the Lord and his Word as his guide, and he looks to God’s Word and from it receives instruction and understanding. (Prov. 3:5-7) The wise man seeks the company and companionship of others who are also wise after God’s way. He will be diligent to attend studies where he may learn more about God’s way. He will study to show himself approved unto God. By so doing he will be pleasing to the Lord and will receive the blessings of life everlasting. He will walk circumspectly, which means to look about him and to see to it that he avoids all entanglements that beset the pathway of men. He will look up to the Lord for his guide, shield and protection. He will have his mind and heart set upon the Lord and be praying at all times that he may be guided in the way of righteousness.—Isa. 58:11.
SHORTENING THE DAYS
••l”1OR then shall be great tribulation, such as was not H< since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved ; but for the elect’s sake, those days shall be shortened ” Prophetic words those, pronounced by the Greatest Prophet nineteen centuries ago, but now they are in course of fulfillment, and hence it is God’s due time for his people to have understanding of them. (Matt. 24:21,22) That Satan’s organization, visible and invisible, will go down amidst a terrible time of trouble is foretold by many scriptures; and about such there can be no doubt. The battle is that of the great Field Marshal of Jehovah God against the great enemy, Satan. Of course, Satan’s visible organization on earth must be involved, and in this case it is “the beast” against “The Lamb”, Christ Jesus—See Revelation 19:11-15 and 17:14.
God has not interfered with Satan’s nefarious course lor many centuries, but the time has come for its destruction All nations are arming with the most destructive elements man has ever dreamed of. In the past, during the great battles, profiteers, politicians and religious clergymen have either remained at home or far enough in the rear to be out of danger. In the terrible and final conflict there will be no place of safety. (Jer. 25: 34-36) Back in A.D. 70, when the Roman legions made the final assault upon Jerusalem and razed the city, completely destroying it, that was a time of great trouble and stress. The description given of it by historians seems almost beyond possibilities. That trouble was in a measure a shadow or prophetic picture of the time of trouble with which Satan’s organization, particularly so-called “Christendom”, must fall. The final trouble, the universal war of Armageddon, must be the one referred to by the great prophet, Christ Jesus, at Matthew 24.21, 22. He said that so terrible will be that final trouble that, “except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved.” “Shorten” means to curtail, or abridge. To illustrate: If an hour had been appointed for the be
ginning of a meeting which must end at five o’clock, the length of time of that meeting could be curtailed or shortened by waiting until four o’clock to begin, instead of beginning at two. A period of time may be shortened by taking off some from either end We may be sure that the Lord God has fixed the time of trouble definitely as to when it shall cease; and that being so, if he should prevent the terrible battle from beginning until a certain period of time, that would shorten the trouble. Such seems to be the very thought expressed by the Lord in the symbolic picture at Revelation 7:1-3. In this text the “four winds” mentioned must, m harmony with other scriptures, refer to a very great time of trouble that shall come upon the nations of earth.
The world ended, that is, Satan’s uninterrupted rule of the world ended, in A.D 1914, and that was marked by the “war in heaven” and by the beginning of the World War on earth. “And the nations were angry ” That was the beginning of sorrows upon the earth, and not the end of sorrows. (See Revelation 12:7-12, Matthew 24:3-8; Revelation 11: 18.) The war progressed and wrought much destruction from 1914 to 1918. The preparations for 1919, if executed, would have brought such terrible slaughter of soldiers and noncombatants that the four years preceding would have been a mere pygmy in comparison
Suddenly the World War ended, in 1918, but neither Satan nor any of his worldly organization had anything to do with causing it to cease. The wholesale slaughter of human creatures stopped with the end of the World War, but the sorrows upon the world that began in 1914 continued. Since then the Devil by and through his organization has continued to harass the people in his endeavor to turn them against Jehovah. Jehovah God exercised his power and authority to stop the World War. The prophecy of Jesus showed that Satan would plunge the nations into the war, and also shows that Jehovah would stop the war; and He did bring it to a sudden end in 1918. (Mark
220
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
13:19,20) Why should Jehovah stop the World War! The answer is found in the words of Jesus’ prophecy: ‘And except those days had been shortened, no flesh would have been saved: but for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.’ A thing can be shortened by cutting a part out of the middle as well as by cropping off one of the ends. Satan never would have stopped the World War, because his purpose was to destroy the human race; but that destruction would have brought no honor to Jehovah nor a vindication of his name. A work having to do with the vindication of Jehovah’s name must be done before the end of the great tribulation which would result in the complete destruction of Satan’s organization. Therefore, said Jesus, “For the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.” It at once appears that Jehovah purposed to do something with his “elect” before the end of the tribulation upon Satan’s organization.
The events that came to pass upon the Jews from 69 to 73 A.D. well foreshadowed what occurred during the World War and what seems now impending. At that time the Romans, as God’s executioners against the unfaithful Jews, were assaulting the religious city of Jerusalem and could have completely destroyed it, but for some reason the Roman army was suddenly withdrawn. Later the Roman forces returned and completely destroyed the hypocritical city. The words of the historian, Josephus, will be read here with keen interest, to wit:
“Cestius Gallus, in the twelfth year of [Emperor] Nero, if ‘he had been inclined to break through the walls of the city by force, would instantly have taken it, and put an end to the war1; but, contrary to the expectation of all, and without any just cause, he departed. Vespasian was deputed in his place, as governor of Syria, and to carry on the wars against the Jews; and when he had subdued all the country, and was preparing to besiege Jerusalem, the death of Nero, and soon afterwards that of Galba, compelled him, from the disturbances and civil wars that ensued in his own country, to defer for some time his plan of operations against Jerusalem. These apparently incidental delays enabled the Christians to provide for their safety; and Eusebius and Epiphanius inform us that all who believed in Christ left Jerusalem, and fled to Perea, and other places beyond the Jordan. Josephus also remarks, after the retreat of Cestius Gallus: ‘Many of the illustrious Jews departed from the city, as from a sinking ship.’ After this period, when Vespasian was confirmed in the empire, Titus surrounded the city with a wall, thirty-nine furlongs in dimensions, strengthened with thirteen forts, so that, Josephus says, ‘with all means of escaping, all hope of safety was cut off from the remaining Jews.’ ”—Antiquities, Book 18, Cap. sect. 3, edition Hudson.
Without doubt the Lord intervened and held back the final assault upon Jerusalem until his own due time, in A.D. 70. It was exactly forty years from the date of Christ’s death to the very day that Masada, the last fort of Israel, fell in A.D. 73. God does everything on time, in his own due time. The complete destruction of the nation and the expulsion of the Jews from the land could not take place until the 15th day of Nisan, A.D. 73; and this is the real reason why the Romans did not destroy the last Jewish stronghold earlier.
As in the case of Jerusalem under siege by the Romans, with equally strong reasoning it must be agreed that the Lord God caused the World War to come suddenly to a halt in 1918. He had a purpose in this. That there is a great destructive and final conflict just ahead no Christian that is familiar with the Scriptures can seriously doubt. Why should it be held back! Jesus answers, “For the elect’s sake.”
Who constitute the elect, and what is the purpose of the elect! The elect company is made up of Christ Jesus and the members of “his body”, whom the Lord elects to be members of the kingdom of heaven, and all of whom maintain their integrity toward Jehovah and all of whom Satan has sought to destroy. That men have been taken out of the world and made a part of the elect and have maintained their integrity toward Jehovah disproves Satan’s contention and is to that extent a vindication of Jehovah’s name. The purpose of selecting this company of elect is that the name of Jehovah might be made known by them as his witnesses before the final battle. After the Jews were given the exclusive opportunity for a period of years, then Jehovah “did visit the Gentiles [the nations], to take out of them a people for his name”. (Acts 15:14) The elect must be used for Jehovah’s purposes at the time that He ‘plants the heavens and lays the foundation of the earth’, at which time Jehovah makes it known that Zion is his Theocratic organization. (Isa. 51:16) Jehovah puts his hand over the members of the elect on the earth, thus providing their protection from the assaults of Satan.
Concerning his elect Jehovah says: “Behold my servant, whom I uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him; he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles [the nations], I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. I am the Lord ; that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.” This scripture, Isaiah 42:1, 6, 8, shows that Jehovah will use the members of the “elect” company on earth for a specific purpose during the time of tribulation, and that he gives this honor to none other. The shortening of the days of tribulation must take place while some of the elect are yet on the earth, for the reason that the witness work which they do, by the Lord’s grace, must be done on earth before the final end of Satan’s organization. Therefore, in answering the question concerning the signs or proofs of the end of Satan’s rule of the world, Jesus also said: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24:14) The “gospel” or “good news” to all lovers of righteousness is that Satan’s rule has come to an end; that the kingdom of Jehovah, which will completely vindicate his name, is here; that Christ Jesus has been placed upon the heavenly throne as the great Ruler, and that all must know that Jehovah alone is the Almighty God over the whole earth.—Ps. 83:18.
It was for the sake of Jehovah God’s witnesses that the trouble has been held back. It is a well-known fact that during the World War the opportunity for proclaiming the message of the Kingdom was restrained and limited up to the spring of 1919. In the warring nations many of the brethren were forced into the army. Circulation of the
July 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
221
“present truth” literature was prohibited. Many brethren in different countries were imprisoned. Persecution began especially in 1917; and in the spring of 1918 officers of the Watch Tower Society were imprisoned, the Bethel home at Brooklyn, N. Y., was dismantled, the Brooklyn Tabernacle was sold, and the headquarters removed to small quarters in Pittsburgh, Pa. For some time thereafter little or no witnessing was done. The conditions were such at that time that had the World War progressed and not come to an end there would have been no more public witness of any consequence given on earth. The ceasing of the work at that time was prophetically pictured by the taking away of the prophet Elijah by a whirlwind, with a chariot and horses of fire, heavenward.—2 Ki. 2:11.
Between the taking away of Elijah and the beginning of operations by his successor, Elisha, there was a period of waiting while Elisha stood by the Jordan river’s bank before getting across. This foreshadowed a period of waiting with the faithful remnant of Jehovah’s people on earth. Elisha’s activities foreshadowed the work of Jehovah’s witnesses done after 1918. That work must be done because the Lord had so ordained it. Since Elisha as one of Jehovah’s witnesses pictured the faithful remnant of witnesses doing a certain work, then it follows that the remnant of “the elect” must do that work.
Now call to mind the question that was propounded to Jesus by his disciples concerning the end of the world (Matthew 24:3), and the answer of the Master thereto. In his answer he first mentioned the World War, the famines, the pestilences and the earthquakes in various parts of the earth, which would mark the beginning of sorrows upon the world. He then refers to the persecution upon his true followers. All of this took place from 1914 to 1918. He said: “Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.” (Vs. 9) Many of the Lord’s devoted people were actually killed; and all the warring nations hated Jehovah’s faithful servants, and continue to. Jesus then said: “Many [shall] be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.” (Vs. 10) This was actually fulfilled when some who had been active in the Lord’s service became angry in. 1917 and 1918, and consulted and connived with those who prosecuted and persecuted the faithful Christians during the war.
The trouble reached a climax in the spring of 1918. Many of Jehovah’s servants thought that all the work was done. But there was something more to be done. What had come to pass brought great joy to their hearts, even though many then were suffering imprisonment and others were being denied opportunities of service. They rejoiced because of the clear proof that the world, or Satan’s uninterrupted rule, had ended with the end of the Gentile Times, in 1914, that the kingdom of heaven was at hand, and that the day of their deliverance drew nigh.
But they overlooked something else that must be done. The good news of the Kingdom as established must be told to others; because Jesus had commanded, after foretelling the World War: “This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come.” In other words, there must be a period of comparative peace after the World War in
order that the followers of the Master, the witnesses for Jehovah, should carry this good news as a testimony unto all the nations. Had not the war ceased, this would have been impossible; because the nations would not have permitted the witnessing to go on. Now “for the elect’s sake” the Lord stopped the war. The “four angels standing on the four corners of the earth” are now “holding the four winds of the earth” until this witness can be completed. (Rev. 7:1-3) In Europe-the work of proclaiming the Kingdom message seems to be done, and manifestly this is because God’s due time has come. It would then appear that the final witness would be given on the Western Hemisphere.
Surprise was expressed that the war stopped so suddenly. The Lord wanted it stopped. In due time he saw to it that his servants in various parts of the earth were released from prison that preparation might be made for the “Elisha work”, that is, the bold and fearless witness concerning Jehovah’s name and his Kingdom unto the nations of the earth.
The knowledge of this fact should thrill the heart of every Christian. The fact that the great Jehovah God and the Lord Jesus Christ, “The King of kings,” would intervene and stop the warring nations, and command peace, in order to give a little handful of Christians in the earth an opportunity to be his witnesses is too marvelous to be expressed in words. It should humble every Christian in the presence of the Lord, causing him to lift his heart in fervent gratitude to God and to the Lord Jesus and then to tighten up his armor and advance into the warfare against demonism or religion with renewed zeal and energy. Otherwise stated, the Lord commands the forces of earth to cease from firing and to stand still and wait until his little band of followers invade the nations and kingdoms of the earth and testify to the fact that the kingdom of heaven has begun. Has not this been fulfilled? During the past twenty years have not Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions gone into nearly every nation on earth? Read, if you have not already done so, the report in the 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah's witnesses, setting forth that during the service year of 1940 there were placed in the hands of the people books and booklets to the number of 28,264,329, in many languages, and that this brings the total placement of books and booklets with the people since 1921 up to 337,749,320, not including hundreds of millions of magazines and free tracts.
Never were creatures more honored than those who are witnesses for Jehovah now. Truly it is sweet music in the ears of these when they hear the command from the Lord: “Jerusalem, Fear thou not; 0 Zion, let not thy hands be slack.” (Zeph. 3:16, Am. Rev. Ver.) Had the war not ceased in 1918 many of these would not have had an opportunity to learn of the Lord’s great Theocratic arrangement and to participate in the witness. Many of these give evidence of being spirit-begotten and anointed as commissioned witnesses for Jehovah, and are accordingly engaged in giving the witness, while an increasing number of persons of good-will are hearing the message and joining the spirit-begotten remnant in giving the witness. May it not be truly said, then, that for the sake of “the elect” the Lord has held back the final trouble of Armageddon and
222
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
‘shortened those days of tribulation’ not only that they themselves might be gathered, but that they might participate in the work of giving the witness in the name of the Lord in behalf of the unnumbered multitude of the Lord’s “other sheep” ? These shall be of the “flesh” that shall survive the battle of Armageddon, just as Noah and his family in the ark survived the Flood.
If you are one of those coming to a knowledge of the Kingdom truth as a result of this great witness since the cessation of the World War of 1914-1918, then give grateful thanks to Jehovah God and his anointed King, Christ Jesus; and see to it that every faculty with which you are endowed is now used to his praise and to the carrying out of his commandment to be His witness. Would that the Lord’s people all over the earth might enter fully into an appre
ciation of what has been done for them during these past years by the Lord’s holding back the terrible trouble that is impending and is now so near' If we see, then, the oncoming storm of Armageddon and know that Jehovah wants the witness given beforehand, why should we not hasten on! If we love the Lord we will do so. They that really love the Lord will “have boldness” in this day of the proclamation of the message of The Theocratic Government.— 1 John 4:17,18.
We are well along in the year 1941. Let everyone now who really loves the Lord abandon religion and put aside selfishness and, moved by the spirit of a loving devotion to Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government under Christ, make the few remaining months the greatest witness yet given or possible.
HYPOCRITICAL
HE nations are angry that Christ Jesus has been enthroned above as rightful ruler of the world and has taken his power and reigns in the midst of his enemies.
This is in fulfillment of prophecy, at Psalms 2:6 and 110 1,2 and Revelation 11: 15-18. The Devil has been ousted from heaven (Rev. 12:1-12), and he sees he must act quickly to keep the people deceived and not permit them to see, hear and understand the message concerning Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. The peoples of earth have suffered long from strife and war. They would now welcome peace coming in any reliable manner. The great deceiver, the Devil, would make the people believe their desire for peace can be had only by following the lead of the most powerful religious system in “Christendom”.
The subsidized press, which gives more and more space to the affairs of that religious system, therefore announced as with a great blare of trumpets that the “holy father” instituted a new festival day, to be known as “The Feast of the Kingdom of Christ”, and which has since 1925 been observed on the last Sunday of October annually. The following quotations are taken from that press dispatch from Rome:
The new festivity, says the Pope, is a part of the program of his Pontificate—“The Peace of Christ in the Kingdom of Christ ” By recalling each year to every one’s mind that Christ is King of all the peoples of the world, it will be an efficacious remedy against “the pest of our age”, namely, laicism.
Laicism, continues the encyclical, by lowering Christianity to the level of all other religions, even false ones, causes “discord between nations, unleashing of passions often disguised as patriotism, covetousness for earthly possession, contempt of domestic duties, discord and instability in families, threatens society itself with rum”.
Then the encyclical exhorts all Christians “to militate courageously under the banner of Christ the King, to go back with apostolic fervor to the rebels and misguided ones and strive to maintain the rights of God himself intact”; for “when in international meetmgs and parliaments the sweet name of our Redeemer is passed in shameful silence it is highly necessary to acclaim it publicly, announcing everywhere the rights of his sovereign dignity and power”!
In conclusion the encyclical states that the church claims as its right complete liberty and mdependence from civil power, the same conditions being extended to religious [Catholic] orders and organizations of both sexes. The Pontiff closes with the reminder
COUNTERFEIT
that not only private individuals must publicly venerate and obey Christ, but also magistrates, law-makers and princes, as one day they will be “called to account to God if they do not obey the divine commands”.
On the face of it this appeared to many as a laudable move to get all the people to recognize Christ as King and therefore that such encyclical was the proper thing. It sounded well to millions deceived thereby. Facts and Scripture show it was a plain hypocritical move of the Devil, through his organized system, to turn the minds of the people toward the Roman Catholic system and away from God’s true kingdom, his Theocratic Government by Christ Examination of the encyclical issued by the pope shows he regards himself as the true representative of Christ on earth and that thereby the people giving allegiance to the kingdom of Christ must do it through him. Since the inauguration of the above feast, Nazism has taken control of Germany and in July of 1933 the pope entered into a Concordat with the Nazi dictator, which Concordat stands today, as also does the pope’s Concordat with the Fascist dictator.
Nazism, Communism, Fascism, and all manner of religious isms mean one and the same thing, because all such totalitarian or dictatorial rule is against Jehovah God and his Theocracy. All the dictators embrace and practice religion or demonism. All are against Jehovah and Christ Jesus, “The Higher Powers”, therefore all such are against The Theocracy. Dictatorial power, like a great ravenous beast, is overrunning and spoiling the earth. As symbolically described in Revelation chapter 17, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is riding upon the back of that ravenous beast. All the dictators and their supporters are against the witnesses of Jehovah who are bearing testimony to the name of the Most High and to his Theocratic King and kingdom. Dictators have turned the nations against Jehovah God; therefore the nations once professing to serve God have entirely forgotten him and become his enemies Psalm 9:17 shows their fate to be destruction at Armageddon.
Confirming the foregoing, note an article in the Chicago (Ill.) Daily Times of August 7, 1940, contributed by the Times foreign editor, Irving Pflaum:
Port or Spain, Trinidad, Aug. 7 (Passed by British Censor). —Hitler intends to denounce Soviet Russia this autumn, return to the policy of the anti-Comintem pact, win the official support of the Vatican and “appease” Roman Catholics of Germany, Po
July 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
223
land, Belgium, and Latin America. This is the program Nazi agents say will be revealed by Berlin “as soon as the attack on Britain succeeds.” I recently have had the opportunity to learn the inside story of future German policy as told to the highest South American leaders in “strict confidence” by German agents now operating as diplomats or undercover men m South American countries A president of an important “sister republic” himself told me what the Nazis have been telling him. . . . Also the information which he gave me was confirmed in other quarters by diplomats and observers who are in positions to know what is going on m South America. . . . suspicion is Latin America’s natural attitude toward everyone. They began to believe that the Reich m its assistance to General Franco was really anti-clerical and anti-church From the beginning, however, German agents smiled knowingly and told South Americans to wait and see what Hitler would do later These agents spoke of the pact with Stalin as a clever trick which would be scrapped when Russia had been
used. Now they are predicting that the time is near when Hitler can return to his former position as the arch foe of Communism and the protector of all things godly. They warn conservative Latin American leaders not to “fall” for Anglo-American propaganda to the effect that Hitler is a godless revolutionary These agents also say that when England has been subdued the wo: Id will witness der Fuehrer in his true and real light. He will then be able to show Latin America that he is a friend of the Catholic church and the one man who made the world safe for the Catholic anti-Communist communities such as Franco Spain and the pies-ent conservative forces in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and other Latin American countries
The religious, fanatical rule, it appears, will overrun the whole earth; but it will succeed for only a very short time, and then its final end must come at Jehovah God's appointed time.
REFUGE
June 20, 1941
Mr. Henry P Drey, Oakland, California. Dear Brother.
A need for refuge appeared to some of God’s people, and an effort was made to provide a refuge organization.
Purpose: The purpose was and is to provide a place where children of the consecrated, who have been expelled from school, might receive instruction and where shelter and food could be produced and provided for that purpose, and where all concerned, including the children, would work to carry out the purpose.
A Committee was formed to attempt to carry out that purpose. That Committee presented the matter to various brethren assembled at various places. It now appears that many who heard the Committee misunderstood the purpose and confusion has resulted. Some appear to have understood that everyone of the consecrated should sell or give up all their property and donate their all to the Refuge Organization, and that a place would be provided for all such to be housed and fed and live together as a community. That understanding is entirely erroneous With such misunderstanding some have contributed their money to the general fund and probably some have unduly denied or burdened themselves in doing so.
Society . Numerous letters have been received asking if the Society is backing this Refuge Organization. As this office has repeatedly stated, the Society is organized and incorporated to proclaim this gospel of the Kingdom and therefore cannot undertake to provide schools, houses and other places of refuge. Therefore the Society can assume no responsibility whatsoever concerning the same Seeing the need of help to be provided for some that are in need the Society certainly would not object to brethren acting independently and together in. putting forth a joint effort to make provision for the needy; but the responsibility for so doing must rest upon those who attempt to do so. While the Society does not and could not object, it cannot assume the responsibility. The Society is ready and willing to co-operate in any way possible, which includes the formulating of rules and regulations and the appointment of some suitable person to manage the refuge, but as to cairying the expense of such organization, that cannot be done.
Many wild, unauthorized and extravagant statements have been made and many unnecessary and silly letters have been written and circulated concerning such organization, and this has resulted in many letters of inquiry showing a misunderstanding.
The commission of God’s people is to proclaim this gospel of the Kingdom, and each individual must do what he can to provide the things decent and necessary for himself and dependent ones and to help others in need insofar as it appears to him that he can do so. It is not for anyone else to say what he shall or shall not do.
F A R M S
Advice . My advice is that those who have received in advance from the Refuge Committee money with the view of advancing the organization, and have received the same without the approval, in writing, of the Auditing Committee, should return such sums of money to the treasurer of the committee who holds the funds; that the necessary and legitimate expense incurred by the committee in their endeavor to organize a refuge organization be paid out of the funds in hand; that the money remaining be returned to the contributors in proportion to the amount contributed, or disposed of in such a manner as each contributor may request.
You are hereby authorized to transmit the information contained in this letter to any person who desires to know the situation, and further to inform all inquiring ones that while the Society feels very sympathetic toward some provision being made for the needy, and will be glad to see such done, the Society as such cannot undertake it because its commission is to proclaim this gospel of the Kingdom. The witness work now is the all-important thing.
The attempted effort to create a refuge organization has greatly enlarged the correspondence m this office, and I therefore ask you to undertake the transmitting of the information herein contained to inquirers, that the time of our office workers here maybe given entirely to the carrying on of the work which the Lord has commissoned them to do.
No doubt all have acted in good faith with the hope of providing some help, but the effort has not been attended, as it appears, with the Lord’s blessing.
The Society has heretofore issued a letter to the effect that where brethren who own property, and could reasonably do so, provide a place for pioneers to park their trailers while engaged in the service, and which pioneers might assist in doing some work on the premises when not engaged in the field service of the Loid, that might be done; but that was merely advisory. It appeals to be easy for some to misunderstand an effort put forth to help others and to make many extravagant statements, without authority, which causes confusion. I hope you may be blessed by the Lord’s grace to assist in putting this matter clearly befoie those who may inquire.
Wishing you the Lord’s blessing, I remain
Very sincerely,
Your brother by His grace,
J. F. Rutherford, President
[Note: To avoid unnecessary correspondence at this office further inquiries about the Refuge Organization should be addressed to
H. P. Drey, 1604 Webster St., Oakland, California ]
FIELD EXPERIENCES
THEOCRATIC AMBASSADORS AND THE “BLITZ”
“At Sheffield a party of five pioneers were making back-calls during the evening blackout, when the warning sirens sounded. The transport in the city had stopped running, and, having no means of making for home, they all returned to the Kingdom Hall in the center of the city. A heavy raid was soon in progress. With Nazi-Papal bombs screaming and crashing around them, they went down into the basement for greater safety. Cartons of books were piled up to the ceiling as added support for the floor above. A high explosive bomb scored a direct hit on the adjoining building, the force of the explosion lifting the basement floor on which were crouching the five pioneers. After hours of terrifying experience they groped their way from the half-wrecked building and, picking their way amidst debris and bomb craters, eventually arrived home. Almost half the center of the city had been destroyed. One Merseyside town has been so devastated that the three pioneers resident there have been compelled to leave, having found it impossible to continue work. Three pioneer homes in London have been rendered uninhabitable by bomb-blast. In the case of a fourth home a bomb demolished the house next door, but by a miracle the home was undamaged. One pioneer has been killed. He was indoors when a bomb exploded near by, and a splinter [of the bomb] penetrated the outside wall of the house and killed him. Another pioneer, a German refugee, was severely injured by another splinter at the same time, and has been in hospital for some time, but is now recovering. A number of Kingdom Halls have been demolished, while the office and Bethel Home in London have had several narrow escapes. At Bristol a blitz commenced two hours after the zone assembly had finished, and the Kingdom Hall, together with the hall that had been used for the assembly, was razed to the ground. A number of pioneers have been bombed out of their homes, some more than once, while others have found their territory rendered unworkable and have had to move to new districts. Often pioneers have arrived at an assignment of territory to commence work, only to find it almost completely devastated and, on occasions, the rescue workers are still extricating the bodies of the victims. In a few instances pioneers have been present when Nazi raiders have swooped down to machine-gun the people on the streets. In spite of all these hindrances these faithful servants frequently brave the bombs and falling shrapnel from the guns, in order to get to the people of good-will. Phonographs and records are often loaned to the interested, and played in air-raid shelters at night. The pioneers join the people in their shelters too and conduct model studies with them, while the guns crash around them and the bombs continue to fall. These frightful experiences often result in stimulating the pioneers to a greater and more determined effort.”
IN SACRAMENTO COUNTY ROAD CAMP (CALIF.)
“Violation of some rules of this camp by some inmates endangered the privileges of the entire camp. To bring justice upon all implicated, general camp court was called and held Thursday night, conducted entirely by inmates. Selection of a judge came first. The boys desired one who would be impartial, honest, and just, to try the ones suspected Chairman called order, one was nominated, but
quickly overruled. A brief silence of the two hundred present, broken by one who timidly said, ‘Jehovah!’ Then the vast majority thunderously said: ‘Jehovah! Yes, Jehovah! Let Jehovah be judge!’ referring to me, as some have mockingly called me by the name of the Most High many times previously. Nearly every man in camp knows the name Jehovah and that I am one of His witnesses. I arose, all faces toward me; silence a pin could have been heard. Said I, ‘Because of conscientious objections I am not able to serve in the capacity of judge.’ Almost in one voice they broke forth: ‘Overrule the conscientious objections! Subpoena him! We want him as judge; he can give us the fairest and most honest trial of any man in camp, and we will get more justice from him than anyone else!’ I arose again and said: ‘My conscientious objections stand.’ They again wanted to overrule it, but the chairman called attention to the fact that they could not do this; so they selected another, who did his best. Little did I realize that so many of the boys placed such a great amount of confidence in me as an ambassador of The Theocracy. Thus were seen the effect and fruit of my labor and positive stand for Jehovah and his King and kingdom. As far as I know the matter is settled and the privileges restored. The Devil is trying to take away even what freedom is still enjoyed here. Considering that it is for five months, the amount of witnessing done here is small, to wit, 29 books, 565 booklets, 191 magazines, 50 hours’ work, and played every set of phonograph lectures, with a total attendance of 162, and 15 back-calls Many here have shown a great deal of respect for Jehovah’s provision for their blessing and opportunity to receive life everlasting.”
MODEL BIBLE STUDIES IN WARTIME
“In England here it is not hard to understand that we are in the ‘last days, when perilous times have come’, especially if you are on your way to a model study and suddenly the wailing sound of an air raid is heard, and presently the drone of approaching aircraft, and then the whistle of a bomb or two coming down. That is all the more reason why we must hasten to the people of good-will and comfort them in spite of all terrors and opposition. My young sister, who has recently become a pioneer and assigned to the Manchester pioneer home, and I worked a private assignment of territory through and were able to get five model studies started. One night, working late at the depot, I could not get along as usual to call for other interest in the neighborhood of a model study. As it happened, I had told the lady of this previously and had mentioned who the people were To my surprise she went around and called for them herself, and that night there were twelve at the model study, the most there had ever been. We took them to the Kingdom Hall for the Kingdom service meeting, where they ordered the new lecture record, ‘Message of Hope.’ By the next Sunday they had both been on the witness work, the husband having arranged to call back on a family and start a model study. Now these people are Watchtower subscribers, come to Kingdom Hall, and go to each other’s model study, and last week the young girl went into the field service Most remarkable of all, the husband’s two sisters have become pioneers and have been assigned to the Manchester pioneer home. The far-reaching effect of the model study is wonderful, because it is Jehovah’s provision.”
224
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. VAX Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose Of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
■United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British____________________ 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian_________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Stratbfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African_________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of II arch S, 1879.
“PURE LANGUAGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The midsummer Testimony Period, as above named, will include all of August The Lord now having turned to his devoted people the “pure language” of the truth of The Theocracy, it will be their privilege during August to publish the same with a “pure lip”, that a multitude of others may hear and turn from religion and join in the united service of Jehovah. Therefore during this Testimony Period the book Religion together with the latest published booklet will be placed with everyone possible, on a contribution of 25c. This, which is generally the vacation season and convention time, should allow for many newly interested ones to start out into the field activity, and for all veteran publishers to get in their full quota of hours. A good report is awaited from each and all at the close of August, marking the special blessing of the Lord upon all that “serve him with one consent”.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock a.m., Wednesday, October 1, 1941, at which the usual annual business will be transacted. See pages 237,238 herein.
NOTICE TO BRITISH “WATCHTOWER” SUBSCRIBERS
Subscribers for The Watchtower in Britain who fail to receive a copy after eight weeks of the date of issue may write to the London office, 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England, stating they have failed to receive that particular issue of The Watchtower, and the London office will try to furnish them with the missing issue, if possible. It is our desire to get to every subscriber the contents of each issue of The Watchtower, because we know that to the reader it is a great aid and comfort in these perilous times.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 7: “When the Righteous Rule,” fl 1-33 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1941.
Week of September 14: “When the Righteous Rule,” fl 34-63 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1941.
VACATION
The members of the Bethel family will enjoy their vacation this year from Saturday, August 2, to Wednesday, August 20, inclusive. This will afford them a change from their regular work at headquarters and the opportunity for a larger part in the in-(Continued on page 239)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	August 1, 1941	N°- 15
WHEN THE RIGHTEOUS RULE
"When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn."—Prov. 29:2.
TEHOVAH places before men the information that I all, if they would, might know why there is so J much mourning, sorrow and distress throughout the earth at the present time. He also tells what will bring peace, contentment and joy to the people. That desirable information is set forth fully in the Bible, which is God’s Word of truth, and the Bible is published in all known languages and dialects. The rulers and leaders in the nations have no excuse for not knowing what God has laid before mankind, as set forth in his Word. The religious teachers have had every opportunity to learn for themselves and to inform the people concerning these vital truths, but they have shunned the true information. They have had ample opportunity to inform the political and commercial leaders of the world as to the real cause of sorrow and distress in the nations and what is the only possible remedy. Such opportunity they have ignored, and, going still farther in the wrong way, they have joined hands with the political and commercial elements to carry out selfish purposes of man. They have forgotten God and his Word and turned to demonism.
2 God provided for his typical covenant people, the Israelites, the office of the priesthood and laid upon the priests the obligation and duty to be obedient to his law and to instruct others. They were commanded to instruct the people of things pertaining to the law. “For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.”—Mal. 2:7.
3 The nations called “Christendom” have pretended to be the representatives of God, and therefore have been in an implied covenant to do the will of God. It has been the duty of the leaders of “Christendom” to properly inform themselves and to instruct the people concerning God’s law and purpose, but in that they have entirely failed. As with the Israelites, so with “Christendom’s” leaders; they have departed out of the way of righteousness and have caused many to stumble at the law of God. (Mal. 2:8) The leaders in “Christendom”, and particularly the clergy, have refused sound doctrine and have turned to
fables, even as the Lord’s Word foretold they would do in these last days of peril.—2 Tim. 4: 3, 4.
‘ The religious leaders and their followers are all influenced by the demons, and both clergy and laymen walk on in darkness. The result now is as God's prophet recorded: ‘Darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people.’ Who will understand?
5	What is set forth herein is taken from the Word of God, and the clergy refuse to believe what is here published. They are blind and cannot understand. The political and commercial leaders refuse to give heed to the truth because they have hired the clergy to do their thinking in matters pertaining to religion, but all of them think in terms of religion. They too are blind as to God’s purpose. Who, then, can understand? Almighty God answers: “Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly; and none of the wicked shall understand ; but the wise shall understand.”—Dan. 12:10.
6	Only the wise after the wisdom from the Lord will understand. Who are they that are purified, made white and tried, as stated by God’s prophet? Such are those who are in Christ Jesus, who constitute “the remnant” of Jehovah’s spiritual people now on the earth, and who are wholly devoted to God. Who are the wise? In addition to “the remnant” all persons of good-will toward God now are granted the opportunity of understanding Jehovah’s purpose. The Lord is now gathering unto himself his “other sheep”, all of which shall understand; otherwise they could not be of his “other sheep”. For the instruction, aid and comfort of those who are of good-will toward God, and who are seeking the way to life, the information herein contained, and which is taken from the Bible, is published in The Watchtower.
MOURN
' In every nation now on earth the people mourn. Daily their distress increases and will continue to increase until the present wicked rule is destroyed. The fact that all nations mourn is proof that the wicked rule. In the year 1914 what is known as the World War began. Prior to that time the people had
227
228
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
much sorrow, but from and after 1914 the woes upon the nations and peoples of the earth have increased with each and every year. Those people of good-will toward God will believe his Word; and the Word of God says concerning the mourning that is upon the nations: ‘When the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.” This .scripture, together with the facts well known to all, should be sufficient proof that the wicked now rule, and this shows the reason why there is an ever-increasing time of mourning and sorrow and woe upon the peoples at this time. But why is the woe and mourning increased since the time that the World War began! The reason is that 1914 marked the end of the uninterrupted rule of Satan. At that time he was cast down to earth; and he has confined his operations to the nations of the earth since. Hence the Word of God says: ‘Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.”—Rev. 12:12.
8	But what has the Devil to do with the rule of the nations of earth now and with the ever-increasing woe? The Devil is the supreme wicked one and for centuries has been the invisible ruler of the nations of the earth, during which time he has operated through visible representatives on the earth, who, being selfish and under his influence, have refused to hear and to obey the Word of Almighty God, and hence have ruled wrongfully. Now the uninterrupted rule of the Devil is ending, and hence, as .the Scriptures state, the Devil and his visible representatives bring ever-increasing woe upon the people because the climax is at hand.
’ Never at any period of time have the people of all the nations been in such distress as now. The daily increase of woes upon the nations causes men’s hearts to fail them for fear, and hence many seek death rather than to endure suffering. That explains the suicides. Such persons see no hope, because they are without knowledge and without God. Religionists offer the people nothing upon which they could base their hope. The sincere people now discern that the wicked and ambitious Hitler is a religionist, bent on establishing a religious rule of the world, and in this he has the unqualified support of the largest religious institution in existence, the head of which claims to be the spiritual ruler of the world. Among the people there are still a number who have faith in the Word of God and who are of good-will toward God, and such persons are now becoming enlightened, shunning religion, turning away from it, and seeking knowledge from the Word of God. It is the desire of The Watchtower to aid such. It is needless to introduce evidence showing that the wicked now rule the nations of the earth, but attention is called to it in order that those of good-will may see the privilege
of taking advantage of God’s provision to learn the Scriptures, find the way of escape to the place of safety, and learn how the wicked came into power and rule and what is the remedy therefor.
THE WICKED
10	The wicked one, who is the invisible ruler of the world, is Satan the Devil. Originally his name was Lucifer. Almighty God appointed Lucifer as overseer of the earth, and when Lucifer rebelled God did not deprive him of his rulership. On the contrary, God said to Satan: ‘For this cause have I permitted thee to remain, for to shew thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.’ —Ex. 9:16, Leeser.
11	Satan has continued to exercise his power and influence over humankind, and thus God has permitted Satan to have full opportunity to prove his wicked challenge, that he could turn all men against God. (Job 2: 5) The climax is now here. Satan knows that his time is short, and hence he increases the woes upon the people before the final showdown.
” As further proof that Satan has continued to bear rule over the nations the following Scriptural proof is submitted. Immediately following the baptism of Jesus he was led by the spirit of God into the mountain and was there subjected to a severe test at the hands of the Devil in the Devil’s effort to cause him to violate his covenant with Jehovah. (Matt. 4:3-11) The Devil put three major tests before Jesus, who was then fasting. He challenged Jesus to make bread out of a stone. He challenged him to leap from the pinnacle of the temple to prove his superiority over men. “Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.”—Matt. 4: 8-10.
18	This shows that Satan was then the invisible ruler of the nations of the earth. Thereafter Jesus spoke of Satan as the prince or ruler of this world. (John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11) Still later the apostle Paul spoke of the Devil as the god of this world who blinds the people from hearing the truth: “But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.” (2 Cor. 4: 3,4) Again the scripture says that the entire world lies in that wicked one.—1 John 5:19.
14	The visible rulers of the nations of the earth are chiefly these: religious, political and commercial men; but, in fact, all of them practice religion. To
August 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
229
turn men away from God the Devil brought forth religion and by this has deceived many. The political element yields to the religious influence and also practices religion to aid in keeping the ruled in subjection. The commercial elements work with religious and political elements in order to accomplish their selfish and pecuniary gain. All three elements love money and power, and all are against Jehovah and his kingdom; hence all are wicked, and the result is exactly as the Lord God foretold: ‘The wicked rule, and the people mourn’ because of the injustices in the earth.
CHANGE
15	Will the present sorrowful state of affairs continue forever or will there be a change in the near future? There is certain to be a change. The fact that Almighty God says, “When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice,” is of itself proof sufficient that in God’s due time the righteous shall be in authority. When the Word of God is considered in the light of existing facts it is seen by those of goodwill that a change is now taking place. In 1914 God enthroned his King, Christ Jesus, and sent him forth to rule while the wicked one is still exercising his power. The righteous Ruler is Christ Jesus, and his work first performed as King is to cause a witness to be given in the earth of and concerning the kingdom of righteousness, and then to completely oust the wicked from rule, and this he will do at Armageddon ; and all the facts and the Scriptures show that that great event is near at hand. That will be a climax of the world’s trouble. That battle of the great day of God Almighty will for ever end the rule of the wicked. All the wicked God will destroy. (Ps. 145: 20) Affliction shall not again rise up. (Nah. 1: 9) Henceforth Christ Jesus, “the Prince of Peace,” will reign, and his reign will be entirely righteous.—Isa. 9: 6, 7.
16	The righteous ruler, Christ Jesus, shall ever be invisible to human eyes, but will have his representatives acting in righteousness that will be visible to human eyes. Almighty God Jehovah is the King of Eternity and is invisible. Christ Jesus is “the express image” of Jehovah and likewise invisible to human eyes. He is Jehovah’s duly anointed King of The Theocratic Government.—1 Tim. 1:17; Heb. 1:3; Ex. 33: 20; 1 Tim. 6:16; John 14:19; Col. 1:13-15.
VISIBLE RULERS
17	God has given his word that there shall be a new heaven and a new earth wherein righteousness shall continue forever. (2 Pet. 3:13) That means that the rule of the earth, both invisible and also visible, shall be in righteousness. Concerning that it is written: “Behold, a king [Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocratic Government] shall reign in righteousness,
and princes shall rule in justice [righteousness].” —Isa. 32:1, Leeser.
18	“Princes,” or governors, are those who exercise a ruling power under the command and supervision of the higher power. The new heaven is the new invisible ruling power, whereas the new earth is the rule of the people by visible representatives of the supreme and invisible power. Since the new heaven and new earth is a rule of righteousness, it follows that there must be men fully qualified to fill the place of visible rulership. They must be righteous. Who could possibly qualify and fill those places of world importance?
18	God has fixed the rules by which men can qualify, and all who are placed by the Lord in positions to rule and administer the laws of The Theocracy must act under The Theocracy and must first qualify according to the divine rules. All such must have full faith in God and in Christ Jesus and all be subject to crucial tests in order to prove their faithfulness. The Bible furnishes the complete information concerning those who shall qualify and who shall occupy the positions as the visible representatives of The Theocracy. It is that rule invisible and visible, or rule of righteousness, that shall bring great joy to the people.
20	Herein is set forth a list of men, which men met the requirements laid down by Jehovah that they might be qualified representatives of The Theocratic Government.
21	Abel, the second son of Adam and Eve, was the first man on the earth to show faith in the Almighty God. God never forgets a faithful creature. It was Abel’s faith and obedience that pleased God. (Gen. 4:4) “By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts ; and by it he, being dead, yet speaketh."—Heb. 11: 4.
22	God counted Abel a righteous man because of his faith. Abel was murdered at the instance of the Devil, and every murder that has been committed on earth has been done at the instance of the Devil. Concerning Abel’s righteousness and God’s purpose to punish those who have practiced religion and used it to bring about the murder of many others, Jesus Christ said to the religionists on earth at his time: “Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city: that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.” (Matt. 23: 34, 35) Abel was a good and faithful man; and it is written that they that have done good shall be resurrected. (John 5:29) God has a place for Abel.
230
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
25	The next man who had faith in God was Enoch. When it is said that a man walks with God, that means that his course of action is in harmony with God’s appointed way or rules. Long ago it was written of Enoch: “And Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God took him.” (Gen. 5: 24) God did not permit the Devil to kill Enoch, and because of Enoch’s faith God took him away: “By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God.” (Heb. 11:5) Enoch prophesied that the Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming and his kingdom, will punish those who have fought against God. (Jude 14,15) It was Enoch’s faith that pleased God, and therefore God has a place for Enoch. It is written in connection with him and other faithful creatures : “But without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.”—Heb. 11: 6.
24	Because of faith God counted Noah a righteous man; and Noah walked with God. (Gen. 6:9) In Noah’s day the human race had become exceedingly wicked and filled the earth with violence. God informed Noah of his purpose to destroy that wicked generation; and Noah obeyed the Lord God, and was saved from that destruction and brought over to the world beginning thereafter: “By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith.” (Heb. 11:7) That blessing of Noah and his family was because of his faith. God has a further blessing for Noah, yet to be received.
25	Abraham resided in the land of Ur when God directed him to move into a land about which Abraham knew nothing. Having faith in God, Abraham obeyed and went into the strange land. Concerning him and his faith it is written: “By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went.”—Heb. 11: 8.
26	In that strange land of Canaan God made a covenant with Abraham and caused Abraham to perform his part in a great prophetic drama, wherein Abraham pictured God himself, and in which Abraham’s son Isaac played a part picturing the coming of Christ Jesus and his great sacrifice. “For what saith the scripture! Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness.”—Rom. 4: 3.
27	Thereafter Abraham was called “the Friend of God”. (Jas. 2:23) Abraham by faith saw the day coming when God would have his kingdom in operation under Christ Jesus the Messiah, and that filled
his heart with joy. Jesus referred to this when he said: “Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad.” (John 8: 56) The Bible magnifies the importance of faith and obedience unto God by frequent reference to the faith of Abraham, who is called ‘the father of the faithful’. “Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.”— Gal. 3:6,7.
28	Abraham was swift to obey God; and that meant he was ready and willing, upon short notice, to move, and also shows that he had no fixed abiding place on the earth but was looking for a better place. He dwelt in tents and with his sons and grandsons; concerning which it is written: “By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise: for he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.” —Heb. 11: 9,10.
28	Abraham had faith in God’s government of righteousness, The Theocracy, which is symbolized by a city, and God has fixed a place for Abraham. Sarah, his wife, was old and past the age of childbearing. She had no children, but when God sent his angel and informed Sarah that she would give birth to a son Sarah had faith in God’s promise and God blessed her: “Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable.”— Heb. 11:11,12.
80	Abraham and Sarah’s only son Isaac grew to manhood’s estate, and then God put a great test upon Abraham. God commanded Abraham to offer his son upon a fiery altar of sacrifice. Under that great test Abraham exhibited strong faith in God. “By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that had received the promises offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be called; accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure.” (Heb. 11:17-19; Gen. 22: 9-18) It was on that occasion that Abraham and Isaac performed their parts in the great prophetic drama foretelling the sacrificial death and resurrection of the beloved Son of Jehovah God.
81	Faithful Isaac was also used of God to foreshadow the seed of promise, that is to say, those who would be made partakers of the great Theocracy. (Gal. 4: 28) The Scriptures tell of the faith of Isaac
August 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
231
and of Jacob, who, because of their faith and obedience unto God, became heirs to the promise of God made first to Abraham, and concerning this it is written : “By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff.”—Heb. 11:20, 21.
32	Moving on in the development of the typical Theocracy and looking further to the great and real Theocratic Government, the Holy City that shall rule the world in righteousness, God makes note of the faith and faithfulness of Joseph, the beloved son of Jacob. Then he makes mention of Moses, who also was there used as a type of Christ Jesus. Moses was reared by the royal family of Egypt; but upon receiving instruction from God, and having faith in God’s promise, he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter and devoted himself to the service of Jehovah. “Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season ; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.” —Heb. 11: 25-27.
33	By faith he saw the coming Theocracy and devoted his life to the service of God. He was chosen of God to lead the Israelites out of Egypt, and in this he played the part in one of Jehovah’s great prophetic dramas foretelling the deliverance of God’s faithful people from the power and oppression of Satan’s organization. “Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them. By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land; which the Egvptians assaying to do were drowned.” —Heb. 11: 28, 29.
34	Joshua succeeded to the place once occupied by Moses. He received command from Almighty God to lead the Israelites into Canaan, and in doing so God worked a great miracle, causing the raging waters of the Jordan river to stand still while Joshua led the host of Israel, and they marched over dry-shod into safety. (See Joshua chapter 3.) At God’s command Joshua led the Israelites around the walled city of Jericho, behind which walls the enemies of God’s people hid for safety, and it was God who threw down those walls; and concerning the faith of Joshua and those who were with him it is written: “By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days.”—Heb. 11: 30.
35	God would have it known that even harlots can turn away from a wrongful course and find the way of life, whereas those who practice religion and re
fuse to obey God fail to find life. (Matt. 21:31) In Jericho resided a woman named Rahab, who was engaged in keeping a bawdyhouse. She learned of Jehovah’s power and his blessing upon those who have faith in him and who serve Jehovah God. Upon learning these truths she readily made a covenant with God’s servants to shield and protect them, and she exhibited her faith in God by agreeing to do what they requested her to do to protect them. Thereby she played a part in a prophetic drama foretelling that in the present time of wickedness on the earth those who show favor to God’s servants shall be blessed by the Lord. Rahab’s faith in God was rewarded and she was saved from the fate that befell those of Jericho who had no faith in God, and concerning her it is written: “By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace.” (Heb. 11:31; Josh. 6:23) God had given his word that he will not forget the faith of Rahab but in his own due time she is certain to receive his everlasting blessing because of her faith.
38	Although Israel as a nation turned to demonism or religion and for that reason God cast away the nation, there were amongst the Israelites some faithful men who exercised faith in God, and who looked forward to The Theocracy and who because of their faith rendered service unto God and received his promised blessing. Those men are mentioned in the Scriptures as receiving the approval of Almighty God because of refusing to yield to the influence of Satan and his agents, and because of their devotion to God it is written concerning them: “And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets.”—Heb. 11: 32.
37	There was Gideon, a farmer, who was threshing his wheat when the angel of Jehovah appeared and told Gideon that God had selected him to be a deliverer of the Israelites from the Devil religionists, the Midianites, who were oppressing the Israelites. (See Judges sixth chapter.) With his little band reduced to only 300 men Gideon put to flight and destroyed the enemy host of the Midianites. Thus God rewarded him with service because of his faith and made a prophetic picture of greater blessings to come in future days.
38	Barak is another specifically named because of his faith. With him was Deborah, the prophetess of God, who worked with Barak. In the prophetic drama, Deborah played a part picturing the organization of God, while Barak, the commander of the loyal forces of Israel, played the part in that drama picturing Christ Jesus the Lord. With a small army of 10,000 men, poorly equipped, Barak joined battle
232
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
with an overwhelming enemy host, which host was equipped with iron chariots under the leadership of Sisera. In that battle the angels of heaven fought with Barak and Almighty God sent a great storm and flood, which swept away the disorganized and disrupted army of Sisera, and then Barak destroyed the entire lot as they fled. (See Judges chapters four and five.) Barak is mentioned for his faithfulness, and God has a place for him.
S9	Samson received favorable report from the Lord because of his faithful devotion to Almighty God. He was used by the Lord to deliver the Israelites from the bondage in which they were held by the demonized religionists, the Philistines. (See Judges chapters 13-16.) After faithful service to God Samson was taken prisoner and brought before the Philistines, who put out his eyes and brought him into a public place to exhibit him and taunt him and to reproach his God. Samson there played a part in the prophetic drama picturing the faithful servants of the great Theocracy, who are blind to everything except Jehovah God and his kingdom. Blind Samson, held a prisoner, was given great strength by Jehovah to pull down the two pillars supporting the temple of the demons, wherein there were assembled thousands of religionists who reproached and defamed God’s holy name. Samson was faithful even to the last and in his death slew a host of God’s enemies. His faith secured for him God’s approval.
40	Jephthah was another faithful servant of God, who led the loyal Israelites in battle against their enemy, the Amorites, who were demon-worshipers. Jephthah gained, by the Lord’s grace, a great victory in vindication of Jehovah’s name. (See Judges 11:1-32.) That which appears to have been pleasing to God, and which gained for Jephthah God’s approval, was the keeping of his vow, which Jephthah had made, the keeping of which put Jephthah to a great and crucial test.—Ps. 50:14.
41	David, when a lad, because of his faith and devotion to Almighty God, was permitted to slay the monster Goliath, foreshadowing Christ Jesus slaying the monster, the oppressor of humankind. David fought many battles, and in every instance those battles were for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Of David God said: ‘He is a man after my own heart.’ (Ps. 89:20; Acts 13:22) David’s name means beloved. He was a type of Christ Jesus. It was David’s faithfulness to God that gained for him His approval.
42	Samuel was a child of parents who were devoted to and served God. His mother consecrated Samuel to Jehovah before Samuel’s birth, and when the babe was weaned she handed him over to the service of God. That was a specific instance in which the child was taught from his youth up to have faith in and to serve God, and from that he never departed. He was
yet a child when God called Samuel to be a prophet and used him thereafter as a prophet. Samuel was faithful unto the end and repeatedly warned the Israelites against demonism or religion. He judged Israel with a righteous judgment, always showing his devotion to Almighty God. (See 1 Samuel chapters 1-7.) Samuel prophesied the coming of The Theocratic Government and the King thereof and the setting up of that kingdom in power and glory.— Acts 3:20-24.
42	Then favorable mention is made of the prophets by and through which God has spoken, which prophets had faith in God and in his coming government, The Theocracy, and prophesied of its coming. Because of their faithfulness they received God’s approval. A list of these names of faithful prophets appears in the Bible. Their prophetic utterances were not their own conclusions, such as “wise men” of today utter, but those faithful men wrote as they were moved of the spirit of God to write.-2 Pet. 1:21.
VALIANT FIGHTERS
44 Every one of those faithful men endured great affliction, which was heaped upon them by religionists and other dupes of the Devil, and all these faithful men are mentioned as valiant fighters. The Devil, in his effort to make effective his wicked challenge to Almighty God, fought against these faithful men, endeavoring to turn them away from God. In that fight the Devil employed religion, or demonism, as his chief instrument and applied physical force where he could not succeed by fraud and deception. That those men remained true and steadfast under the test and showed their faith and devotion to God, the Almighty caused to be written in his Word concerning them the following, to wit: “Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance ; that they might obtain a better resurrection; and others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds and imprisonment; they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins, and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth.”—Heb. 11:33-38.
THE PROMISE
42 Almighty God had given his word that he would raise up a Seed and set up his government, by which
August 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
233
the world shall be ruled in righteousness and by which obedient men shall be forever blessed. Later he renewed this word of promise to Abraham and bound his word with his oath. (Gen. 12: 3; 22:16-18; Heb. 6:17-20) The faithful men described in the foregoing paragraphs, who died before the coming of Christ Jesus, trusted God implicitly. They believed his promises and relied upon them. They willingly bore testimony to their faith in God’s word of promise, and they sealed their testimony with their own lifeblood. They did not expect the promised government in their day, but they were firmly convinced that in his due time God would carry out fully his word of promise, and therefore they went into death full of faith. Their faith is certain to be rewarded by the Most High. Mark here the Scriptural proof. “These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.”—Heb. 11:13.
48	They knew that the promise would not be fulfilled completely while Satan continued to be the invisible overlord or god of this wicked world: “For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country.” (Heb. 11:14) They were seeking a country; which manifestly meant that they were not devoted to the country wherein they resided. They were seeking what country? The Scriptures answer: “The kingdom of heaven,” “the holy city,” which Jesus bought with his own lifeblood. They willingly took that course, and they could have turned back had they so desired. “And truly if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned: but now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly : wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he hath prepared for them a city.”—Heb. 11:15,16.
47	God has prepared a place for them in connection with his Theocratic Government. A “city”, or ruling organization, is specifically prepared for them. That “city” is not a part of “the Holy City”, but a part of God’s organization just the same, and which shall operate under the supervision of the Holy City.
48	When will those faithful men come into possession of what is prepared for them? The Scriptures answer that they received the approval of God as faithful men, but while they sojourned on earth they did not come into possession or bear away that which was promised. And why did they not receive it before their death? That question is specifically answered as follows: “And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise : God having provided some better thing for us,
that they without us should not be made perfect.” —Heb. 11: 39,40.
4’ Clearly the meaning of this scripture, last quoted, is that some better thing must first be provided for others, of whom Paul was one, before those faithful men of old could come into their reward or that which was prepared for them. That “better thing” here mentioned is “the holy city”, the kingdom of God, The Theocratic Government, and it is prepared for those who compose the capital organization, to wit, Christ Jesus and the members of his body, all of whom must prove faithful unto death. That would mean that all of the Holy City must be selected and the Kingdom must come before those holy men of old could receive what is prepared for them.
80 This is the order, as shown by the Scriptures: Jehovah God first revealed to his beloved Son the 'hidden treasure’, which is The Theocratic Government. The beloved Son gave up everything that he had that he might buy that treasure, and he bought it, including all obedient creatures. (Matt. 13:44) The purchase price was presented in heaven, and the first ones to receive the benefit thereof are those who are called and elected to be members of the Holy City or “holy nation”, “the kingdom of heaven.” The Kingdom must be completed and set up, with Christ Jesus in full authority and glory as King, before these faithful men could be granted everlasting life on earth. The ransom sacrifice, by which the purchase price was provided for mankind, must first be paid over before any man could be released from the bondage of death, which had been inherited through Adam. When Jesus became a man and when he was crucified as a man, at that time all the faithful men preceding him and who are mentioned at Hebrews the eleventh chapter had passed away. Where were they since they had been counted righteous and had received a good report from Jehovah? Had they gone to heaven? The Scripture answers that all were dead. No one could go to heaven before the purchase price was paid over in heaven and the heavenly way was open. Concerning David, ‘the man after God’s own heart,’ it is specifically written: “For David is not ascended into the heavens; but he saith himself, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool.”—Acts 2:34, 35.
51	John the Baptist was one of the great prophets, and he can never be in heaven, because he had died before the crucifixion of the Lord: “Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist; notwithstanding, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.”—Matt. 11:11.
234
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
62	All those men died and went out of existence into the grave, or “hell”, but all are held in the memory of Almighty God, who will resurrect them from the dead in his own due time and according to his promise. Those men had faith in the resurrection, and therefore they endured the great fight of affliction even unto death in order ‘that they might obtain the better resurrection’.—Heb. 11: 35.
RESURRECTION
53	Those who compose the royal house, the “holy nation” of which Christ Jesus is the Head, participate in the “first resurrection”, that is to say, first in importance and first in time. (Rev. 20:4,6) The apostle Paul wrote that he gladly suffered the loss of everything that he might share in that resurrection with Christ Jesus. (Phil. 3:7-14) Those who have a part in the resurrection of Christ are raised up out of death and made spirit creatures and are given life immortal, and their everlasting existence is in the spirit in heaven.—1 Cor. 15: 40-54.
84	Faithful men of old, from Abel to the last one of the prophets, cannot have a part in the first resurrection, for the reason that they died before the heavenly way was opened and before anyone was called to the heavenly kingdom. The life of those faithful men shall be forever human on the earth. They have a “better resurrection”, however, than that of those of the human race in general who are favored in the general resurrection. Those faithful men of old had their trial of faith before the purchase price or ransom was made available, but they had full faith in God’s promise and they shall receive the benefit of the ransom sacrifice because of their faith and faithfulness. Other human creatures that have lived on the earth for a season and died are held in the memory of God and shall be resurrected, but not on equal terms with those faithful men of old who received God’s approval before they died.
VISIBLE
85	When God set up his typical Theocracy with Israel and ruled over Israel as his chosen people, none of the Israelites saw him, yet they observed his power. When God spoke to his faithful men he sent an angel as his messenger, who appeared in human form and delivered the message from the Most High. (Gen. 22:11; Josh. 5:13-15; Judg. 6:11) God made the earth for man, and he made man for the earth, and in due time righteous men shall live forever on the earth. They shall have an organization that shall govern in righteousness. That organization will not be a democracy, but a government representative of the great Theocracy, acting under the direct supervision of the King of the great Theocratic Government. Necessarily that representative government
will be visible to human eyes, and the people will receive the laws and instructions through those visible representatives.
88	The faithful men named at the eleventh chapter of Hebrews complied with the divine rules and received God’s approval. Therefore their record proves that when resurrected they are qualified to represent The Theocracy on the earth. A “prince” is a sovereign ruler appointed by and acting under the direct command of the supreme or higher powers. Jehovah God and Christ Jesus his King are “the Higher Powers”. (Rom. 13:1) Jehovah is the King of Eternity over all, and Christ Jesus is the King of the Holy City and, as the Chief Executive appointed by Jehovah, has and exercises all power in heaven and in earth. (Matt. 28:18; John 5: 22, 26) The Lord Jesus Christ is “The Prince of Peace”, and upon his shoulder the government of The Theocracy shall rest. (Isa. 9:6,7) The chief ruler amongst men appointed by the Lord is a “prince”.—Gen. 32:28; 1 Ki. 14:7.
"IN ALL THE EARTH”
87	The faithful men of the nation of Israel were called “fathers in Israel” and were so recognized by the Israelites, and are thus spoken of in the Word of God. (Acts 3:22) Those faithful men of old who had faith in the coming Theocratic Government and were under the great test proved their faith and integrity toward God; and while a long time ago they died and went into the tomb or grave, yet in the memory and purpose of Almighty God they have lived, because it is his express purpose by and through Christ Jesus to resurrect them from the dead. (Ex. 3:6; Matt. 22:31,32) Since those faithful men and servants of Jehovah God have opportunity of a “better resurrection”, and since God gave his word of promise that he had “prepared for them a city”, that is, an organization, where will their eternal existence be? and what position or place in God’s great arrangement shall they have? This question is answered in the following scripture, to wit: “Instead OF THY FATHERS SHALL BE THY CHILDREN, WHOM THOU MAYEST MAKE PRINCES IN ALL THE EARTH.”— Ps. 45:16.
88	Christ Jesus bought those faithful men, and bought their rights to life with his own lifeblood. They must therefore receive life from God by and through Christ Jesus. It is the will of God that Christ Jesus shall raise them out of death and give them life. (Rom. 6: 23; 5:18,19) Their resurrection shall take place, according to the Scriptures, when the Kingdom comes and begins to function. When raised from the dead and given life they will be the “children” of Christ Jesus because receiving life by and through him. Therefore it is certain that those faithful men will be raised from the dead as perfect hu
August 1, 1941
^.e WATCHTOWER.
235
man creatures and will occupy the high position of “princes”, or visible overlords or sovereign rulers, “in all the earth.” They will not be a part of the Holy City, or Theocratic Government, because that is spiritual; but they will occupy the high position of visible representatives of the Holy City, or Theocracy, and will govern or rule the peoples of the earth, and all the people will look to them to receive instruction from them.
59	The text at Isaiah 32:1, according to the Authorized Version, uses the word judgment as to the manner of the rule of these princes, whereas another translation (Leeser) renders the same word justice. Both are correct. The judgments or judicial determinations are made by the Lord, and those faithful princes will carry out or execute those judgments previously written and made by the Lord, and they will carry out these judgments or orders with exact justice to all. All the peoples that live on earth shall come under their visible rule or command. That will be a rule that will be a joy to the whole earth and all the people in it. “When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice.”—Prov. 29: 2.
BE WISE
60	Long ago God published his Word setting forth what would come to pass, foretelling specifically how he would enthrone Christ Jesus and shall destroy the wicked, both invisible and visible, and gave this positive and emphatic instruction to the leaders of the nations of earth: “Be wise now, therefore, 0 ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.”—Ps. 2:10-12.
81	The clergy and their allies had full access to this information; and they having been fully warned and refusing to give heed to the warning, their destiny is sealed. The Scriptures, together with the facts well known, prove beyond all doubt that the present great distress and mourning of the peoples of the nations of the earth is due to the powerful influence of Satan, the chief of demons, and his associate demons, all invisible to human eyes, and that the religious, political and commercial leaders of the world are under demon influence and power, and hence all are wicked. There is no human organization, political, commercial or otherwise, that offers any remedy for the sorrows and woes of humankind. There can be no peace and joy amongst the peoples as long as the wicked bear rule. There is no hope for anyone who holds to and supports that wicked rule. At Armageddon, which is near, Christ Jesus, the great King now present, will destroy the wicked, clear them off the earth, and make the way for righteousness and righteous rule to ever thereafter follow. That is the hope of humankind.
62	Christ the invisible King will rule in righteousness in full harmony with the will of Almighty God. On the earth the faithful men of old, resurrected and made perfect, will execute the orders of The Christ and do so always in righteousness. Only those who love righteousness and hate iniquity will survive, and then all such will rejoice and give praise to the Most High.'
63	Today the wise will hear the Word of the Lord and give heed thereto and flee to the great Theocratic Government, and will there find safety during Armageddon, and after Armageddon enter into complete joy under the righteous rule of The Theocracy.
ASSEMBLY
ST. LOUIS, Missouri, is the point upon which many thousands are now converging from all parts of the United States and adjacent lands, for a five-day assembly of unusual importance in view of the great world crisis due soon to reach its climax. These are Christians, who worship God, not according to any religious formula, but “in spirit and in truth”. All such love Jehovah God and Christ Jesus his elected King of the world, and also love those who truly worship Jehovah and his King. Hence it is a joy to such and a source of great spiritual strength to assemble together to worship the Lord, and it is certain that such is pleasing to the Most High.
The assembly dates are August 6-10 inclusive, and the place of assembly will be at The Arena, 5700 Oakland Avenue, where space is provided for the gathering together and accommodation of approximately 70,000 persons. According to all indications it is possible that a greater number than that will attend, in which event additional space can
IN ST. LOUIS
be readily provided. When the president of the Watch Tower Society addresses the public, it is expected, St Louisans and other interested persons within a radius of 100 miles will greatly swell the visible audience in and about The Arena.
According to the published announcement, the president, Judge Rutherford, is to deliver the opening address of the assembly on Wednesday, August 6, at 3 p.m., thereby infusing added enthusiasm and zeal into the great program of field activity which will make this Christian gathering a tremendous witness to the name and the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God. All who love righteousness and hate wickedness, and who strive to do right, will be welcome to the assembly. That means all persons who are of good-will toward the great Theocrat will be welcome, and it is hoped that as many as possible will attend.
Throughout the entire earth the people now mourn and many are seeking that which would bring them comfort.
236
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Jehovah has commissioned his people to “comfort all that mourn”. (Isa. 61:2) All who are fully devoted to Jehovah will be diligent to fulfill that divinely given commission. In full harmony therewith the president of the Society is to address the public on the timely subject, “Comfort All That Mourn,” on Saturday, August 9, at 3 p.m.
A further public address is to be given by the president on the final day of the assembly, on a subject which appears to mark an epoch for all persons of good-will toward Jehovah and his kingdom by Christ Jesus, to wit, “Children of The King.” This will be delivered Sunday morning, August 10, at 11 o’clock. A thoroughly organized advertising campaign is under way, within a wide-sweeping radius of St. Louis, to bring these two highly important speeches to attention of all who seek the comfort and instruction they will afford. As is the regular practice at all gatherings of
Jehovah’s witnesses, the admission is free and never is any collection taken.
At other times many cities have been tied together with land wires and by radio and all have participated in one convention though gathered together at many different points. This year it is manifestly the will and arrangement of Jehovah that all come together to one general assembly point. That fact calls to mind the prophetic words of Hebrews 12:23 concerning “the general assembly ... of the firstborn”, which assembly may be quite near. Inconveniences and hardships are being undergone by many to attend, but such remember the words of the apostle that “we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God”. (Acts 14:22) The joys and attending blessings are sure to far outweigh all inconveniences. The Almighty God and His King make all necessary provision for the protection and blessing of those who are devoted to The Theocracy.
GOD AND MAN
THE present state of man is far removed from the perfection enjoyed by Adam in Eden. The perfect man necessarily was beautiful, because all the works of the Creator Jehovah are perfect, and it is written that man was made in the image of God. He was endowed with the faculties of justice, wisdom, love, and power, which attributes were in harmony. He was the crowning part of God’s earthly creation.
Today man is broken in body, in mind, and in heart. Physically he is weak, emaciated, and unsightly. Mentally he is unsound. Morally man has reached a low ebb. Man’s sense of justice is warped all out of proper shape. His reduced power is directed in the wrong way. His love is for self, and his wisdom is foolishness in the sight of God. Truly the world of mankind is undone.
This deplorable condition has existed for many centuries, with no known remedy by man for it. Yea, after 6,000 years the world knows nothing about The remedy. The fact is slowly dawning upon those who think that not even the strongest men of the world are capable of producing a satisfactory or desirable government. The world has reached its extremity; and now it is God’s opportunity to bring the people out of a condition of lethargy by having his name declared throughout the earth.—Ex. 9:16.
That which man desires above all things else is life in happiness. The wisdom and power of man are wholly inadequate to provide a way that leads to life or to happiness. All that man can do is to fight for a bare existence; the greater portion of his time is spent in sorrow and distress. God’s provision leads man to both life and happiness. Yea, it makes it possible for obedient man to attain unto his fondest desire. Why, then, do so many humans pass unnoticed the provision made for man and for attaining his greatest desire ? The answer is: They are blind and cannot see. Their blindness has been caused by man’s adversary Satan and his chief instrument, religion, which he uses to keep them blinded.—2 Cor. 4: 3, 4.
But who is God, the One who purposed and provided the way that leads to life and endless happiness for faithful man? God has revealed himself to man through his works
and his written Word. (1 Cor. 2:10) His name is Jehovah, which means His purpose toward his creatures. He is the Self-existing One, “from everlasting to everlasting.” (Ps 90:2; Isa. 26:4) He is almighty, and there is none beside him; and his eternal attributes are justice, power, love and wjsdom. These attributes always work in exact harmony. His works bespeak his majesty, and magnify his wisdom and justice, love and power. The natural man can see some evidence of the wisdom and power of God. The spiritually minded man can appreciate God’s justice and rejoice in His love.
The scope and magnitude of God’s power and wisdom are appalling to the finite, imperfect mind of man. Jehovah God made the sun to give light by day for man, and to give life and beauty to the unintelligent creation of earth. With the natural eye we behold one sun, the center of our solar system. Astronomers declare that, with the use of instruments, they have counted more than 125 million suns, each one of which is the center of a different solar system It is estimated that light travels 186,000 miles a second, and that the constellation of the Pleiades is 120 light-years distant from the earth (each light-year being the distance the light travels in a year’s time). Doubtless there are stars the light from which can reach the earth only after many centuries, so vast is the domain of God. It is not unreasonable to conclude that if a man could stand on the very outer line of the known boundaries of creation he could by the aid of powerful instruments discover millions of stars beyond his present vision. The prophet David was modest in his speech when he said: “The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handywork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun; which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is (Continued on page 239)
August 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
237
READ INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE SIDE FIRST
Please cut here and mall to the Secretary of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, 124 Columbia Heights. Brooklyn
Questions:
(1)	Are you in harmony with the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY and are you assisting in carrying on the Lord’s work through it? Answer .....................................................................
(2)	If you have sent in contributions from other places than your present address, please give the addresses: City 	 State ................................................................. Approximate	date ...............
City..................................................... State .................. Approximate	date ...............
(3).......For married sisters: If you sent in any donations before you were married please give your maiden name ..........	 City ................................................................................. State	..........
(4)	Write your present name in full, NOT your husband’s initials: .......................................
(5)	Your husband’s name in full: ........................................................................
(6)	Names and addresses of any friends whom you know to have been contributors to the Society who have died recently: 	-.......................................................................................................
PROXY
I (here write your name in full, and write plainly) ......................................
of (your address in full) ............—..................................... State	..........
do hereby make, constitute and appoint (here write the name of the brother or sister you desire to act as your proxy, OR if you expect to attend the meeting write in your own name) ...............................
of .................................................................................. State	...........................
my lawful proxy and attorney, for me and in my name, place and stead, to appear at the annual meeting of the Shareholders of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY to be held at the city of Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny City), in the County of Allegheny, State of Pennsylvania, on the first day of October, 1941, at ten o’clock in the forenoon, and at any adjourned or subsequent session of said annual meeting, and then and there cast the number of votes to which I shall be entitled, in the election of Directors and officers of the Society for the ensuing three years, and for the transaction of any other business that may require the votes of Shareholders; and my proxy shall have and exercise all the powers that I have or could exercise if personally present.
WITNESS MY HAND AND SEAL this.............. day	of............ 1941
(Sign here) ..........................................................................
(Witness sign here) .........................................................................
THE SECRETARY OF THE SOCIETY AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., WILL FILL IN BELOW
I HEREBY CERTIFY that .............................................. of ..............................
whose signature appears above is entitled to vote at the election of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY on October 1, 1941, or subsequent sessions, and there are credited to said party . votes.
Secretary of the W. T. B. & T. Society
Brooklyn, N. Y. Date ........................... 1941
(over)
Please mall to the Secretary of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y.
238
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
INSTRUCTIONS —PLEASE READ CAREFULLY
The annual meeting of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY will be held at Pittsburgh, Pa., Wednesday, October 1, 1941. The triennial election of a board of seven Directors, and from the Board sa elected the election of a President, a Vice-President, and a Secretary and Treasurer will take place at this meeting.
Each person or company that has contributed $10.00 or more at one time to the work of the Society is entitled to one vote for each $10.00 so contributed, if still in harmony with the work of the Society. Each company can indicate its vote by instructing its secretary to fill out a proxy and attach thereto a statement that such instructions were given at a regular meeting.
Each voter expecting to attend the meeting, whether in person or by proxy, will need a certificate of identification. This proxy, when properly filled out and signed by contributor and sent to the Secretary of the Society at Brooklyn, N. Y., and verified by him, will constitute the certificate. The Secretary of the Society will thereon certify to the number of votes credited to voter and deliver the proxies to the proper parties at the annual meeting in time for voting.
Answer questions on reverse side in full and fill out proxy and sign your name in the place indicated, and have someone witness your signature; then mail it promptly, addressed as follows: Secretary, WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y.
It is desired to keep our records as clear and up to date as possible, but we often encounter several difficulties. Parties living at different places have similar names. One may move to another place and not advise us of the change, and we do not know whether he is one whom we already have on o^f record or is someone else. Thus we may have John Smiths in various places, whereas several of them may be the same person. To assist in this matter please answer Question 2, on reverse side of this sheet.
Some sisters contributed under their maiden name, and after marriage have sometimes used their own given name, as Mrs. Mary Smith, and sometimes given their husband’s name or initials, as Mrs. John Smith. Thus we have learned of some cases where we had the same party under three names. Please answer Questions 3, 4 and 5.
One more difficulty: Some of the friends have been the only ones in their families who were interested. If they pass away, their relatives do not always notify us; and the names are retained on the active list for want of definite information. We shall appreciate your assistance in helping us clear these difficulties. See Question 8.
Please cut here and mall to the Secretary of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn,
(over)
a:
Please mail to the Secretary of the Watch Tower Bible 4 Tract Society, 124 Columbia Heighte, Brooklyn, N. Y.
August 1, 1941
WATCHTOWER,
239
(Continued from page 236) nothing hid from the heat thereof. The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.”—Ps. 19:1-7.
Again David stood upon the crest of the hills of Judea, and in his mind communed with the all-wise Creator. On the east he saw the lofty mountains lifting their hoary heads heavenward and, like silent sentinels standing on watch, guarding the entrance to the Promised Land. He observed that the high and rugged hills made a refuge for the wild animals. He saw the flocks and herds peacefully feeding in the sheltered spots. He looked to the north, and beheld the evergreen cedars of Lebanon, full of sap, emblems of everlasting life, waving their mighty arms harmoniously to the winds that God caused to blow through them. He saw the water streams spring out from the hillsides and hurry on to refresh the broad plain on the west, which spread itself out to be kissed by the waves of the great and beautiful blue sea. Moved with awe and admiration for the Mighty One who made them all, he exclaimed:
“0 Lord, how manifold are thy works1 in wisdom hast thou made thefn all: the earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts.” (Ps. 104:24,25) And then extolling Jehovah and worshiping him, David exclaimed : “Thou . . . coverest thyself with light as with a garment, who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain ; who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters; who maketh the clouds his chariot; who walketh upon the wings of the wind; who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire.”—Ps. 104:1-4.
There are men on earth who possess much gold, who are looked upon as great, yet who cannot make even a blade of grass grow nor a leaf that rustles in the wind. They are capable of giving aid and do give a few million dollars to make themselves a name among men; and others stand in awe of their power and greatness. Comparing the insignificance of these with the great God the prophet asks: “Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance ?”—Isa. 40:12.
Some who call themselves great hasten to take counsel together, in behalf of the world situation, and many who look upon them as great seek counsel with the great ones, believing that they can accomplish much. In God’s sight their wisdom is as nothing; and comparing them with the Lord, the prophet further asks: “Who hath directed the spirit of the Lord, or being his counsellor hath taught him? With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?”—Isa. 40: 13,14.
These great men of earth are the ones that build and rule the nations with selfishness, and who boast of the power and of the greatness of the nations and of themselves. Comparing them with the Lord God the prophet says: “Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he [Jehovah] taketh up the isles as a very little thing. All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. To whom then will ye liken God ? or what like
ness will ye compare unto him? It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in.”—Isa. 40:15,17,18, 22.
The things visible to man are not the greatest of God’s creation. The greatest of all of his creation was and is his first and only direct creation. There was a time when Jehovah God was alone. Then he must have communed with himself and meditated upon his great purpose. In the course of time it pleased him to begin his creation, and he did so by giving life to his beloved, only-begotten Son, The Logos, or Word of God. (John 1:1-4) This Logos was the beginning of the creation of God, and whom later Jehovah gave as a gift for the world, that believing men might not perish but have everlasting life.—John 3:16.
What was the motive that led to this unspeakable gift ? Was it justice? It was not; because Jehovah owed man nothing. Equal and exact justice required the perfect life of Adam, and took it accordingly, due to his sin. All his offspring were born imperfect and justly must die. Was it that God might exhibit to his creatures his great power? Surely not; because already his power had been exhibited in another manner at the Flood, which was prophetic of the battle of Armageddon now at hand. Was it for the purpose of making manifest his wisdom? Surely not, because that alone would bring no profit to man. “God is love.” (1 John 4:16) Love is the complete and perfect expression of unselfishness. Here now is the most complete expression of unselfishness that could possibly be given In God is the very embodiment of love. It was love for the human race that moved him to sacrifice the dearest treasure of his heart, to give up the One in whom he delighted and whose companionship he loved and enjoyed, in order to provide and make the great gift for men. (John 3: 16) From the very beginning of the preparation for this great gift every act of Jehovah is marked by unselfishness He might have selected an angel and made of him a man to redeem mankind, but that would not have been such a great sacrifice to Himself. His only direct creation, his only begotten Son, his dearly beloved Son, very precious to his heart, he would give to be put to an ignominious death that man might have an opportunity to attain to the thing he desired, namely, everlasting life This proves that there can be no true and perfect expression of love without a sacrifice. It proves that perfect love is the complete expression of unselfishness.
Thus from Jehovah’s Word and his works we have a glimpse of the great and mighty One who is the Giver of every good and perfect gift. He it is who has taken cognizance of the poor, imperfect people of earth and has provided for those of good-will the most marvelous of all gifts
(Continued from page 226)
creasing field work. The factory and office will be closed down during this period, and no books will be shipped nor regular mail answered. Hence all orders for literature should be sent in well in advance of August 2 to receive attention before closing down Order m sufficient quantity to carry you through the vacation period and the rest of August. Also as little correspondence as possible should be sent to the Society, with the exception of report cards and subscriptions.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
MISSOURI ZONE NO. 2 ASSEMBLY
“The assembly was held in Belleville, Ill. This has been the worst place to witness to in this zone, because public officials had the idea they were the law, the mayor even going so far as to say, ‘To hell with the Bible!’ and, ‘If this work is done in Belleville, I’ll see that everyone engaging in it will be arrested and prosecuted.’ He was backed up by the Catholic Hierarchy, and thereafter every witness who put his nose out of the door was arrested, including myself. The law of the land was ignored by these superpatriots, and truth-telling was stopped in Belleville. The Lord then took a hand, and note the results: First, an injunction was sought and city and county officials were taken to Federal Court to explain their unlawful actions of interfering with the liberties of the people. Second, at the public election in April all officials who were so hostile to us and were so un-American were removed from office, and other officials were installed. Third, a zone assembly was held on May 3 and 4, and in what was the ‘toughest spot’ in this zone and one of the toughest in the United States, here is what happened: Every home in the city and surrounding county was visited by Jehovah’s witnesses; 500 attended the assembly, nearly all of whom engaged in calling on the people, giving them opportunity to hear the message of God’s Kingdom and to find the only place of safety in these days of distress; 2,000 pieces of literature, to say nothing of handbills and Kingdom News, were left with the people, in this town of 30,000 persons; 1,500 hours were occupied in calling on them; 700 heard the recorded lectures of Judge Rutherford at their homes, explaining the Bible; 205 attended the public lecture on Tleligion as a World Remedy’; 115 new names of interested persons were secured, who will be called back upon with more Kingdom information; 18 were immersed, symbolizing their covenant to do the Lord’s will. Belleville had not been adequately witnessed to for two years, due to those un-American, un-Christian officials who defy God, and, as was to be expected, many sheep were hungry for the truth. By God’s grace, these will now be fed.”
CHILDREN WITNESSES IN BRITAIN
“Told that this person was very interested, I went and arranged a model study in her home. On my first visit she was not very impressed, as I was only a pioneer 16 years of age, but, since she was a person of good-will, she soon realized that youth was used by Jehovah, when hearing from Psalm 8: ‘Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength.’ This model study still continues, and more people have attended it. Her husband at first thought she had a touch of religious mania, but he soon dropped that idea, and became interested himself. He asked whether he could take Salvation for his fellow workmate that he might have the same knowledge as himself. However, the workmate read a couple of chapters and became offended; a religionist, I guess. Despite this, Mr. L--still
persists in giving out this witness. After the fourth visit I tactfully put to these people of good-will the issue concerning the witness work. The lady herself did not respond immediately, but her daughter of 8 years of age said: ‘You ask mum and Florie to come on the work with you, but you don’t ask me.’ I extended her the invitation. The first week she did 16 hours, placing a book, 43 booklets and two maga
zines, and also attended pavement witnessing on Saturday evening. She did not require any help from me, but said she could manage with the testimony card. Her sister of 6 years was missing for a while. On her return she told us she had been out on her own and placed 5 booklets and two magazines in her own street. The lady herself also picked the road next to hers and placed 6 booklets and two magazines. Also she has lent the phonograph and records to all her neighbors, and this has resulted in the division of ‘sheep’ from ‘goats’. However, she still continues to feed the sheep, speaks of the Kingdom wherever she goes, and is having many interesting experiences.
“As pioneers there is the privilege and duty of helping our brethren who are ‘company publishers’. Last week a young publisher, 11 years of age, came out with me in the service and worked 22^ hours for the week and placed 60 booklets and 12 magazines, with an order for 3 bound books. She is now anxious to engage in all the group work evenings and week-ends. I guess she will want to be a pioneer before long.”
REPAYING GOOD FOR ILL IN NEW MEXICO
“In an oil town in southeastern New Mexico a Kingdom publisher of about 60 years was on the way to conduct a model study. Suddenly a bystander cried out, but too late. She had been hit by a passing car which had traveled too close to her by the curb. Blood changed the hue of the publisher’s clothing. Passersby urged her to take the license number of the car and to be sure to save her blood-soiled garments as evidence against him. The driver stopped, stepped out and said: ‘You don’t have to save that dress as evidence; I acknowledge I ran over you and I’m here to do the right thing about it.’ A few days later the driver called at the publisher’s home, offering to give her five dollars, which she would not accept. Instead she said: ‘I have something for you; it would do me more good for you to accept this than for me to take your money.’ And with joy she told him the glad tidings of The Theocratic Kingdom. As the young man left he took it with him in printed form, and now is a person of good-will because he ran over a Theocratic ambassador.”
FIRSTHAND INFORMATION FOR SCHOOL
“I placed the book Religion with a schoolteacher. I offered to return and play a recorded Bible lecture, and he invited me to play the lecture before his entire school. The following week I took the lecture ‘Government and Peace’ and played it to the 32 children and their teacher assembled in the little country school. They listened attentively and all accepted the booklet God and the State after the lecture. Many thanked me therefor. Upon being informed of the special Watchtower offer, he invited me to return later, at which time he accepted the book Enemies and a year’s subscription for The Watchtower. His attitude toward God’s message is very favorable and his eyes are certainly open to the wickedness of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allies. The lecture had additional results, when, at a later date, my husband witnessed to the mother of one of the school children. The girl told her mother that this message was similar to the one she had heard at school, and her mother agreed to let us return some evening and play the lecture for them.”
240
AUGUST 15, 1941
CONTENTS
I


They shall know that lam Jehovah!
-Ezekiel 35:15.
Vol. LXII
Semimonthly
No. 16

$$
Integrity ..........
Pictures.................... ..	.
Hate ...........................
The Issue ......................
The Test .......................
Meaning ........................
Climax .........................
Facts in Fulfillment............
The Way to Life...................
Whose Prayers Are Answered? ......
Field Experiences ................
“Pure Language” Testimony Period “Watchtower” Studies .............
Notice of Annual Meeting .........
Use Renewal Subscription Blank .
243 244 244 245 246
.. 246
.. 248 . 248 . 250 .. 253 . 256 ..242 . 242 . 242 . 242



THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street	-	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Butherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children,” - hatah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents In the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ______-....-........ 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian .._______________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W„ Australia
South African _________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price’may have The 'Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thns aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as eecond-olase matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, ISIS.
“PURE LANGUAGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The midsummer Testimony Period, as above named, includes all of August. The Lord now having turned to his devoted people the “pure language” of the truth of The Theocracy, it is their privilege during August to publish the same with a “pure lip”, that a multitude of others may bear and turn from religion and join in the united service of Jehovah. Therefore during this Testimony Period the book Religion together with the latest published booklet will be placed with everyone possible, on a contribution of 25c. This, which is generally the vacation season and convention time, should allow for many newly interested ones to start out into the field activity, and for ah veteran publishers to get in their full quota of hours. A good report is awaited from each and all at the close of August, marking the special blessing of the Lord upon all that “serve him with one consent”.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 21: “Integrity," 1-23 inclusive, The Watchtower August 15, 1941.
Week of September 28: “Integrity,"
1J 24-44 inclusive, The Watchtower August 15, 1941.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock a.m., Wednesday, October 1, 1941, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
(See The Watchtower August 1, pages 237,238.)
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	August 15, 1941	No. 16
INTEGRITY
"And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever"—Ps. 41:12.
TEHOVAH’S purpose to have the world ruled by I his righteous Government is repeatedly empha-J sized in the Scriptures. His Government is the Theocracy over which he has made Christ Jesus the King. It is the kingdom for which Jesus directed all of God’s children to earnestly pray, ‘Thy kingdom come; thy will be done in earth as it is done in heaven.’ It is the means by which Jehovah will fully vindicate his holy name; and therefore The Theocracy is the greatest and most important doctrine. For many centuries Christian people believed that God’s chief purpose is to save souls from death. In that they greatly erred.
2	Jehovah’s promise is that “the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day”. (Prov. 4:18) Since Christ Jesus came to the temple the light upon the pathway of God’s people has shone with ever-increasing brilliancy to them, and now we stand at the very portals of the perfect day. Now it is clearly seen that while individual salvation is important, that which is of greatest importance is the vindication of Jehovah’s name and that all who will enter into God’s great organization, and thus receive salvation, must be ardent supporters and advocates of Jehovah’s name and Kingdom. Since The Theocracy is the means of vindicating Jehovah’s name, The Theocracy is vital to the existence of all who shall receive life everlasting.
3	Today we see the wicked powers of this world fighting desperately for world domination and that they are rapidly approaching the final climax; and at the same time we behold the triumphant entrance of the King of The Theocracy, whose rule of the world shall be holy and righteous. Today is the time toward which faithful men have looked during all the centuries past, and now the Kingdom has come and the King is upon his throne. The creature’s greatest privilege and his highest attainment is to have a part in that Theocratic Government.
* Who shall be exalted in the Theocratic organization? and who shall stand in that righteous government? Only those who are wholly devoted to The
Theocracy ; and thus the Scriptures answer: “He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.” —Ps. 24: 4, 5.
5	The one who enters and stands there must be clean, and not contaminated by any part of Satan’s organization or by touching the same. He must have a pure heart; that is, his motive must be entirely unselfish. He must be sincere, steadfast and blameless in his devotion to the Kingdom and be entirely free from hypocrisy and deceit. All who are made members of that righteous government, and all who receive a commission from and who serve under that government, must be crucially tested and each approved one must meet that test successfully. Each one who is of The Theocracy or who serves with approval under it must hold fast his integrity. David as the king of Israel, or typical Theocracy, was a type of Christ the King of glory, and the utterance of that typical king applies to The Christ, Head and body. David was fiercely beset by his enemies, and likewise today the prospective members of the Kingdom who are on the earth are severely attacked by the enemies. David exclaimed: “By this I know that thou favour-est me, because mine enemy doth not triumph over me.”—Ps. 41:11.
6	The fact that his enemies did not triumph over him was to him a sure token from Jehovah that he had received the favor of the Most High. Now those who proclaim The Theocratic Government and hope for complete entrance thereinto with confidence likewise say: ‘I know Jehovah favors me, because he has prevented the enemies from overwhelming me.’ As David said, so now those who likewise hope for deliverance say: “And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever.” (Ps. 41:12) Thus it is seen that all who shall stand in favor before the Lord must hold fast their integrity and never be found deficient therein. It is God’s chosen people whom he has called for his purpose; who must now remain steadfast and im-
243
244	5THE WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N.Y.
movable for The Theocracy, that shall receive the everlasting blessings of the Lord. The salvation of each one of such depends upon complete loyalty and faithfulness to The Theocratic Government.
PICTURES
1 Jehovah has made and recorded in the Bible many prophetic pictures disclosing his purpose to create and set up his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Among such pictures is the one in which Job prominently appears; and that picture is of peculiar interest to God’s covenant people at the present time. That great prophetic drama pointed forward to the coming of The Theocratic Government in power and glory and disclosed the narrow and trying way in which creatures must walk who enter that government. The faithful men of old by faith walked in that way. Christ Jesus took the lead and made clear the way of testing which leads to victory and glory. Now Christ Jesus has come and his faithful servants behold the fulfillment of the prophetic drama about completed. This knowledge gives strength and increases the hope of the faithful servants of the Most High, particularly at this time of great distress upon the earth.
8	When the light of the Lord had not so fully enlightened the minds of his people as it does now it was thought that the picture of Job included the entire human family, to whom God would grant the “blessings of human restitution on the earth”. The Watchtower publication pointed out what was thought to be Jehovah’s purpose to give restitution to all obedient ones of mankind and that the Job prophetic drama included such. The increased light which the Lord has given to his people in these latter days makes it now to clearly appear that Job did not picture the entire human family who would be granted restitution. It is The Theocratic Government that is of paramount importance, and therefore the prophetic drama of Job includes the Head and body members of that government; it includes the faithful men of old who will be the earthly representatives of that government and rule amongst men, filling the places of visible governors, and also includes those who receive the divine commission from Jehovah and who act under that government to carry out that divine mandate to fill the earth.
8	Christ Jesus and the 144,000 members of his body constitute the official Theocracy, that is, the Kingdom, the government created by and employed by Jehovah to vindicate his name and to carry out his purpose. That is the government that shall forever rule in righteousness. The faithful men from Abel to the last of the holy prophets include those named at the eleventh chapter of Hebrews, who shall be the governors or princes visible to men and acting for
the invisible Christ, and therefore officials and servants of The Theocracy acting by command and under the direction of The Theocratic Government. They shall rule in justice and execute the judgments of The Theocracy in righteousness. The Lord’s “other sheep”, who are carried over Armageddon and who receive the commission to form the “great multitude” and to carry out the divine mandate, will be servants under The Theocratic Government. These, as the Scriptures declare, shall come from the east and the west and sit with or be associated with and directed by the faithful governors in the earth. (Matt. 8:11) The prophetic picture of Job pointing to the main figures in the test primarily applies to Christ Jesus, and the members of his body, with special reference and emphasis to the remnant now on earth. The severe test to which Job was subjected foretold the test to which the members of The Theocracy are put; and a like test is put upon everyone who holds an official position under that righteous government. Each and every one under the test must hold fast his integrity in order to receive the approval of the Lord the King and of Jehovah.
HATE
10	The name Job means-“hated”; hence to be persecuted by the enemy. Those pictured by Job are hated by all adversaries or enemies of the Kingdom, which enemies are hostile or at enmity with and against the purpose or purposes for which the Job class is used. Some texts following show the use of the word which is translated Job. When God pronounced judgment against the Devil He said thus: “And I will put enmity [hatred] between thee and the woman [picturing God’s universal organization], and between thy seed and her seed.”—Gen. 3: 15.
11	“The seed” of Jehovah’s organization, which organization is pictured by the woman, is The Christ. (Gal. 3:27-29) Concerning that Seed it is written: “And thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies.” (Gen. 22:17) The prayer which God has put in the mouth of his people is: “So let all thine enemies [haters] perish, 0 Lord; but let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might.” (Judg. 5:31) The same root word is used in Job’s prayer: “Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that riseth up against me as the unrighteous.”— Job 27:7.
12	Satan hated the perfect man Adam when he was perfect in Eden because Adam was God’s perfect creature and Satan coveted the worship which Adam properly gave to Jehovah. Satan brought about Adam’s downfall. Since then Satan has not so much hated the imperfect offspring of Adam who have yielded to the Devil’s influence, but his great hatred has been leveled -against those who have devoted
August 15,1941
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
245
themselves to Jehovah and remained loyal to God. These he has not hated because they are the offspring naturally of Adam, but because their devotion has been and is to the Most High. This is particularly shown in the sons of Adam. Abel was faithful to God, and Satan hated him for that reason and caused Cain to show hatred by killing Abel.
18	The deadly enmity of Satan was shown toward the man Jesus. Repeatedly Satan tried to bring about the destruction of Jesus; and that was due to the fact that Jesus was at all times faithful and loyal to his Father, Jehovah. Jesus at all times is at enmity with Satan. Jesus hates wickedness and all wicked works: “Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness; therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.”—Ps. 45:7.
14	Because of the love of Jesus for righteousness Jehovah has made him the owner by purchase of all of Adam’s race that put themselves on the side of God and Christ and faithfully remain there and obey. The fact that the ransom sacrifice paid by Jesus holds benefits only for believers who are obedient to God thus shows that the prophetic drama of Job does not picture or represent the human family as a whole, but that it represents only those who believe in God and in Christ, and who take their stand on the side of righteousness. Such are then subjected to the test of loyalty and faithfulness pictured by Jpb. Undergoing such test these must withstand the assaults of Satan and of the other demons and must remain faithful and true to the Theocrat and His King. During the millennial reign of Christ Jesus those of the human family who are brought forth from the grave will not be subject to the wicked influence and works of Satan. (Rev. 20:1-3) The prophetic drama of Job appears to apply to all persons who are hated and assaulted by Satan because of their devotion to The Theocratic Government. Since the “other sheep” of the Lord, who form the “great multitude”, are subjected to the test of loyalty before Armageddon and are hated and opposed and persecuted by Satan and his agents, such “other sheep” appear clearly to be embraced within the prophetic drama.
15	There appears to be special application of the Job picture to the remnant now on earth. The apostle James refers to the Job picture, using it to give instruction to spiritual Israel, particularly those on earth at the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, and wherein the apostle says: “The judge standeth before the door.” It is then that the servants of the Lord, the remnant, are subjected to the test: “Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. Grudge no^ one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold, the judge standeth before the door. Take, my brethren,
the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.”—Jas. 5: 8-11.
16	Christ Jesus as a man was the chief of those who love righteousness, who was hated of all enemies, and who at all times held fast his integrity and, like Job in the prophetic drama, he was qualified to act as an intercessor. (Job 1:5; Job 42: 8, 9) As Job was rendered childless and made exceedingly poor, so the man Jesus was made materially poor and childless and was subjected to all manner of persecution and through it all Jesus held fast his integrity. (Matt. 8: 20; 2 Cor. 8:9) Though reproached and persecuted by Satan and his agents, and also made to appear as afflicted by Jehovah, even as Job suffered and was made to appear, Jesus remained true and steadfast and loyal in his devotion to Jehovah.—Isa. 53: 2-4.
the issue
1T The issue between Satan and Jehovah was not raised for the first time in Job’s day, but centuries before that time. The prophetic drama of Job discloses what Jehovah requires of all creatures who shall receive his boundless blessings. While the question for determination raised by the prophetic drama was and is, “Can Jehovah put men on earth who, under the most severe test, will prove faithful and true to God!” yet that great issue embraces much more. The Scriptural record is that there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before Jehovah and Satan came also among them. No doubt Satan there appeared in an arrogant and defiant manner, but it was then in respect to Satan’s boast that Jehovah put the question to Satan: “Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect, upright man, one that feareth God and is without evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.’—Job 2:1-3.
18 This shows that long before that time Satan had challenged the supremacy of Jehovah and raised the great issue. Many other Scriptures support that conclusion. Satan’s accusing charge was made before the angels of heaven, and hence was known among all the host of heaven, but not properly understandable and appreciated amongst men till the present time. God’s due time now appears when those on earth devoted to him are given an understanding of the real issue.
18 The primary issue raised by Satan’s defiant challenge was and is that of universal domination. God had created the earth and created man for the earth. A perfect man upon the earth would worship
246
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and serve Almighty God. (Isa. 45:12,18) When God laid even the foundations of the earth Satan had heard the announcement made to the sons of God and learned that much of Jehovah’s purpose. (Job 38:7) Then Satan, moved by covetousness, determined that he would have the worship of men for himself in the place and stead of Jehovah and that therefore he would be the ruler of the universe. (Jer. 51:13) Then it was that Satan began to act to accomplish his wicked purpose, as it is written: “For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High.”—Isa. 14:13,14.
20	Because Jehovah is righteous and all his ways righteousness Satan chose the way of wickedness that he might turn creatures away from God, turn them into wickedness and rule according to his own selfish desire. He would rule the universe or ruin it. He seduced the many sons of God and brought about the debauchery of humankind, filling the earth with wickedness and violence, until God destroyed all flesh save Noah, a just man, and the members of his family. (Gen. 6:1-13) Following the flood Satan set up Nimrod as the first dictator among men and turned the people away from God and caused them to hail and worship the Devil’s representative as one mightier than Jehovah God. It was after that time that God directed the attention of Satan to faithful Job, and then the great prophetic drama was made. Jehovah would not destroy Job without a cause. Job had remained faithful and true to Jehovah and was rich in material things and surrounded by those who loved him. Satan challenged Jehovah to put Job to the test, and Jehovah permitted Satan to put the test upon Job without informing Job why he was being tested. Job knew that he had not willingly been disloyal, and therefore he could not understand why he, as a servant of God, should suffer. His suffering was a prophetic picture made for the benefit of others.
THE TEST
21	The test put upon Job was directly related to world domination, the issue being world domination; and Job being an example used to make the prophetic picture, the test put upon Job necessarily points to the requirements God makes of all who shall have to do with the rule of the world in righteousness. Jehovah had declared his purpose to set up his capital government of righteousness to rule the peoples of the world. Job would know of this promise because the promise had been made to his kinsman Abraham. In opposition to Jehovah Satan had declared that he would rule the world or ruin it. Jehovah had said
to Satan: ‘You may go ahead and do what you can. I will permit you to remain for a time, but in the end I will cause my name to be declared throughout the earth and then I will show you my supreme power.’ (Ex. 9:16) With Job Jehovah was making a prophetic picture, chiefly for the instruction and comfort and hope of God’s devoted people who are now on the earth, at the end of the world.—Rom. 15: 4.
22	Job had faith in God and in his coming Theocratic Government by the Messiah, and for that reason Satan hated Job and attempted to cause him to repudiate Jehovah and to die. That the test put upon Job involved chiefly his loyalty to the King of The Theocracy is shown by these words of Job: “Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book! that they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever! For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.”—Job 19:23-26.
23	The test put upon Job being a prophetic picture for the benefit of the remnant of God’s people, it follows that the crucial test must be applied after the Lord comes to the temple. That test is not for the purpose of determining whether or not the devoted covenant people of God are perfect in word or deed or character development. That test is to determine whether or not they* are completely and immovably devoted to the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, which has now come to rule the world in righteousness.
MEANING
24	The meaning of the word integrity is “innocence, blamelessness; that is, without fault”. Job stood for Jehovah and his promised Kingdom. God permitted Satan to afflict Job and cause him to suffer loss of everything, and still Job remained loyal to God. He held fast his integrity, and therefore was blameless before God. Was Job blameless because he was perfect in his organism and had the right to life? No; because he was the offspring of Adam and hence under condemnation. (Rom. 5:12) His integrity, or blamelessness, consisted in the fact that he refused to be moved from his steadfast devotion to God and his coming Kingdom by the Messiah. He would suffer all things rather than be unfaithful to The Theocracy. The prophetic drama therefore shows that the integrity of Job foretells that those whom Job pictured must be immovably devoted to the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and that regardless of what the enemy is permitted to inflict upon them. They must remain faithful and true and wholly devoted to the Government of Righteousness. In no other way could they be blameless before God.
August 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
247
25	As further evidence that the issue is The Theocracy, and that the test is whether or not men who have agreed to obey God’s commandments will hold fast their integrity, note the unbroken line of testimony from Abel to the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple in power and glory. The apostle Paul, who had his heart set entirely on the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, summed up the matter as shown by the record at the eleventh chapter of Hebrews. There in substance he says ‘that Abraham was living in Ur, the land of enemies, the same land from whence Job came; that Abraham moved out, and into a country that he knew nothing about, and in that unknown country dwelt with his family in tents, because he relied upon Jehovah’s promise’. What promise? The Scriptural answer is that God would create and set up The Theocratic Government, which should rule the world in righteousness. The testimony of the apostle concerning Abraham is: “For he [Abraham] looked for a city [organized government] which hath foundations [solid, unbreakable and immovable], whose builder and maker is God [that is, the Almighty, the Creator].”—Heb. 11:10.
26	Continuing his testimony the apostle further says: “These all died in faith, not having received the promises.” What promises? we ask; and the Scriptural answer is, the promises that Jehovah God would make and set up his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, administered by faithful representatives on earth, and through which all the families of the earth that would obey might receive a blessing. Abraham and his sons believed the promises to be true, and relied upon them. The apostle continues: “But having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.” By faith they looked forward to the day when The Theocratic Government should be set up, and their hope was centered therein. “For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country. And truly if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.” (Heb. 11:9-15) Those faithful men came out from the organized government controlled by the Devil, and because of their immovable devotion to The Theocracy they had no desire to return to Satan’s organization. Therefore says the apostle: “But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he hath prepared for them a city.” (Heb. 11:16) Their desire and hope was in the government which the God of heaven and earth was preparing, and they held fast to that hope; and because of their blamelessness God was nbt ashamed to acknowledge them as his servants.
27	Were those faithful men of old, who had hope in The Theocratic Government, put to the test? They were, and suffered indescribable and horrible punishment at the hand of the Devil and his agents opposing The Theocracy. Concerning this the apostle further says: “Time would fail me to tell of Gedeon [who with a small band of 300 successfully fought the host of Midian, who oppressed and opposed the people of God who were of the typical Theocracy and who showed faith and devotion to the real Theocratic Government], and of Barak [who, because of his faith and devotion to The Theocracy, led his little army of ten thousand against a mighty host of the adversaries and defeated them, by God’s grace and power], and of Samson [who successfully fought the adversaries of the Theocracy and laid down his life for the cause of righteousness], and of Jephthae [who led the forces of Israel, the typical Theocracy, against the foes thereof, and gained, by God’s grace, a great victory and received the everlasting blessings of the Most High].” Such is the substance of the apostle’s argument. Those faithful men and their faithful women suffered all manner of punishment and violent death because of their complete devotion to The Theocracy. Those faithful creatures refused to compromise with Satan’s organization, and they died faithful to The Theocracy; and of them it is written, ‘The world was not worthy of them.’ What world? The world under Satan’s control, to be sure, the world of wickedness.—Heb. 11: 32-38.
28	Then the apostle adds: “And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise; God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.” (Heb. 11: 39, 40) In other words, Jehovah has in store for those faithful men a great blessing but they must wait until The Theocratic Government is fully set up.
29	The first announcement made by Jesus Christ after his anointing was concerning the Kingdom, The Theocratic Government. Ever thereafter he put the Kingdom foremost. Satan employed every possible scheme and device to kill Jesus because he was and is the King of The Theocracy. When Satan’s religious representatives on the earth recognized Jesus the King they said: ‘This is the Heir to the throne; come, let us kill him.’ (Mark 12:7) Those representatives of Satan did kill Jesus because he is the King of The Theocratic Government. Jehovah raised Jesus out of death, exalted him to the highest place, and made him Lord and King of The Theocratic Government. That government not having been completed, Jesus must wait, as commanded by Jehovah, until due time for him to take his power, rule in righteousness, and exhibit his power against the enemy.
248
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
80	The highest hope of the faithful apostles was the coining of Christ and his kingdom. They were persecuted, beaten and imprisoned because they advocated and proclaimed The Theocratic Government; they suffered martyrdom because they refused to compromise with Satan’s organization. Repeatedly punished because of their faithfulness; commanded to refrain from telling of the Kingdom, they answered: “We will obey God rather than men.’ They were hated by the ruling powers of the world, but that hatred originated with and emanated from Satan. Every person who has boldly advocated The Theocracy has been and is hated and persecuted by Satan and his representatives. To such Jesus says: ‘The servant is like the Lord: they have hated and persecuted me, and they will hate and persecute you also.’—John 15:20.
CLIMAX
81	The climax must come sometime. In due time there must be a final showdown as to who shall rule the universe. But when must it come? The prophetic drama of Job was made to be fulfilled at the end of the world, where we now are. That end began when Christ Jesus was enthroned, in 1914, when the war began in heaven and Satan and other demons were cast down to the earth. Referring to that very time the Lord Jesus addresses these words to his faithful followers: “Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.”—Matt. 24: 9.
32	The facts today completely fulfill that prophecy uttered by Christ Jesus. Are men hated today because they are called Christians? No, not that. Those persons of the most powerful religious organization on earth, which men are bent on ruling the earth contrary to God’s will, are called Christians, and those hypocritical men are the ones that manifest the greatest hatred against Jehovah’s faithful servants. The faithful followers of Christ are hated today by all nations that are under Satan’s control, and that hatred is because such are witnesses for and advocates of the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. It is a part of the same conflict begun long ago, the Devil against righteousness. Now the King of righteousness has begun to exercise his power as King and the climax foretold by the prophetic drama of Job has come; and this is exactly in harmony with the admonition of the apostle addressed to the faithful ones now on earth. That admonition of the apostle emphasizes the fact that at the second coming of Christ Jesus those who will receive God’s approval must hold fast their integrity, or blamelessness. Desiring that his faithful brethren might receive the full approval of the Lord, the apostle says: “So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the earning of
our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.”-l Cor. 1:7-10.
38	The only just conclusion that can be reached is that at the coming of Christ Jesus and the beginning of his reign as King the prophetic drama of Job would be fulfilled in completeness; and that then all who receive God’s approval must, as Job did, hold fast their integrity and stand blameless before the King. Furthermore, that the suffering of Job foretells a climax of suffering of God’s faithful witnesses at the present time and that amidst all of such suffering the approved ones must hold fast their integrity; that they must all speak the same thing, that is, this gospel of the Kingdom, The Theocratic Government, and that they must be in complete unity in action, perfectly joined together in their activities for The Theocratic Government.
facts in FULFILLMENT
84	Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy, came to the temple in 1918 and began his judgment of those who claim to be his followers. Those who feared men quickly fell away to Satan’s organization. Those who trusted God and his King withstood the temple test and have been sent forth as the witnesses of the Lord and have since been subjected to all manner of persecution by the “evil servant” and religious leaders and supporters; and this persecution has been in all the nations of the earth. The Axis powers, the instrument of Satan, began open opposition to The Theocratic Government and Jehovah’s witnesses in Germany, and with the avowed and announced purpose of said powers to re-establish the old Roman Empire with the Hierarchy of the Vatican riding on the back of that beastly government. The Axis powers defy Jehovah, the Almighty God. Every one who is a supporter of The Theocratic Government suffers at the hands of the Satanic powers. Within the lands controlled by Germany thousands of Jehovah’s witnesses have long lingered in filthy prisons because they have remained steadfast in their devotion to The Theocracy by Christ Jesus. Many of them have been killed because they refused to compromise with Satan’s representatives. They died in faith and faithful, and, without a doubt, the Lord immediately resurrected such and they are now in the Kingdom with Christ Jesus, because such is the promise of Jehovah, and he never fails in one of His promises. (IrCorinthians 15:51-53) There is an abundance of
August 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
249
evidence' that in the suffering of those faithful ones Jehovah and Christ Jesus have greatly comforted them. All of these faithful ones rejoice to be counted worthy to suffer for the Kingdom of Righteousness. They hold fast their integrity.
” Likewise throughout continental Europe, in Asia and Africa, and in the islands of the sea, Jehovah’s witnesses and faithful servants have suffered and still suffer great persecution because of their devotion to The Theocratic Government. In Canada the religious Hierarchy has exercised its influence and persecuting power to such an extent over the political powers as to have declared the witnesses of Almighty God an “illegal organization”. That declaration, however, cannot prevent the faithful servants of Jehovah from continuing God’s work of testifying to the name and. majesty of Almighty God and his government by Christ Jesus. Those faithful men and women count not their lives dear to them, well knowing that if they suffer violence and death at the hand of the enemy because of their faithfulness to The Theocracy God will avenge them and grant them everlasting life in his Kingdom. (Luke 18:7,8) Therefore they go right on serving God and continuing to do so with joyful heart.
S0	In the United States, for long “the land of the free and the home of the brave”, Jehovah’s witnesses have been subjected to all manner of cruel persecution for no other reason or exctase than that they are faithfully telling the people that Jehovah is the Almighty God and that his government by Christ Jesus is the only hope for humankind. They have been haled into the courts, charged with sedition and treason because of their obedience to the Lord’s command to tell the people the good news that the Theocracy by Christ Jesus is at hand and that early deliverance of the obedient ones is sure. Some of them have had their houses burned and almost all of their property destroyed as the result of hatred by those who are blinded by Satan and who therefore oppose The Theocracy. Verily the prophetic drama of Job is now having fulfillment upon those who stand firm for the Kingdom under Christ Jesus. But, thanks be unto God, we see the end is at hand and the complete triumph of The Theocratic Government is near!
" As soon as Jehovah had announced Christ Jesus as King of The Theocracy the Devil began his subtle and vicious attack upon the Kingdom. He persecuted the Lord with unabated viciousness until the body of Jesus hung lifeless on the tree. Satan thought he had defeated The Theocracy ; but he was doomed to disappointment. Jehovah raised Jesus out of death and exalted him to heaven and proceeded in the selection of the members of his Kingdom. In the centuries that followed the resurrection of Christ Jesus
Satan has subtly turned millions of professed Christians away from The Theocracy by turning them to religion and inducing them to believe that man can rule the world contrary to Jehovah’s expressed purpose. By means of religion Satan has blinded many to the truth. The result is that today there is but a small number on the earth who stand firm for The Theocracy and which small number the Lord designates as ‘the remnant of the seed of his organization’. Religion has caused the nations called “Christendom” to forget God; and their judgment is written and is certain of execution.—Ps. 9:17.
38	Now the King of The Theocracy is come in power and glory. The demons, with Satan their chief, are cast down to the earth. Their final wicked assault against The Theocracy is in progress, and the host of wickedness go forth to make war upon the remnant of God’s organization, which keep the commandments of God and have and deliver the testimony of Jesus Christ. (Rev. 12:17) Satan knows that the battle of that great day of God Almighty is near, when he must make his last stand. He now fights desperately against those whom Job pictured, and these must hold fast their integrity.
39	The Lord’s “other sheep” have now become the companions of the remnant and join in the proclamation of the name and kingdom of Jehovah. The prophetic book of Job shows that we must expect to Suffer from the assaults of Satan and other demonized creatures on the earth. With full confidence in God and his King the faithful face the situation fully determined that their zeal and activity for The Theocracy shall not be beaten down, but that they shall maintain their integrity.
40	The apostle Paul, under inspiration of the holy spirit, saw the present-day situation and left behind a message for the comfort and encouragement of the remnant and their companions. He recounts the exaltation of Christ Jesus the King and points to the time when the tongue of every surviving one shall confess that Christ is Lord and King to the glory of God the Father. Now Paul has fully entered into his resurrection glory and his words of admonition thrill his fellow servants yet on earth, who hold fast their integrity. To them the faithful apostle says: “Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.” —Phil. 2:12,13.
41	These words assure God’s servants that if they have remained steadfast on the side of The Theocracy they cannot fail. Then the apostle further says: “Do all4hings without murmurings and disputings;
250
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world; holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain. Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all. For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me.” (Phil. 2:14-18) The saints in heaven rejoice and we now on earth do rejoice that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is at hand.—Rev. 7:11,12.
42	We must now be blameless and harmless as sons of God. We must hold fast our integrity; and this, by God’s grace, we can do by refusing to compromise with any part of the demonized organization of the enemy. We must and will be entirely, wholly, unreservedly and completely devoted to The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. We can have no part in and nothing in common with Satan’s organization. We are wholly and steadfastly for The Theocratic
Government, and here, by God’s grace, we will remain. We know it shall vindicate Jehovah’s name and bring deliverance to all who love righteousness and who serve Jehovah under his righteous government.
" As David the king, who was a type of The Christ, prayed, so now let all of Jehovah’s witnesses pray: “Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on thee.” (Ps. 25: 21) “Judge me, 0 Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity; I have trusted also in the Lord; therefore I shall not slide. For thy lov-ingkindness is before mine eyes; and I have walked in thy truth. I will wash mine hands in innocency; so will I compass thine altar, 0 Lord: that I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works.”—Ps. 26:1, 3, 6, 7.
44	Let nothing move you from the absolute and complete devotion to The Theocracy. Be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord ; and, thus doing, you shall receive and enter into everlasting blessings of Jehovah and his King!
THE WAY TO LIFE
THERE is a way that leads to destruction. There is a way that leads to preservation. The one means eternal death. The others means eternal life. Eaeh intelligent creature, coming to a knowledge of these ways and then choosing, fixes his own destiny.
He that has the power of death is now making desperate war against him that has the power of life. The worst of the battle seems to be just ahead. Who is on the right side, and who will be able to stand ? Those persons who are in a covenant with the Supreme Being to do His work and will occupy the most critical position of all on the earth. Falling away now from steadfastness may plunge such into everlasting darkness. Steadfastness, fidelity and loyalty to the Lord God now lead to endless life and joy. Blessed is the person on earth now who has a vision of God’s unfolding purpose. Thrice blessed is he that understands, appreciates and joyfully obeys.
The reason why this crisis has come, the reason why the battle is so desperate and must increase in severity to the end, the reason why those in a covenant with God stand in such danger and at the same time in such transcendant glory, cannot be so well understood and appreciated without a view of the history of Lucifer and The Logos. The two great ways are marked out by the course these mighty ones have taken. God’s intelligent creatures must know this fact and, knowing, must choose.
Lucifer’s name means “Brilliant Star”. God’s prophet (Isaiah 14:12) speaks of him as “Son of the Morning”. It would be difficult to find words more descriptive of beauty than these. Without doubt he was a part of God’s organization. He was in the holy kingdom of Jehovah God, shining forth among the others of that glorious realm. Doubtless he was more brilliant and showy than any others of the creatures of heaven. He was appointed by Jehovah
to a high official position in the kingdom of God. This is made certain by the words of God’s prophet (Ezekiel 28. 14) : “Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain [kingdom] of God.” The word “covereth” means to screen, to shield, and to protect. “Anointed” means appointed to official position by Jehovah. Therefore his name indicates that Jehovah appointed him for the purpose of screening, shielding and protecting those over whom he had supervision.
That Lucifer was beautiful beyond the description of our language there can be no doubt, and in proof of this the words of Ezekiel 28:13 are cited: “Every precious stone was thy covering.” And this was so from the day that he was created. (Vs. 15) That he was perfect there can be no doubt, because all Jehovah’s works are perfect. —Deut. 32: 4.
Concerning his way from the day of his creation, Ezekiel 28:15 says: “Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.”
In the course of time God created the perfect man, Adam, and his perfect wife, Eve, and provided them with a perfect home in his garden, Eden. He gave Lucifer charge over this perfect pair to shield and to screen and protect them. That he was there in Eden for that purpose there is not any doubt, because God says of him: “Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God,... thou art the anointed cherub that covereth.”—Verses 13, 14.
God gave to Adam His law. He plainly told Adam that a violation of his law would result in the enforcement of the death penalty. (Gen. 2:17) Since Lucifer was given charge over man to shield and protect him, it follows that he-had the power to inflict punishment for any infraction
August 15,1941
37ie WATCHTOWER,
251
of the rules or laws governing man. He was made Jehovah’s executive officer over man. Then it would seem that it would be his right and duty to put man to death for the violation of God's law. That he was given the power of death there can be no doubt, because the apostle Paul, under inspiration, plainly says of him: “Him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.”—Heb. 2:14.
Lucifer did not usurp power or authority over man, because God gave him that right. To “usurp” means to seize authority from another, to hold a position by force and without right. A usurper is one who by force seizes, illegally, the sovereign power, or the throne from the rightful holder, and then holds it by force, illegally. That would be a bold, bad deed; but there are some things that are worse. Lucifer did not usurp power and authority from God, because that would mean that he would exercise a force superior to that possessed by Jehovah; which is impossible. He did not usurp power and authority, but did worse.
He held a position of confidence and trust by appointment from Jehovah. He occupied a fiduciary relationship toward God. A fiduciary is one who holds a thing in trust for another. The position necessarily involves confidence and trust, requiring and demanding faithfulness and loyalty to the last degree. To betray such a trust is far worse than being a usurper. One in such a fiduciary capacity who is guilty of betraying his trust is lawless, wicked and iniquitous. Yea, because of the violation of his sacred obligation he makes himself a nefarious creature and covers himself with perfidy. Not only did Lucifer do this, but to accomplish his selfish purpose he resorted to lying, murder, and defamation of the good name of his great Creatbr, Jehovah, to whom he was indebted for his position and for his life. He became the greatest and most wicked of all criminals.
The prophet Ezekiel later tells how Lucifer was impressed with his own beauty: “Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness.” (Ezek, 28:17) The prophet Isaiah tells of the conception of Lucifer’s wicked scheme. (Isa 14: 13, 14) His heart was malignant; that is to say, h;s purpose or motive secretly conceived was wicked. This docs not prove he was a usurper of power, but does prove he used the power and authority with which he was clothed for his own selfish gratification. Be it here noted that he has tempted every one of God’s righteous creatures along the same line.
Chapter three of Genesis records the beginning of Lucifer's wicked scheme. He knew that God had commanded Adam and Eve to multiply and fill the earth with a righteous race and that by their obeying this divine mandate the time would come when the earth would be filled with a race of human creatures. He knew that man worshiped God He also knew that for him to accomplish his own selfish purpose he must alienate man’s affections from God. He determined he would do this very thing by inducing Adam and Eve to believe that God is a liar, that he was holding from them their just rights by a threat of death, and that God was therefore unworthy of love and worship.
This perfect pair was already under Lucifer’s care. His purpose was, by betraying his trust, to win the affection and worship of man. Because God had given Lucifer the power of death he would reason that should Adam and Eve turn away from God and be found guilty, it would devolve upon himself, Lucifer, to execute the death penalty under the law; but that he would refuse to do this and in the course of time he would see the earth filled with the offspring of man, and that this creation would worship him instead of God, and that then he would be like the Most High God.—Isa. 14:13, 14.
To carry out his wicked and diabolical scheme he told Eve that the eating of the forbidden fruit would not result in death. Through the serpent he said: “Ye shall not surely die; for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened; and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.” (Gen. 3:4, 5) Intending, doubtless, to refuse to exercise against them the power of death, he expected to see Eve and Adam have the eyes of their understanding opened; that they would still live; that they would then believe God to be a liar and believe Lucifer to be their benefactor, and that therefore they would readily turn from God and worship Lucifer. In order that he might be adored and worshiped like the Most High Ged he was willing to betray his sacred trust, to make God out a liar and devoid of love, and he was willing to risk his own ability to save man from death.
God knew of this wicked scheme in Satan's heart, of course; and that was when iniquity was found in Lucifer’s heart. Jehovah did not interfere with his carrying out his wicked scheme. To him are directed the words: “Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.”(Ezek. 28:15) “Iniquity” means perverseness, wickedness, lawlessness and unrighteousness. It means the violation of the rights of others. It means nefariousness, that is to say, a breach of the most sacred trust and obligation
“Error” means to wander away or deviate from the right course; a departing or deviation from truth, a violation of duty. It means lawlessness and sin. It means fraud, deceit and delusion; a turning away from piety or a right course. The error or delusion of the wicked one was selfishness, which means a lack of love. Of Satan, the prophet (Isaiah 14:13, 14) says: “For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High.”
Lucifer permitted selfishness to override love. Therefore he developed a wicked heart. Pride and a malicious desire to shine above all other creatures and to be like the Most High God led him to unfaithfulness and disloyalty, and that through selfishness. His end is destruction. His course, or way, stands as a monument, warning every intelligent creature that he who goes this way goes to death.
Writes the apostle John: “In the beginning was the Word [or, The Logos], and the Word [The Logos] was with God.” (John 1:1) The Logos was and is the only begotten Son of God, “the beginning of the creation of God.”
252
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Rev. 3: 14; Col. 1:15) On the sixth creative day concerning the earth God said: “Let us make man.” (Gen. 1: 26) While no statement is made as to to whom God spoke these words, it seems quite evident that they were addressed to his chief executive officer, The Logos. (John 1:2, 3) Lucifer may have been present and participated in the conversation. This conclusion finds some force in the statement of the prophet (Job 38:7) that when God laid the foundation of the earth “the morning stars sang together”. That The Logos and Lucifer were the “morning stars” here mentioned seems to be definitely settled.—See Isaiah 14:12; Revelation 22:16.
The apostle John tells us that all things were made by The Logos as Jehovah’s active agent, and that without him was nothing made that was made. (John 1:3) The Logos not only was the confidential friend of Jehovah, but was entrusted by Jehovah with the great work of creation. Of course, this creation must have included the creation of Lucifer. There is no place in the Scriptures that indicates that The Logos sought to shine in the eyes of others. There is nothing to indicate that he ever possessed any selfish spirit. He is shown to be a humble, submissive and faithful messenger of Jehovah.
When the children of Israel left Egypt and wandered for forty years in the wilderness on the way to the Promised Land,-God sent an angel before them, as it is written in Exodus 23:20. Doubtless that angel or messenger was The Logos. In the same capacity, as a messenger or angel of Jehovah, The Logos appeared to '.Joshua as the captain of the Lord’s hosts. (Josh. 5:14) And later he is shown as Michael, the friend of God’s people, who stands up for the people.—Dan. 12:1.
In all these things The Logos delighted to do his Father’s will. “Wherefore, when he cometh into the world, he saith,... Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, 0 God.” “I delight to do thy will, 0 my God; yea, thy law is within my heart.” (Heb. 10: 5-7; Ps. 40:8) The Logos loved the name and honor of his Father. He was unselfishly devoted to Him. Of course, lie observed the apparent leniency and tolerance of God toward Satan, in that God permitted him without interference until the end of the world to pursue his nefarious course, and this of itself would furnish a test to the loyalty of The Logos.
God made his purpose of salvation of humankind to depend upon the vindication of His name by the perfect loyalty and absolute devotion of The Logos when made a perfect man on earth. To others it would seem weakness to risk so much upon the faithfulness and integrity of one perfect man, but “the weakness of God is stronger than men”. (1 Cor. 1:25) The Logos being tested for a period of four thousand years after the treachery of Lucifer and always loyal and unselfishly devoted to the Father, God knew he could safely rely upon his only begotten Son when he would be transferred to earth as a man, to become the vindicator of Jehovah’s word and name and also the Redeemer of obedient humankind. There could never be such an exhibition of fidelity, submissiveness, loyalty and unselfish devotion to Jehovah God as that made manifest by the Logos, afterwards Jesus, later the Christ or Anointed One.
When on earth Jesus was always faithful and loyal to his Father. He refused to be tempted away from his course of steadfastness, defending himself against every assault through the Word of God. He said: “I can of mine own self do nothing:... because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me.” (John 5:30) He and his Father, having enjoyed long centuries of sweet fellowship, knew each other and loved each other. Jesus said: “As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.”—John 10:15, 17.
Jesus knew it was the will of God to have him suffer death that he might vindicate his Father’s name and redeem man and undo and destroy the wicked works of the evil one; and such was the joy this brought to him that he gladly and willingly did it, despising the shame to which he was subjected. (Heb. 12:2) Instead of attempting to make himself a reputation and to shine in the eyes of others, he humbled himself and became obedient even unto the most ignominious death. For this reason God has highly exalted him and given him a name above every name, and commands that all creatures in heaven and earth shall worship the Son as he worships the Father.—Phil. 2: 5-11.
Lucifer had selfishly attempted to obtain the worship of creatures, and resorted to the blackest crime to accomplish his purpose; and he must therefore suffer destruction. The Logos always honored his Father, defending His good name and fame, and willingly went to an ignominious death to accomplish his Father’s will; and the Father will see to it that all creation shall worship the Son. The Logos justly earned and received the title “The Faithful and True”. (Rev. 19:11-13) His course of humility, loving devotion, absolute and complete faithfulness and unswerving loyalty has led him to the highest place; and his honor shall never be dimmed. The course of The Logos, like a silent monument, stands beckoning all creatures that desire life to walk that way. Said Jesus: “I am the way, and the truth, and the life.”—John 14: 6.
That the end of Satan is to be destruction there is no doubt. That his destruction is being deferred until his wicked works are destroyed at the battle of Armageddon is also sure. (1 John 3:8) In pronouncing judgment against Lucifer Jehovah said: “I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain [kingdom] of God: and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.... I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee.... And never shalt thou be any more.”—Ezek. 28:16, 18, 19.
At the time of the tragedy in Eden there were no nations on earth. But, looking down to the end, God said in prophetic phrase to Lucifer: “How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!” (Isa. 14:12) These words of final judgment pronounced against the wicked one seem clearly to refer to the future, both by reason of the phrase used and by the facts.
Since Eden Sat^n has been permitted to pursue his wicked course, all of which God will counteract in his own due time to his own glory. Thereafter when the sons of God
August 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
253
came to present themselves to Jehovah, Satan also came and even had the liberty of holding conversation with God concerning man. (See Job 1:6-8; 2:1-7.) The prophet Zechariah gives testimony to the fact that while the “church of the living God” has been in course of selection and development, Satan has been standing by to resist. (Zech. 3:1-3) Moses, the servant of Jehovah, was permitted to see the land of Canaan from a mountaintop, but was not permitted to cross the Jordan river and go into it. Moses died in the mountain. It seems evident, according to the record of Jude 9, that Satan then possessed the power of death, because he claimed the right to the body of Moses. Michael seems to have recognized that Satan still had some authority and official power, because, as recorded, he contended with the Devil about the body of Moses.
When Jesus was on the earth Satan boldly claimed that the world belonged to him and that he had the right to give it to Jesus, only upon condition that Jesus would fall down and worship him. He, at that time, still possessed the great desire to be worshiped like as Jehovah is worshiped. Jesus did not deny Satan’s claim to ownership of the world. (Luke 4:6, 7)'. On the contrary, Jesus spoke of Satan as “the prince of this world”.—John 12: 31; 14: 30.
That Satan has had access to heaven, and the privilege of communication with Jehovah until the establishment of God’s kingdom in 1914, seems quite evident from the fact that till the enthronement of Christ Jesus as King Satan has been the accuser of the brethren of Christ day and night before Jehovah God. (Rev. 12:10) That Satan possessed the power of death during the apostle Paul’s time seems to be indicated by his words concerning the wicked: “Deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit [of the Lord in the church] may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.” (1 Cor. 5:5) “Of
whom is Hymenseus and Alexander; whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.”— 1 Tim. 1: 20.
Satan, all through the centuries, has held to the claim that he had a right to destroy those who will destroy him. In Eden Jehovah said to Satan under the symbol of the serpent: “And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.”—Gen. 3:15.
Satan observed that Abel pleased God, hence he proceeded to cause Abel’s destruction. He has tried to destroy all those who have sought after and served God. He caused the prophets of God to be imprisoned, sawn asunder, and slain. God could have prevented this, but for his own good reasons he did not do so. In due time Jehovah will demonstrate his great power by resurrection to bring forth to life everlasting those who proved their faithfulness and who suffered martyrdom at the hands of Satan and his emissaries. Satan has at all times sought to destroy the “seed” of promise; that is to say, The Christ, to wit, Jesus the Head and the church his body. That Satan has often prevented the Christians from doing what they wanted to do, seems evident from the apostle’s words: “Satan hindered us.”—1 Thess. 2:18.
Let us keep in mind the course of selfishness pursued by Satan, and his end; and, above all, let us keep in mind the course pursued by the Lord, and his glorious reward. “Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.”—Heb. 2:14.
God is love. Jesus is the “express image” of his Father; therefore Christ Jesus is the perfect expression of unselfishness. His is the way that leads to life.
WHOSE PRAYERS
WORLD peace is the burden of countless prayers by the religionists during the present international crisis. Many of the peoples of earth address their prayers to stones or to statues of wood or to other inanimate objects. Some turn wheels and count that as prayer, while others count beads and repeat formal phrases and believe that this is prayer to God. Such prayers are worse than useless. They are never answered. Many prostrate themselves in an attitude of devotion before images of wood or stone, or before some inanimate object in the form of a cross, believing that the presence of such object will aid them in their prayers. The people who offer these prayers are not to be blamed. It is religion that is blameworthy! Such prayers are without proper understanding.
Do not all persons have the privilege of approaching in prayer unto the great Giver of every good and perfect gift? They have not. People may pray but with no assurance of having their prayers answered. Under inspiration from God the apostle Peter wrote: “For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil.” (1 Pet. 3:12) By this authority it is seen that only the righteous have the privilege of prayer. Such may
ARE ANSWERED?
present their petitions to God and expect to be heard and answered according to His holy will.
Does not the sinner have the privilege of prayer? If one who is a sinner, going in the way of sin, repents and is converted, which means to change his mind and his course of action, and then desires the mercy of God, he may call upon God for mercy; and if he follows God’s appointed way he may come into harmony with God and later enjoy the privilege of prayer. An example of a sinner praying to God is found in the Scriptures, at Luke 18: 13: “And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.” It will be observed, however, that he had not the full privilege of prayer.
Can a Mohammedan or other heathen pray to God and expect relief? The answer is, No; because such religionists do not proceed according to God’s appointed way. They do not believe in the Lord Jesus Christ as the great Redeemer of man and the way of coming to God. Why is it necessary to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as the Redeemer? Because all the human family became sinners by reason of the first man’s disobedience to God. Jehovah God provided for the death of his beloved Son that through
254
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the merit of that sacrifice those of Adam’s offspring who believe and obey might be relieved of the effects of the judgment of condemnation. God does not force this privilege upon anyone, but grants it to those who come and ask, as sinners, that they might be relieved of their difficulties and come into harmony with him through Christ Jesus. It follows, then, that if anyone comes in any other way than through Christ he would not be received. Hence prayers to a dead woman (Mary) for world peace and other favors are of no value. The Scriptures leave no doubt about this. The apostle Peter says, at Acts 4:10-12: “By the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole.... Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.”
What, then, shall we say about “modernists”? Modernist clergymen in particular say they do not believe man fell because of sin, nor do they believe God created man, but claim that man is a creature of evolution and that man is gradually evolving. They say they do not believe the blood of Jesus was shed as a redemptive price for man; hence they do not have faith in the ransom sacrifice. These modernists often stand in public places and pray. Do they have the privilege of prayer, or are their prayers heard? This can be judged only by the Scriptures; and when the Scriptures plainly say that no man can come unto God except through Christ Jesus, then it follows conclusively that any man who believes neither in the fall of Adam nor in the redemptive price, and hence denies Christ Jesus as the great Redeemer and King, has no privilege of prayer.
In Jesus’ day the ecclesiastical or clergy element, particularly the scribes and the Pharisees, who claimed to represent God, took much pleasure in walking on the streets in long robes and in appearing in the religious houses in such and receiving greetings, and in occupying the chief rooms at the feasts. They also delighted to display their piety by standing in the synagogues and on the street corners in prayer. Jesus said that these were hypocrites, that they were praying to be seen of men, and that they had their reward, because men might see them and say: How wonderfully pious are these men 1
After 1900 years this class of religious clergymen have not passed from the earth, but rather have increased in numbers and have fraudulently taken to themselves the name “Christian”. The words of Jesus (Luke 20:46, 47) seem now quite appropriate: “Beware of the scribes, which desire to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief rooms at feasts; which devour widows’ houses, and for a shew make long prayers: the same shall receive greater [condemnation].” And Matthew 6:5: “And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.”
There is a time and a place for everything. God does not judge one according to the place where he prays, but judges him according to his purpose and intent. If his prayer is uttered in a public place that others might hear
and remark upon the piety of the one praying, then such a one may receive the reward of commendation of others, but he does not receive the approval of God There are certain conditions in which it would be proper to pray in public. Where there is a public assembly of Christian people for the purpose of holding public worship it would be entirely appropriate for the chairman, or other consecrated Christian in the presence of all, to act as the spokesman to give expression of thanksgiving to God for his manifold blessings and to ask his guidance in the consideration of the matters in which the assembly is to participate.
It should be remembered always that prayer is not offered to the people, but to Jehovah God. Only God can grant the answer to prayer. If, therefore, there is a thing in which a public assembly of those in a covenant with God is equally and jointly interested, and if all desire to ask the same thing, it would be proper then for one to utter audibly the prayer that the minds of all might be guided in unison. Where there is a mixed audience, or many present that do not believe the Lord, then if the one serving desires to pray it would be far better for him and more in keeping with the Scriptures if he should pray privately.
“Thanksgiving” means to give expression of gratitude for favors and blessings received. It is proper for all people to express their gratitude to the Giver of every good and perfect gift. For a chairman of a public assembly, however, to stand up before the people and tell Jehovah God what He is expected to do, is not only presumptuous but often blasphemous. Long prayers uttered in the presence of others are generally uttered for the purpose of attracting attention to the speaker. We may be sure that Jehovah does not hear and answer such prayers. Ofttimes the chairman prays because he loves to hear his own voice and that others might comment upon his eloquence.
The Lord Jesus left no doubt as to where the Christian should pray. He said: “But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.” (Matt. 6 6) If you desire a special favor at the hands of some earthly ruler, you would not wish to call a public assembly of the people and loudly announce in their presence your requests addressed to the ruler. You would prefer to have a secret audience with him, that you might present your matter in a better and more direct way. Since prayers are addressed to Jehovah, the effectual prayer is that petition which is secretly presented to Jehovah God in Jesus’ name
It was not unusual for the Lord Jesus to withdiaw to a secret place for prayer. He did not utter prayers for the benefit of the multitude, that they might hear him. Concerning this it is written, at Matthew 14 • 23: “And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there alone.” He held sweet and precious communion with his Father in heaven by means of prayer This is true of each true and faithful follower of the Lord Jesus. To all such prayer is a sacred privilege.
If it becomes necessary or fitting to pray in public, no one that is a true Christian would hesitate to do this. The
August 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
255
point is that it seems more appropriate for a child of God who has a petition to present to his Father to do so secretly, or else in company with others of like precious faith, that the mind of each one may be solemnly set upon the thing that they ask in the name of the Master.
Is there any virtue in a long prayer? Or might we expect the Lord to surely hear and answer our prayer if we repeated it time and time again? Many good, honest people are told that if they will repeat their prayers so many times a day, and count the number by going over their beads, this will result to them in many blessings. Undoubtedly they are honest in their endeavors, but the trouble is that they are not advised as to what the teaching of the Scriptures is upon the point. Jesus, when instructing his disciples to pray, said: “But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask him.”—Matt. 6: 7, 8.
It is not necessary to tell the all-wise Creator time and time again our heart’s desire. As the Lord here stated, our Father knows" in advance what things we have need of. The question may then arise, Why ask him at all if he knows in advance what we need? The answer to that is this: Jehovah is a just, wise and loving God. He does not force anything upon another. He wishes his children to learn certain truths and to express themselves in full harmony with his will, and to earnestly desire his blessings before he bestows them. Any good parent can see the wisdom of this course. If he wishes to properly train his child “in the nurture and admonition of’the Lord” (Eph. 6:4), he will prefer to see the child first request a thing that is desired; then, if his wisdom leads him to believe the child is in need of it, he takes delight in giving it. Jesus lays down the rule when he says: “And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.”—Luke 11: 9, 10.
Through the prophet Moses the Israelites were brought into a covenant or solemn contract with God, and they prayed to God because they were his covenant people and servants of God under the terms of the law covenant. By Christ Jesus the Christian is directed to pray to Jehovah God and to address him as Father. Only those who are His sons begotten of his spirit, or who are in line to become his earthly children under the Kingdom, have this privilege to thus address Him. All such are likewise in a covenant with Jehovah God by a consecration of themselves to Him by Christ Jesus to do God’s will. At John 15:16 the Lord Jesus lays down the rule definitely that the petition must be presented in his name: “Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.” At John 14:6 he said: “I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.”
This fixes the rule, then, as to who can come to God and to whom the Christian must present his petition- or
prayer. Necessarily it excludes unbelievers and also those who claim to be Christians but who deny God’s Word and who oppose his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, by which Government He will vindicate His name and bless obedient humankind. It cannot be said that because a man poses before the public as a clergyman, priest or preacher he has the privilege of praying to God. When the Lord Jesus was on earth the scribes and the Pharisees were the most zealous of all in claiming to represent God. Without doubt their prayers were not heard by Jehovah, for the reason that Jesus said to them: “If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.”—John 8:42-44.
The Lord Jesus himself directs the Christian that when he prays he should say to Jehovah God: “Our Father which art in heaven”; and that then he should ask in the name of Jesus, the Son of Jehovah. He says: “If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.” (John 15:7) If one abides in that blessed condition and with the Word of God abiding in him, then he shall ask what he will and it shall be done to him. But mark the condition: If the Word of God abides in him, then the Christian will ask only in harmony with the will of God and not ask something formulated by religion and contrary to God’s expressed will. As Jesus stated, at John 14:13, 14: “And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.” By this text, then, it is seen to be proper for the child of God to address his prayer to Jehovah, the Father, and in the name of the Son, Christ Jesus, and according to the written Word of God.
Today true Christians, as Jehovah’s witnesses, suffer great persecution and they cry in prayer to Jehovah God for his name’s sake. Looking forward to this very day Jesus said: “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith [this belief] on the earth?” (Luke 18:7, 8) Who on earth today has this strong and abiding faith ? Who understands the meaning of these trying times, particularly the great persecution of those who serve Jehovah God and Christ? Do you believe that Jehovah will by Christ Jesus within a very short time avenge his elect and thus vindicate his own great and holy name? “According to your faith be it unto you.” (Matt. 9:29) Be assured that all things shall work together for your good because you love God and have been called according to his purpose, and that, come what may, the final result will be glorious to those who stand firm on the side of His great Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Unto such faithful ones the assurance is given that God will answer their prayer and avenge his people, and that shortly.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
LONDON ZONE ASSEMBLY
“Last February a brief announcement appeared that London could expect its zone assembly to take place on Sunday, May 18. At the time of the announcement the whole country was in heated controversy regarding the opening of all theaters on Sundays. Military speakers were all in favor, as thousands of soldiers are at a loss as to what to do with their Sunday evenings. Week after week the battle waged. With it the fate of our assembly seemed closely allied. Eventually the motion was defeated in the House of Commons by a margin of three votes. Immediately we got busy. The Wimbledon Theater in South London was selected and arrangements fixed except that we found it necessary to forward the date to May 11, as the theater was going over to movies with the subsequent Sunday opening. The brethren had the first official announcements at their local Kingdom Halls. Each unit was advised to make its own arrangements for hiring buses or coaches to overcome the wartime difficulties of travel. Back-calls were visited; people of good-will were given invitation tickets.
“It was decided to make the assembly a two-day affair, commencing with a two-mile ‘magazine pavement witness’ right through the heart of the West End of London. Pioneers and any interested could attend the servants’ meeting afterwards, both of these events to take place on the Saturday. It was decided to hold field service on Sunday morning, having the brethren meet at four rallying points, Paddington, Wimbledon, Brixton, and Teddington, at 9:30 a. m. and to leave for the field after song and prayer, back at the assembly points at one o’clock for sandwiches, and then to Wimbledon, where proceedings were due to commence at 4 p. m. All four points were Kingdom Halls; tea was to be provided at each point.
“Came the day, Saturday, May 10, time 2 p. m. Watchtower bags everywhere. From all parts of London they came. Arrived at the headquarters the brethren were dispatched in parties to take up their allotted positions along the planned route: Piccadilly Circus, Trafalgar Square, Oxford Street, and Edgeware Road. Four miles of ‘magazine pavement witnessing’! At four o’clock back to the Central Kingdom Hall for the servants’ meeting; 700 brethren in attendance. Here we discussed Kingdom interests as concerning London. The Society’s London Branch servant gave us counsel and quoted instances of the growth of demonism in this country.
“Nightfall, with a brilliant full moon; time, 11:30 p. m. All Jehovah’s witnesses tucked up in bed resting content in the Lord and ready for the morrow. Suddenly the night air is rent with the stomach-turning air-raid warning, a sound which only the Devil himself could think of. Almost immediately the sound of many planes and gunfire. From that time till 6 a. m. wave after wave of Nazi bombers carried out a most violent and concentrated ‘blitz’ on the center of London and along the route where we had stood the afternoon before. Great fires were started and intense damage done. Railways were put out of action, and the Devil was reigning again in his confusion. The boys in the Society’s Bethel home were rocked all night long in their beds by the bombs crashing all around.
“Came the morning of Sunday, May 11. Early reports showed chaos on the public transport facilities. Then was seen the blessing of having made all arrangements to come to the rally in private hire coaches. The coachloads of happy witnesses began to converge at the four points. Most of them had little sleep, but that did not matter. One, a Greek pioneer, turned up at the Central unit with only his trousers and jacket. During the ‘blitz’ he took refuge in a shelter. He returned home only to find it had vanished, having received a direct hit. Smiling, he was the first to turn up at his rally point, where he was provided with a shirt and in an hour’s time was leading a party of thirty out onto the field. All the coaches arrived, and by 10:30 all brethren were in the field. Again the cloud of Watchtower bags descended on London ■ as one cockney spectator remarked: ‘Blimey, there’s fousands of ’em!’ The field report showed actually 1,060 in the service Sunday morning.
“The report came that the ffilitz’ had deprived two rally points of gas, hence tea-making difficulties. Insurmountable difficulty! Oh, no! Fires were built in gardens and basements, and water boiled in dixies in the good ‘old-fashioned’ ‘out West’ style. One watchman minding a bomb crater in the South district lent his brazier for kettle boiling. One o’clock and all returned, brimful of field experiences. The physical man was fed while music and declarations were in progress from the platforms. Plenty of tales to tell! Two-thirty p.m., back into the coaches and the long, long trail to Wimbledon: ‘all steps to Wimbledon today, sir E Puzzled onlookers who overcame their curiosity by asking ‘the reason of the hope that is within you’ were rewarded by a personal witness and the offer of a Watchtower subscription. One subscription was placed within three minutes of the signal given for the departure. Right through the London streets the cavalcade passed, diverted where bombed streets made it impassable. Each coach had all the Watchtower bags well in evidence and a sign ‘London Theocratic Assembly’.
“Arrival at Wimbledon! Clouds of ‘locusts’—2,200 of them. Main street full of coaches and buses. Police most helpful. Remarks from the public, ‘Who are all these people?’ ‘What have they got to laugh at anyway?’ ‘What’s this Theocratic Government?’ Whenever the last remark was made within hearing of a ‘locust’, the answer and a witness was immediately forthcoming. Inside the theater, sharp at 4 p.m. the assembly began. Keynote of all proceedings was the Victory Song [Judges chapter 5]. The stage was dominated by a huge, colored photographic enlargement of the cover of the booklet Theocracy. Each speaker carried the theme of the Victory Song. The Jael class were invited to join with us in driving home ‘the hammer and the nail’, A demonstration was given showing how not to witness and the correct method. A great item, and we all enjoyed a laugh at our own expense. A high spot of the program was reached when some thirty newly interested, many of whom had made their first approach to the doors of the people that morning, were introduced to the audience and gave declarations. The assembly closed with a Watchtower study, thrown open to the audience of 2,000. Then everyone climbed back into the coaches.”
206

THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W, E. Van Ambuboh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom -on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth’’ with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Orness
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 6, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the pubUsbers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Votice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N.
under the Act of March S, 1879.
“LIGHTNING-WAR” TESTIMONY PERIOD
October as the “Lightning-War” Testimony Period is notable in three ways: it begins the new 1941-1942 service year, it is a Period of like united activity world-wide, and this year it also marks the opening of a general campaign with a most potent weapon of truth, recently released at the Theocratic Assembly at St. Louis. “Lightning” not only suggests enlightenment for humankind, but also speed in enlightening them and in exposing the dark deeds of enemies of truth and righteousness. The people’s crying need of the hour and also the enthusiasm over the feature offer for this Period, to wit, the new book Children, should speed up the activity of all Kingdom publishers as never before, in further fulfillment of the prophetic drama of Deborah and Barak, whose name means “lightning”. Children, together with a unique Home Study Course by mail, and the new booklet Comfort All That Mourn, will be offered on a mere contribution of 25c. The swift approach of the real lightning-war of Armageddon behooves all persons of good-will to join in this round-the-world educational campaign before it closes. Apply either to this office or to the foreign branch supervising your territory, for references to the local organized service company. Promptly at the close of the month’s work turn in your field report to aid in compiling a world report on “Lightning-War”.
“CHILDREN”
Announced and released Sunday morning, August 10, at the Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in St. Louis, Mo., and at the conclusion of the climax speech on “Children of The King”, the new book Children won instant acclaim from the thousands assembled. Written by Judge Rutherford, Children bids fair, as shown by its initial reception at St. Louis, to be his most popular book, and with good reason. It is written in narrative and conversational style, presenting interestingly and simply the latest Bible truths concerning the glorious hope early to be realized by the persons of good-will today living. Children is bound in shy-blue cloth, with an embossed, gold-stamped cover design that is unusual. The text within is adorned with frequent color illustrations, and is supplemented with an index of subjects. You will prize the author’s edition as it contains the facsimile of a special letter in the author’s own hand and addressed “To the Children of the King”. You may obtain it on a contribution of 50c a copy, mailed prepaid to you. This edition is limited.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 5: “Children of The King,” fl 1-24 inclusive, The Watchtower September 1, 1941.
Week of October 12: “Children of The King,” fl 25-48 inclusive, The Watchtower September 1, 1941.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	September 1, 1941	No. 17
CHILDREN OF THE KING
"And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up." —Deut. 6:7.
JEHOVAH gave instruction to Moses to be transmitted to others, the meaning of which instruction is now clarified to those who love the Most High.
Jehovah had chosen His people for the typical Theocracy and was leading them by the hand of Moses to the land of promise. Moses then stood before that people on the plains of Moab and delivered the instruction. Today Jehovah has chosen his people for the antitypical Theocracy, many of whom have entered the antitypical Land of Promise, and the remnant thereof have the assurance that soon they may enter therein.
2	Moses was a prophet of Jehovah and a type of Christ the King, that great Prophet, who executes Jehovah’s purpose. The words of Jehovah are not altered, and are heard with compelling force now by every one who has given his devotion to The Theocratic Government. Christ Jesus, the King, is present, and all who today are for The Theocracy serve under His command. Jehovah’s words, given to and uttered by Moses, now apply to all who would receive life through Christ Jesus, the King, to wit: “Jehovah our God is one Jehovah: and thou shalt love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be upon thy heart; and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.”—Deut. 6: 4-7, Am. Rev. Ver.
3	Today the obligation is laid upon every parent who is in a covenant to do Jehovah’s will to bring his children into the congregation, that they may learn the words of the Lord and may see their privilege of serving The Theocratic Government. The parents that serve Jehovah, and who love their children, will be diligent to instruct their children in the way of righteousness, that they may serve the Lord and live. The parents who neglect this divine obligation disclose thereby that they have not a proper ap
preciation of their relationship to the Almighty God and of their obligation to the children that they have brought into the world.
* Centuries ago Jehovah announced his purpose to create and set up a paternalistic government, to be presided over by his beloved Son. That government is the great Theocracy, by which Christ Jesus exercises a paternal care over the interests of the people that shall live on the earth. He is the King and the Father of them that obey Him, and they, as His children, will address Christ Jesus as “Father”. Jehovah God is the King of Eternity, and the fountain of life, and none can get life contrary to his will. Jehovah has delegated to his beloved Son, the King, full authority to administer life to those who shall receive life everlasting. In these latter days the Most High has made this fact clear to those who have fled to the Lord and there found refuge.
8 The mimic god, Satan, in carrying out his scheme to blind the people and to turn them away from Jehovah God, has from time to time set up a counterfeit paternalistic government, in which religion and polities are used to keep the people in subjection. Such counterfeit government claims to rule by divine right, but such claim is entirely false. Soon, now, such counterfeit paternalism will completely fail and for ever disappear. Counterfeit paternalistic governments have existed for many centuries in different places in the earth, and have defamed Jehovah’s name. Such governments, instead of being a father to subjects, have enslaved the people under their control. The real Paternal Government will set free all who desire to be free and who serve the Lord, the King of The Theocracy.
’ Knowing the end from the beginning, in due time Jehovah began to make known His purpose to create and set up a paternal government by Christ Jesus. In the Bible God tells of the birth of the child who should rule as King and give life to others, and long before his birth as a man-child it was written in the prophecy of Jehovah concerning Christ Jesus, these
269
260
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
words: “Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given.” (Isa. 9:6) That meant that in due time a child should be born of God’s universal organization that should become the King and rule the world in righteousness. That man-child was born in a manger at Bethlehem and at that time the angel of Jehovah delivered this message to men whom God had chosen as witnesses: ‘Unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.” At the same time Jehovah caused his angels to deliver to all persons of good-will then and thereafter on the earth this message: ‘Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace to all men of good-will.’ (Luke 2:10-14, Rotherham) That means that those who are of goodwill toward the great Theocracy shall have peace and all attending blessings, and now Jehovah’s due time has come when all who are of good-will toward him may receive such blessings.
T As to the power, authority and glory of that child born in the manger Jehovah, by his prophet, says: “The government shall be upon his shoulder”; meaning the great Theocratic Government. That great Ruler shall guide the people in the right way; and as to this it is written: “And his name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor.” All persons who follow his counsel are certain to walk in the right way.
’ One of the names given him is “The mighty God”-, meaning that all power in heaven and earth is committed into his hands. (Matt. 28:18) He is called “The everlasting Father” because unto him is given the power to minister life everlasting to obedient ones of humankind. That means that those to whom he gives life and who obey shall never die, and those who are his faithful and obedient subjects shall live forever and carry out his purpose. One of his titles also is “The Prince of Peace”, meaning that he is the great paternalistic Ruler and his rule of peace and righteousness shall never end. (Isa. 9: 6, 7) The authority conferred upon him by Jehovah means that the territory of the dominion of Christ the King-Father belongs to Him, and not to his subjects. The people will occupy the earth and glorify it in trust. That is a sacred and blessed trust, which the children of The King shall have the privilege and joy of executing. Thus the Lord confers upon his children a great and wonderful privilege and honor. This great King is “The Seed of Abraham” according to God’s promise first given to Abraham (Gen. 13:14-17), and He shall own the earth, and his children shall beautify it and use it to the glory of Jehovah forever. Christ Jesus became the King centuries ago, but it was the will of Jehovah, his Father, that he should wait until 1914 and then take possession of the Kingdom and proceed to oust the enemy. His first work upon taking possession is to announce the name of Jehovah and have his servants proclaim that name
throughout the earth, and then proceed to destroy the wicked ruler, to the end that the people may have a righteous government under which to live and forever to praise the name of the Most High without interruption.
BY PURCHASE
* By right of purchase the beloved Son of God becomes King and Father of his subjects that live. His purchase price was his own precious blood. He spoke a parable illustrating this, wherein he likens himself unto a merchant who found a great treasure hid in a field and who joyfully sold all he had, meaning his own human life, and with that price bought that field and treasure. (Matt. 13:44-46) That purchase includes The Government and all subjects who live under that Government. He tells of himself as the Good Shepherd, who lays down his life for his “other sheep”. (John 10:11,16) By that ransom sacrifice he becomes the owner of all who gladly come to him and ask for his blessing. To all such obedient ones he gives life everlasting; and therefore he is the Father to all who shall live forever on the earth.
10	To disobey God’s law leads to disaster. That is forcibly shown concerning the first man. God created Adam and gave him the authority to become the father of the people on earth. To Adam and Eve God said: ‘Be ye fruitful and multiply and fill the earth.’ (Gen. 1:28, Roth.) Had Adam been faithful and obedient he would have occupied a unique position with all of his offspring. The time was when God dealt with Adam directly; and therefore if Adam had continued faithful he would have been a channel of communication to all of his children, communicating the message from Jehovah to them. His was a princely office with respect to other persons. By instructing Eve and their children in the law of God Adam would have occupied the place of prophet or spokesman for God and others. Adam was selfish, became willfully disobedient, and lost everything. Not only did he lose the right to life everlasting for himself, but he lost it for all of his offspring, and all of them by inheritance came under condemnation. (Rom. 5:12) Satan, the chief of demons, is the one who brought about the downfall of Adam, and such resulted disastrously for all the people, and, without divine help, in time all the people on earth would have perished for ever. That divine help was given by and through Christ Jesus, the Redeemer. —John 3:16.
11	The Devil cannot thwart God’s purpose, who had made the earth for man to live upon. God made provision, therefore, for a ‘second Adam’, who shall minister life to all obedient ones, and make the earth a righteous and glorious place to live. (1 Cor. 15:45,47) By right of purchase, and by power and authority
September 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
261
which Christ Jesus received from Jehovah, he becomes the second Adam, owns the earth, and will regenerate and minister life to all of the purchased ones who render themselves in full obedience to his law. Jesus says: “Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.”—Matt. 20: 28.
” The “many”, as used in this text, are those who have full faith in God, who are obedient and serve joyfully The Theocratic Government. Concerning that matter it is written: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”—John 3:16,35,36.
” Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy, actually gives life everlasting to all of his subjects, and thus he is truly their “Everlasting Father”: “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Rom. 6:23) Following Adam’s failure Jehovah began to make known hijjnarvelous provision for The Theocracy and the blessings it would bring to all who become loyal and faithful subjects of that righteous government.
princes
14	Under The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus the position of prophets and princes will be given to those faithful men of old who were witnesses for Jehovah before the coming of Christ, and who by faith saw the coming of the Kingdom or Theocratic Government by the mighty Messiah. Those men long since died, but they shall have a “better resurrection” than many others, which resurrection will come by Christ Jesus, who is “the resurrection and the life”. (John 11:25) By such resurrection those faithful men are the children of The King, and them as his children he makes princes, or governors, in all the earth. They were once known as the “fathers” of God’s typical people; hence it is written of them: “Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make princes in all the earth.” —Ps. 45:16.
15	A partial list of those faithful men is set out at Hebrews the eleventh chapter. When those princes perform their duties as the visible governors under The Theocratic Government there will be no more politicians, religionists or commercial gangsters to prey upon the people. Of. and concerning the King of The Theocracy, and of his princes, or visible governors, it is written: “Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.” (Isa. 32:1) The law shall go forth from the
invisible King, and his visible governors of earth will carry into operation his judgments announced.
BRIDEGROOM KING
14	Christ Jesus, the Life-giver, has a bride, and he is the Bridegroom. His bride is made up of 144,000 creatures who have proved their faithfulness and loyalty to God and Christ Jesus his King. (John 3:29) The bride includes the faithful apostles and the faithful Christians that have lived since their day, and all of whom have died as human creatures and have been resurrected as spirit creatures, with the exception of a “remnant” still on earth who shall likewise have their change from human to spirit and all become joint-heirs with Christ Jesus the King. (Rom. 8:16,17) It is to such Jesus said: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.” (Rev. 2:10, Am. Rev. Ver.) By faithful obedience to Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus these faithful members,make ready for the new government. (Rev. 19:7) In Jehovah’s due time these faithful ones are resurrected and become a part of The Theocratic Government; and concerning them it is written: “And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.”—Rev. 20:4.
1T The glorious King, Christ Jesus, and his royal bride were foreshadowed in a great prophetic picture, which Jehovah made with Isaac and with Rebecca, to whom it was said: “Be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.” (Gen. 24: 60) That means that the royal family, the King and his bride, shall see the enemy pushed out and they shall possess all the things once possessed by those who hate The Theocracy.
1S	The faithful apostles are members of the bride of Christ, and to them Jesus spoke: “And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” (Matt. 19:28) These words of the King prove that there shall be a regeneration of humankind and the great Life-giver to the regenerated ones is Christ Jesus the King.
19	The selection of the members of The Theocratic Government to be associated with Christ Jesus the King has been carried forward during the past 1900 years and is now practically completed. The Lord Jesus received the Kingdom and began his rule in
262
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
1914, and in A.D. 1918 he began the judgment of those consecrated to do God’s will, selecting those faithful and approved ones whom he has sent forth as his servants to be witnesses to the great Theocrat, his name and his government. The remnant of these are yet on the earth, and these must join and do gladly join with Christ Jesus to extend the invitation to all persons of good-will now on earth to come and take freely of the truth of life; and those obeying shall live. (Rev. 22:17) Thus the heavenly generation bring the life message to the earthly generation; and concerning such it is written: “One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.”—Ps. 145: 4.
OTHER CHILDREN
20	After telling of the faithful spiritual company, whom Jesus purchased with his own blood, and who shall be associated with him in The Theocratic Government, Jesus says: “And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.” (John 10:16) The “other sheep” of the Lord here mentioned are the ones who shall form the “great multitude” and live forever on the earth. (Rev. 7:9-17) They will experience regeneration. A multitude of such persons are now living on the earth, and these hearing the message of life respond gladly and, proving their integrity, they shall live and never die. That blessed multitude was pictured by the sons of Noah that were carried safely over the flood with their father Noah. There Noah pictured the great Life-giver. After the flood all nations of earth were from Noah their father. (Genesis 10) So likewise the people that are carried over Armageddon and who form the “great multitude”, together with all others that live after Armageddon, shall be from the King-Father, Christ Jesus. The name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus are now being proclaimed in the earth, and many are hearing and hastening to declare themselves for the Theocratic government of righteousness. These who hear and obey are the prospective children of the King.
21	Such persons of good-will who embrace The Theocracy now see that Christ Jesus the King has come and that his long-promised government of righteousness is now at hand. They hail and praise Christ Jesus the King and seek life through him, just as this was pictured by a multitude of children in Jerusalem who filled the temple and cried to Jesus: “Hosanna to the son of David!” (Matt. 21:15) On that occasion the religionists tried to silence the children, but Jesus in words of rebuke said to them: “Have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?” (Matt. 21:16)
Today the children of the King joyfully hail Christ Jesus, proclaiming The Theocratic Government ; and the religionists of the present time try to silence these children, but they cannot. God can make the very stones to cry out, and he will see to it that his children shall now herald the message before the people who desire to hear. The religionists have lost their opportunity, and now the children, by the Lord’s favor, take up the glad song and herald it far and wide, and, as the Lord declares, this is done to put the enemy to silence. The children are now in the favor of the Lord and joyfully serve him, and they shall see the enemies of The Theocracy go down to defeat.
opportune time
22	Long ago Jehovah fixed the time and season to carry out his purpose concerning The Theocracy, and in his due time each progressive step takes place. When the due time arrives the Lord instructs his teachable and obedient ones in the way that they should go, and to that end he makes clear to such the meaning of his Word; as he has promised: “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. All the paths of the Lor4 are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. What man is he that feareth the Lord ? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will shew them his covenant.” —Ps. 25:9,10,12-14.
22	Every child that now gives his heart devotion to Jehovah and Christ the King may confidently expect to be guided in the right way, because now is the Lord’s due time to gather unto himself his “other sheep”. It was in the year 1914 that Jehovah instructed Christ Jesus to begin his duties of his Kingly office, and concerning which it is written: “The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion; rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.”— Ps. 110:2.
28	The first work of the King is to cause his faithful servants to proclaim the name of Jehovah, the Supreme One, and to tell of his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and, when that is done, then to oust the Satanic rule; and which will be accomplished at Armageddon.
28	Since 1918 the Lord of glory and power has been judging the nations; as it is written: “And before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats.”—Matt. 25: 32.
28	It is not at all necessary for the people to see the Lord with their eyes in order to be judged by him. He is there, invisible to human eyes, and he judges
September 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
263
them by their heart devotion or motive exhibited when they hear of his kingdom. During that judgment the prospective children of the King, which he calls his “other sheep”, are separated from the disobedient ones, which he calls “goats”, and his “other sheep” are placed on the side of the King’s favor and saving power: “And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.”—Matt. 25: 33.
27	The Lord compels no one to serve him, but he offers his blessings to those who desire to do right and who are anxious to see the righteous government in full control of the world. Such prospective children are diligent to learn what is the Lord’s will concerning them and they hasten to do the will of the Lord. Because they took the side of The Theocracy and have proclaimed the name of the great King, they are bitterly opposed by the demons and demonized men. The prospective children of the King must, under that crucial test, remain firm and steadfast for the King and his kingdom, and, if they do so until the test is completed at Armageddon, “then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” (Matt. 25: 34) Thus they become the children of the “Everlasting Father” and enter into the abundant blessings which Jehovah has prepared for them from the foundation of the world. Note some of these great blessings that he named in the Scriptures.
DOMINION
28	Jehovah God gave to Adam, the perfect man, dominion over certain specific things. The fact that Adam lost that blessing by disobedience means that the Lord’s obedient children shall receive that dominion from the hand of the Lord, and which corresponds exactly with the dominion given to perfect Adam in Eden. (Gen. 1: 26, 28) Everything then will be under the control of Christ the King; and his children shall carry out the things given to Adam, and which he lost. Concerning this it is written: “For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honour, and didst set him over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet. For in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. But now we see not yet all things put under him.”—Heb. 2: 5-8.
“Before taking control of the earth Jesus first purchased with his lifeblood all obedient ones, and then he comes in glory and honor and power as King of Jehovah’s Government and takes charge of all
things under The Theocracy. Hence it is written: “But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.” (Heb. 2:9) He purchases all who become his children subjects.
20	These children include the “princes” and those of the “great multitude”. Thus the visible representatives and the children of their Father, the King, will exercise dominion over the earth, over the fish, and the fowls, and all the beasts of the forest and of the field. The Lord gives His guarantee that none of the beasts or other animal creation shall hurt or do violence to his children. As an example, a young lamb will become very much attached to the lion, and all the animals and all the children will become real friends, as it is written: “The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on. the cockatrice’ den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.” (Isa. 11: 6-9) There shall then be everlasting peace between man and beast, as is declared by the Lord: “And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground: and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely.”—Hos. 2:18; Ezek. 34:25.
81	The children of the King shall be used by the Lord to make the earth a place of glory and beauty. (Isa. 60:13; 66:1) Tended and kept by his princes and his children subjects, the earth shall become the King’s garden, a paradise of which Eden was a type, and everything therein will proclaim the praises of the Most High and of the King.—Gen. 2:15.
THE MANDATE
82	Now the nations of the earth are in the throes of death, and soon Armageddon, the battle of that great day of God Almighty, will be fought, and in which Christ shall be completely victorious, pushing out and destroying every wicked thing. In that battle the wicked and all the oppressors and all the opposers of The Theocracy shall perish. Then the survivors of Armageddon, the “great multitude”, the children of the King, shall carry out the divine mandate, which God gave to Adam and which Adam lost because of his disobedience.
264
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
•* God’s purpose cannot fail. (Isa. 46:11) He has given his word that the earth shall be populated with righteous people. The sons of Noah made a picture related to that divine mandate as carried out. (Gen. 9:1) The children of the King shall fulfill that divine mandate in reality and completeness to the glory of the Lord. To the children of the King that mandate is: “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth.” Thus shall be performed by the obedient children of the King the greatest privilege ever set before human creatures.
8‘ The fulfillment of that divine mandate is one of the many blessings now set before the Jonadabs, as the obedient, prospective children of the King, and they shall carry it into execution to the glory of God and of the King when Armageddon is passed. Righteous creatures shall perform and fulfill that mandate of righteousness, and they shall do so under the supervision of the King of righteousness. Under his supervision the children of the King forming the “great multitude” will marry and bring forth children in righteousness, which offspring also shall be children of the King. “They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them.” (Isa. 65: 23) Thus the earth, under the ruler-, ship of The Theocratic Government, shall be filled with people in perfection that shall forever honor and praise the name of Jehovah and the name of his King. They will be the people of the Lord, and he will be their God and Life-giver. Then the babes shall not sicken and die. Each one shall be given a full opportunity to prove his complete devotion to the King and Jehovah, and if any die it will be only because of their own willful disobedience, and for such there will be uq tears of sorrow shed.—Rev. 21:4; Ezek. 24:16-18; also Vindication, Book One, pages 332-334.
’’Marriage is a divine institution and therefore made sacred by Almighty God. Under the rulership of the wicked marriage has become a mockery. Under the rule of the King of The Theocracy marriage will become sacred and to the glory of God. In the days of old the typical covenant people of God, who loved him, looked to the Lord to guide in the selection of a wife for the man. (Gen. 24:1-67) This is at least a suggestion that under The Theocracy men and women will seek the face of the Lord, the King, and beseech him to make the selection of the wife for the husband. Since Armageddon is near at hand it would seem wise for those who hope to be of the “great multitude”, and therefore to fulfill the divine mandate, to wait upon the Lord and seek his direction and ask him to guide them and make selection of a companion. As the “great multitude” will carry out the divine mandate in righteousness they will need and greatly desire the direction of their “Wonderful
Counsellor”, the King of glory, and he is certain to guide those who earnestly seek his counsel and guidance.
” The “great multitude” will bring forth children in righteousness to the honor of the King. Relating to this it is written: “In the multitude of people is the King’s honour; but in the want of [the] people [which now prevails in all the earth] is the destruction of the prince [the wicked prince, ‘the god of this world,’ and his supporters].”—Prov. 14:28.
87 Under the reign of Christ the King the “great multitude”, as children of the King, shall rejoice to bring forth children and to teach them the way of righteousness that they may live forever in righteousness. Concerning this it is written : “Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord; and the fruit of the womb is his reward. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of the youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them; they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.” (Ps. 127:3-5) Today those who love Jehovah and his King are not ashamed to proclaim The Theocracy by Christ Jesus, but serenely and joyfully speak to their opponents, telling them of the gracious things God has in store for those who joyfully serve him.
PARENTS’ DUTY
’’When Moses stood before Jehovah’s typical covenant people on the plains of Moab and delivered the instruction from Jehovah he knew that soon thereafter the children, then present, would take the place of their parents in the ranks of God’s army. Forcibly he urgently reminded the parents of their duty to their children. He urged upon them diligence and faithfulness in teaching the truth to their children. That was important then; the fulfillment thereof is of greater importance now. Today Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, has gathered his covenant people before him and in the most forceful way tells them to instruct their children in the way of righteousness by constantly keeping before their children the name of Jehovah, his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and the necessity of complete and unselfish devotion to Jehovah and his government. We know that in the very near future the last members of the governmental associates with Christ Jesus must leave behind their children and go on to higher duties and service. It will be the blessed privilege of the faithful children, under the direct lead of the faithful “princes” or governors in the earth, to carry into action the divine mandate toward filling the earth with a righteous people. Let the parents now who are in a covenant for the Kingdom see to it that they are obedient to God’s commandment to be diligent to teach their children of and concerning The Theoc
September 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
265
racy. In this do not fail! The greatest favor the parents can now bestow upon their children is to keep constantly before them the Kingdom and what it means to humankind. If such parents have brought up their children “in the nurture and admonition of the Lord” they will not depart from that training, and blessed shall be those parents and children who thus obey!—Eph. 6:4; Prov. 22: 6.
DUTY OF CHILDREN
•’ Those who are children of the anointed, and who desire to live, must keep always in mind this admonition of God’s Word: “Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.” (Eph. 6:1) Those words mean that the children must give heed to the instruction they receive from their parents who are in the Lord and who obey the Lord’s injunction. Furthermore it is written: “Honour thy father and mother, which is the first commandment with promise, that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth.”—Eph. 6: 2, 3.
10 The “Everlasting Father” of these children is Christ Jesus, and their real mother is the Lord’s capital organization. If you children have shown diligence and efficiency in the schools of this world, with stronger reasoning you must now be diligent to grow efficient in the school under The Theocratic Government.
41 You may soon meet with Abraham, Daniel, and other like faithful men, who shall be here as perfect men acting as governors of the new world. Eagerly seek their instruction and hang on their words of wisdom and grace, because they will lead you in the way of righteousness. Rest confidently in their leadership because they are the Lord’s princes. Referring to their coming as the righteous governors Jesus says: “Many shall come from the east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.” (Matt. 8:11) Sitting with them does not mean remaining inactive, but does mean to rest in complete confidence with them, knowing that they are right and, being with them, you are walking in the way of righteousness.
42 Your present-day duty is that of great weight and responsibility. Christ Jesus, the King, is here, fully prepared and equipped for the battle of Armageddon, and there His enemies shall bite the dust. Before he executes that judgment with great power, he commands that all who love him shall be actively engaged in proclaiming The Theocracy to the praise of Jehovah. (Ex. 9:16) If you hope to live, and you now love the “Everlasting Father”, the King, you will willingly and joyfully give heed to his words and obey him; as it is written: “Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holi
ness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.” (Ps. 110: 3) Are you willing to fully perform your duty? Hear then the commandment of the Lord set forth in the Bible at Revelation 22:17: “And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.”
42 Christ the King is that great Spirit, and his bride there mentioned is the body members of his government; and you are the prospective children of the King, and as such may live forever on the earth. “And the Spirit and the bride say, Come.” Come where? Come to and take your stand firmly on the side of The Theocratic Government. In the language of Jesus: “Flee to the mountains”; that is, to God and Christ Jesus, the great Theocrat and his King. If you hear and obey, then to you the King says: “Let him that heareth say, Come.” So “say” you to whom? Thus “say” to all who will hear the message concerning The Theocracy. That means that you must now be diligent and very active to make known the name of the King and of the great Theocracy and the Almighty Theocrat. For what purpose must that message now be delivered? Jesus answers that all who desire righteousness and life may now dome and put themselves under the protection of the Lord and find the way to life.
the government
44	The apostle, under inspiration from the Lord, long ago wrote these prophetic words': “Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.” (2 Pet. 3:13) The “new heavens” are The Theocratic Government, the invisible ruling power in the hands of Christ; and that government has come. The “new earth” is the new rule under the princes of the King of glory; and these princes are due to come any day. That is the righteous rule or government concerning which Jehovah caused to be written in his Bible: “When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice.” (Prov. 29:2) Such is a guarantee from Jehovah that the day of joy for the people is just ahead and that all who obey the law of The Theocratic Government shall rejoice forevermore.
45	That prophecy in the way of fulfillment is a flash of light from heaven now given when darkness covers the wicked rule of this world and gross darkness .has settled down upon all the nations. It is a beacon light of hope to all who love righteousness. As prospective children of the King it is now your great privilege and bounden duty to hasten to carry out the commandment of the Lord by carrying Jehovah’s message of hope to the peoples of the earth who will hear. By doing so willingly, confidently and with
266
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
out fear of demons or men, you will prove your love for the great Theocrat and his King in this day of judgment.—1 John 4:17,18.
46	The rule of the nations by present-day dictators holds out no hope whatsoever for humankind. All nations are now afflicted with war, famine, pestilence, sickness and death. It is your privilege and duty to now lift high the standard of The Theocracy and, as sweet singers of the new world, point the willing people to the way of safety and to life. Under the rule of The Theocracy there shall never be another war amongst men, because the Lord God has given His word that peace shall persist forevermore. (Isa. 9:7) The righteous King shall rule in equity, and every obedient one shall stand equal with every other one before the Lord. The people will unselfishly work together, and “they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks; nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid; for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it.”—Mic. 4: 3,4.
47	Famine and want will be unknown under The Theocratic Government. There shall be plenty for all and all shall eat their food in joy and contentment ; as it is written; “And in this mountain [Theo
cratic Government] shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. He will swallow up death in victory ; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth; for the Lord hath spoken it.”—Isa. 25: 6, 8.
48	The great and long-hoped-for Theocracy has come! Lift up your heads with joy. Go now and tell the glad tidings of The Theocratic Government to all who will hear. Those who do hear and obey will join in the everlasting praise of Jehovah now being sounded in the heavens; as is written in the prophecy of the Most High: “Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and flying fowl; Kings of the earth [Christ and his bride], and all people; princes, and all judges of the earth [the visible representatives on earth of The Theocratic Government] ; both young men and maidens; old men [survivors of Armageddon] and children [born of the ‘great multitude’ to fill the earth]: let them praise the name of the Lord [JEHOVAH] : for his name alone is excellent; his glory is above the earth and heaven. He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints, even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord.”—Ps. 148:10-14.
A KINGDOM PRAYER
WITH many prayer is merely a formality performed mainly in some religious building. With others it is a mockery. Some pray to be heard of men, over the radio or elsewhere in public. A few pray with a sincere desire to have the will of their Maker and God done concerning them. Such was evidently the reason why the disciples of the great Teacher Jesus requested him to teach them how to pray. If it was necessary for the apostles of Jesus to learn how to pray, surely it is necessary for all to learn how to pray intelligently who expect to have their prayers answered. Now what is the proper method for such to use in praying?
The answer to this should be found in the Scriptures, and nowhere else. Luke 11:1 records: “And it came to pass, that as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John [the Baptist] also taught his disciples.” Jesus answered : “After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.” (Matthew 6:9) It is observed that here Jesus directed that the prayer shall be addressed to Him “whose name alone is Jehovah”, and who shall be addressed as Father. (Ps. 83:18) This does not mean the fatherhood of God to all mankind, nor the brotherhood of all men, as some religious men have foolishly taught. Jehovah God is the Father to those only who have been begotten by his spirit to a heavenly inheritance and to those persons of good-will who stand in line to become his sons on earth under the Kingdom, and this after
such have made a full consecration of themselves to Him to do his will.
Of necessity this rule of prayer excludes all those who are not sons of God. The petitioner, after thus addressing Jehovah, acknowledges him as the great eternal God, that his name is sacred and shall be vindicated by his great Vindicator and King Christ Jesus, and that Jehovah the Father is worthy to receive all praise and adoration It shows marked reverence on the part of the petitioner for the great Jehovah. There is nothing about it that would warrant the conclusion that the petitioner may irreverently rush into the presence of the Almighty. How different this from what we often hear, to wit, some persons publicly praying and arrogantly telling God what he should do, as at present published in the news concerning war-torn Europe
“Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.” So continues the prayer. (Matt. 6:10) This expression means that the petitioner expresses himself in full harmony with God’s holy will, that he desires the coming of God’s Theocratic Government, that this kingdom may rule in the earth to the end that the will of God may be done in the earth and in heaven also. The petitioner recognizes the injustice, sickness and sorrow in the earth, and that the kingdom of God is the only relief for this; and thus he expresses his humble, sincere desire to see God’s will operating in the hearts of all men that live instead of that which now controls selfish men.
September 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
267
The Theocratic Government is "the kingdom of heaven” because it is the government of Jehovah God operated from heaven by his duly appointed representative, Christ Jesus the King. The Great Theocrat is Jehovah God, the Almighty One. The Theocracy is His government, which shall rule the world in righteousness to the praise and honor of Jehovah’s name and which shall fully vindicate his name before all creation. The King of that great Theocracy, or the one ruling directly under the command of the great Theocrat, is Christ Jesus. For his own name’s sake Jehovah God sent Jesus to earth. At the time of his baptism in the Jordan river Jesus was anointed as King by Jehovah. (See Matthew 3:13-17.) Then Jesus began his work of bearing witness to his Father’s name. His very first discourse, and each one thereafter, magnified Jehovah’s name. The first time he preached, following his anointing, he said: “The kingdom of heaven is at hand.” (Matt. 4:17) That was literally true for the reason that Jesus, the King, was then and there present speaking to those who heard him. For more than three years thereafter Jesus went about amongst the people, visiting them from house to house in the towns and villages, telling them the truth concerning his Father, Jehovah God, and of his kingdom. At all times he emphasized the paramount importance of the Kingdom, which is The Theocracy, and he specifically commanded his followers to always pray to Jehovah God: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth.”—Luke 11:2.
It is not an uncommon thing to hear religious clergymen say that the present kingdoms of this earth are here by divine right and that therefore they represent God. This is directly contrary to what Jesus said. When he stood before the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate, he declared: “My kingdom is not of this world.” (John 18:36) The reason why he then said this was that for a long period of time Satan had been the “god of this world”. So Jesus taught his disciples to keep their hearts in harmony with him, and to patiently wait and pray for the coming time when the kingdom of God should be established and when the will of God should be done here. It expresses a hope that in God’s due time his kingdom will be established for the benefit of obedient mankind.
The presumption is that the one who prays as above seeks to ascertain the will of God by studying his Word, and that from the Word of God he sees that in God’s due time Christ Jesus shall take charge of the affairs in earth, that he will bind Satan that he may deceive the nations no more, and that the Kingdom will establish peace and righteousness amongst men that they may be brought back into harmony with him. This has really been the desire of the true and faithful Christian throughout the age. He has properly not been praying to God to convert the world, because he knows from the Word of God that the religious systems will not get the world converted, but that “in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof”. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) Hence the Christian has been praying that God’s
will and purpose to vindicate His name by his kingdom should be carried out, and he has known from God’s Word that His purpose is to establish his kingdom amongst men. For this reason the true Christian is zealous in telling other people about that Theocratic Government, that they may have a hope of relief from present sufferings and learn about the blessings that will come through the ministration of that kingdom.
The Authorized Version, or King James Version, of Matthew 6:10 reads: “Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.” If by the word “heaven”, as here used, is meant the council of Jehovah, then, of course, God’s will has always been done in his court. But the word “heaven” cannot invariably be limited to the throne of Jehovah. There has been rebellion in the invisible as well as in the visible realm. When the time came to put the rebellious ones out, at the time Satan’s uninterrupted rule of the world ended, in A.D. 1914, then God sent forth the rod of power out of his capital organization Zion, with the order and authority to Christ Jesus the King to “rule ... in the midst of thine enemies”. (Ps. 110:2) Whichever construction we may place upon the words of the Master in the prayer he taught, it does not at all militate against the fact that Satan was in heaven and has now been expelled from heaven; or that this expulsion took place in or immediately after 1914.
As expressed at 2 Corinthians 4:3,4, Satan has for centuries been the “god of this world”, and his world is composed of the evil heavens and the evil earth, to wit, the invisible and the visible part. At 2 Peter 3:13 the apostle says: “Nevertheless we, according to his [God’s] promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.” It follows then that the old heaven is the Devil’s and is therefore evil, wicked. Revelation 12:1-12 shows that the Devil has now been cast out of heaven. The Lord Jesus has assumed his power and reigns. The next act is to expel Satan and his demons and his visible representatives from the earth; and then there will be a new heaven and earth. In it the Lord will establish righteousness.
The prayer continues: “Give us this day our daily bread.” (Matt. 6:11) This means both literal food and the things upon which it is necessary to feed the mind. The creature that has devoted himself to God by a consecration to do His will consists of mind, will, heart and physical organism. The organism is flesh and blood, like that of other men. This organism requires daily food for sustenance. It is entirely proper that the son should request these things of the Father, because it is the will of God that his children should ask and receive that which is for their good. The Christian properly does not ask that he be given houses and lands and factories and great quantities of money; but he asks his Father to provide his daily needs, and he asks in confidence, because Jehovah God has promised that his little ones shall not suffer for the things that are necessary.
It is therefore entirely proper for the child to daily ask his heavenly Father to provide for him food and raiment that may be necessary, to the end that he may serve the Lord. This, of course, implies that he will be thankful for what he does receive, and he will delight each day to express his thanksgiving both by word and by action, at meals and otherwise. The child of God grows as he feeds his mind upon the precious things of the divine purpose. He has
268
THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
a command from the Lord to be not conformed to this world, but to be transformed by the renewing of the mind. (Rom.
12: 2) This means that the child of God will study the Bible, God’s Word; and as he studies he will ask the heavenly Father to feed him upon the precious things thereof that in due time he may have a vision or a clearer understanding of His great truths. In this behalf, to aid all persons of good-will in their fight against the iniquity of today, an appropriate Scripture text is selected from the Bible for each and every day of the year and in the Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses are published appropriate and consistent comments on each daily text. By considering the text and comments at the beginning of each day the consecrated ones are aided to meet the perplexing problems that daily arise and thereby they are fed spiritual food.
Every true child of God has experienced this blessed privilege. As he studies the Lord’s Word, confidently trusting in him, the Lord leads him into wider fields of understanding and fulfills to him his precious promise (Prov. 4:18): “The path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” The Lord Jesus said concerning the creature that lives: “Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.” (Luke 4:4) The Christian, therefore, properly will be asking for the things needful for his development as a Christian in harmony with God’s will.
Jesus then proceeds in the model prayer thus: ‘And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.’ (Matt. 6:12) This is a searching test for the Christian. If someone has done him an injury and he feels resentment and refuses to forgive such a one who repents, he cannot conscientiously approach Jehovah God in prayer and ask to be forgiven. This teaches the Christian to be merciful and kind and to look upon the afflictions of his fellow creatures with sympathy and to be willing to forgive whenever forgiveness is asked. If we are not willing to thus forgive we cannot expect our Lord to forgive us. We have to come to the Lord frequently for forgiveness, acknowledging our shortcomings.
The apostle Peter asked Jesus how often he should forgive an offender. In Matthew 18: 21, 22 it is written: “Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times; but, Until seventy times seven.” This really means that we should never refuse to forgive an offender where that offender asks for forgiveness. Our Lord and Master stands as the Advocate of the Christian; and while this is no warrant for a Christian to do a wrong, if he does commit a wrong he has the privilege of going to God in prayer and asking help. (1 John 2:1, 2) He should cultivate the disposition of doing the same toward his fellow creatures.
The prayer continues: “And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.” The King James Version does not here give a clear rendering, for God does not lead anyone into temptation. (Jas. 1:13) Rotherham’s emphatic translation reads: “And bring us not into temptation, but rescue us from the evil one.” The Emphatic Diaglott Version reads: “And abandon us not to trial, but preserve us from evil.” The American Revised Version reads: “But deliver us from the evil one.”
It is observed that when the Lord Jesus had made a consecration to do God’s will and symbolized that consecration by water baptism and thereafter spent forty days in the wilderness, then the Devil was permitted to tempt him. (Luke 4:1-4) He was therefore put to a test as to whether or not he would prove his loyalty and faithfulness to God under the test. He withstood the test and proved his faithfulness and maintained his integrity toward Jehovah God. In 1 Peter 2:21 the apostle tells us: “For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.” In corroboration of this the apostle Paul declares: “For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.” (Heb. 12:6,7) Chastisement here means disciplining or test. The test must come to each one that he may have the opportunity to prove his faithfulness to God.
Concerning those who are faithful and maintain their integrity under the test it is written, at James 1:12: “Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.” God does not tempt any man, but he permits the test to be put before man; and the Christian is to pray that the Lord God will not abandon him in that test, but that he will sustain him; and he may have faith and confidence that the Lord God will deliver him. This is really a time of temptation. Concerning the Christian’s privilege in time of temptation the apostle writes: “Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.”—Heb. 4:14-16.
The further words of Matthew 6:13 found in the King James Version, to wit, “For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever,” are still repeated in public and private religious functions; but these words are not found in the older manuscripts of the Bible text and hence do not appear in the modern revised versions. Those words are an interpolation; and evidently this interpolation was made at the instigation of Satan to aid his emissaries to foist upon the people the thought that the kingdoms of this earth belong to God. It is inconsistent with the first part of the prayer: “Thy kingdom come.” However, the time has come when the Lord has assumed his power and begun his reign. Still it is proper for the Christian to continue praying “Thy kingdom come” until Satan is ousted completely and God’s will is done in the earth.
Jesus appreciated the privilege and value of prayer. The record in the Scriptures tells of his repeatedly going into a secret place to pray, and sometimes all night. His disciples saw the importance of praying aright, and asked him to teach them to pray. He did teach them, and the instruction which he gave them applies with equal force to all his followers. The Christian should daily keep near the Lord, that the way of communication by prayer may always be open between him and his Father, through the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Christians’ Head, Redeemer and King.
IS RELIGION HOLY?
IN CERTAIN circles in “Christendom” the expressions are often publicly made, such as “our holy religion”, “his holiness,” “the holy father,” and the like. At the same time the laws of the nations of “Christendom” provide severe punishment for those who are guilty of lewd, unchaste, indecent conversation or conduct in the presence of others or with one another, and for acts that result in injury to another; and there are millions of people who diligently strive to live up to the accepted moral standard. They are kind and considerate with others; they are chaste in their relationship to the opposite sex; they observe the laws of the land; they diligently shun evil and try to do good, and are therefore such as are generally called “nature’s noblemen”. Many believe that such a course of conduct guarantees for them eternal happiness in heaven. However, many of the world who make no pretense of being Christians may come nearer to keeping this standard than do some who profess to be consecrated Christians.
If every one kept that standard perfectly it would not constitute holiness unto the Lord, within the meaning of the Holy Scriptures. Those who have weighed the matter carefully realize it is practically impossible for a man to be perfect in thought, word and deed; and for this reason many have been deterred from attempting to be Christians; and many Christians, having a misunderstanding of the matter due to religion, have become discouraged. Some will say, however that what the Lord requires of a man is that he must be perfect in intention. To this the answer must be that many upright, noble people of the world habitually intend to do right and not to do wrong Something more than merely a good intent is required by the One who says: “Be ye holy; for I am holy.”—1 Peter 1:16.
Holiness is required of those who shall see the Lord. The admonition at Hebrews 12:14 is: “Follow . . . holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.” Holiness, within the meaning of the Scriptures, means an unreserved consecration, absolute dedication and continued unselfish devotion of oneself to God. It means to be set apart to the worship and service of God. It means to be completely reserved from profane or common use. Holiness means to be whole, unimpaired and sound from every wrongful affection. It means an unselfish zeal toward God as His true and faithful servant. The opposite of the term “holy” is “impure; fractional; divided or impaired”. When we speak of “the whole solar system” we mean the entire, complete solar system, not a part of it. Likewise, “holiness unto the Lord” means to be wholly, completely and absolutely devoted to the Lord God, in the faithful performance of duty and of obligation such as are laid upon the one who becomes holy.
Is religion holy? Is it not true that during the greater portion of the so-called “Christian era” the most of those who professed to be Christians but who were in fact religionists have thought it entirely proper and in fact a religious duty for them to participate in politics; to seek office and hold office in the various branches of the worldly governments; and to participate in temperance organizations, and to promote like reforms of the world? Is it not also true that almost all such professed Christians have honestly believed that what is required of them in order to be holy
is for them to be morally pure, chaste, virtuous, honest; not to rob, steal or commit other crimes; and at the same time to grow patient, kind, pious and read religious literature, or even the Bible ? Is it not true that this is what many have called “character development”, and have not many of them believed they could perfect a “character” while in the flesh ? And have not many others, having such a religious conception of holiness, become discouraged because they could not reach the perfect standard ?
Thus the great deceiver, Satan, has deceived many, causing some to be exalted in mind and to assume an attitude of being “holier than thou” (Isa. 65:5), while others have fallen away because of discouragement. Thus the adversary has turned the faces of these away from the perfect pattern and caused them to look to themselves, some going to one extreme and some to another extreme. The difficulty all along has been that they did not understand their duty and obligation unto God, nor the necessity of keeping away from all entanglements laid for them by the adversary.
Jehovah God is holy because all his ways are right. (Ps. 18: 30) The Lord Jesus is holy because he has always been in harmony with Jehovah God, and his ways have therefore always been right. Everything that is out of harmony with God is unholy. Satan and his organization made up of religion, commerce and politics are not only out of harmony with God but in opposition to God; therefore they are unholy. There can be no partnership or fellowship between holiness and unholiness. Jesus plainly said: “No [man] can serve two masters.” (Luke 16:13) No one can devote part of himself to God and the remainder to Satan’s organization. The Christian can have no sympathy with the Devil’s organization, or any part thereof.
Cardinal Gibbons, in his book The Faith of Our Fathers, page 38, writes: “In the Creed framed in the first Ecumenical Council of Nicaea, in the year 325, we find these words: T believe in the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.’ ” Credulous persons have been induced to believe that the Roman Catholic organization is the Church of God, and for that reason they have submitted themselves to the organization which is ruled by the Catholic Hierarchy.
The office and mission of the true church of God under Christ Jesus, compared with that of the Roman Catholic organization, show that the two take exactly opposite courses. The Roman Catholic organization is now and for centuries has been engaged in religion, politics and commerce for gain, and is therefore unholy and the enemy of God and of all men. In the Scriptures a “tree” is used as a symbol of a creature or of an organization composed of creatures, and the fruits of that tree symbolically stand for what such creature or organization holds before the people as spiritual food for their sustenance and growth. Speaking of the same, at Matthew 7:18-23, Jesus said: “A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. . . . Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.”
God’s kingdom shall in time rule in righteousness and minister blessings to faithful people. The kingdom of God 269
270
5He WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
has nothing that is commercial, and has nothing in common with the harsh, cruel and wicked system that rules the world now and which present rule is under the Devil and his representatives. Concerning this world Jesus said: “My kingdom is not of this world.” “The prince of this world [Satan] cometh, and hath nothing in me.”—John 18:36; 14:30.
To the religionists of his time that claimed to be holy but opposed the Kingdom message Jesus addressed himself, and to them and also to religionists of the present time he says: “The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.” (Matt. 21:43) Never at any time has the Roman Catholic church organization brought to the people the fruit or message of God’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, but, on the contrary, that organization has at all times co-operated with politicians, militarists, commercial giants, and other gangsters to rule and control the nations of the earth. Instead of bearing before the people the fruits of God’s written Word, which sustain the spiritually hungry ones, the Catholic organization has bitterly opposed the Kingdom or Theocracy under Christ. Every religious organization on the earth indulges in politics and in commerce, more or less, and contrary to God’s will, and all these organizations ill-treat and persecute Jehovah’s witnesses who bear the message or fruits of and concerning The Theocracy or kingdom of God before the people.
When one becomes a Christian he may think for a time that it is right and proper for him to participate in and pursue a course similar to that of the so-called “respectable” part of the world. But he cannot do this and be holy. He must leave the religion, the politics, the reformations, the temperance organizations and every similar thing and become absolutely and completely dedicated to the Lord, and use his faculties with which he is endowed to the Lord’s glory and the advancement of the interests of His Theocratic Government. In no other way can he become holy. The apostle Paul confirms this when he says: “Be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God.”—Rom. 12: 2.
The Devil has led some to believe that sanctimoniousness is holiness or saintliness. It is really a hypocritical devoutness. A hypocrite may look pious and speak piously, be quiet and submissive in the presence of others, and be regarded by them as very saintly; but he does not deceive the Lord. What is really required of us is, as far as possible, to live up to the highest standard of purity and righteousness and also to be dedicated to the Lord, absolutely and completely using our faculties to the Lord’s glory and refusing to make any compromise with the world, the Devil’s organization. The true sentiment of the Christian’s heart is thus expressed: “For thou art great, and doest wondrous things; thou art God alone. Teach me thy way, 0 Lord; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name.” “Lead me in the way everlasting.”—Pss. 86:10,11; 139: 24.
He who thus earnestly prays will diligently seek to know the Lord’s way and will refuse to conform himself to the way of the Devil’s organization. The way of the world at its best is a false way. Its good things the Christians desired before they became God’s children. Now they must have no
sympathy therewith. As stated at Psalm 119:104: “Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way.” To walk in the right way the affections of a Christian cannot be divided between the Lord’s organization and something that is included in the Devil’s organization.
“As he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.” (1 Pet. 1:15) To become holy the Christian must set his affections on things above and not on things in the earth or Satan’s visible organization on earth. (Col. 3:2) To be holy the child of God must be “conformed to the image” of God’s holy Son, Christ Jesus. (Rom. 8:29) The word “image” here means likeness or resemblance. The Lord Jesus withstood the temptations of Satan and remained firm and steadfast in his devotion to God. (Matt. 4:1-11) The world is the Devil’s organization. The Christian is in the world. Jesus overcame the world by being faithful to his Father. He said to his followers: “In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.”—John 16: 33.
In the text “Be ye holy in all manner of conversation” the word “conversation” means course of action or conduct. (Emphatic Diaglott translation) Our course of action or conduct, therefore, must be in harmony with God’s organization and contrary to the Devil’s organization. Thus the Christian must grow up into Christ in all things.-Eph. 4:15.
The apostles were holy, because they were absolutely and completely devoted to God. The apostle Paul declared he was determined to know nothing except Jesus Christ, and him crucified for maintaining his integrity toward God in vindication of His name. (1 Cor. 2: 2) Again Paul said: “Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” (Phil. 3:13,14) When he was known as Saul of Tarsus he was a man of affairs in the world, but when he became Paul the Christian he desired them no more. The same was true with the apostle Peter and with all others that have followed in the footsteps of Jesus and have proved faithful.
At Ephesians 2:19-22 the apostle says: “Ye . . . are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; in whom all the building, fitly framed together, groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the spirit.” This growing up into Christ Jesus means that we must be wholly dedicated and devoted to God and his righteous cause. The Lord God is building a habitation for himself, which is his capital organization Zion, and those of Zion can have no sympathy or fellowship with the Devil’s organization. Is it not apparent, then, that to be holy means to be unreservedly on God’s side?
At 2 Corinthians 7:1 the apostle further says: “Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God." The adversary has deceived many into believing that all that is required by this text is to clean up oneself from filthy habits of the flesh and filthy thoughts and words. That must be done, of course; yet the
September 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
271
“noble” people of the world clean themselves up from filthiness of the flesh, filthiness of the mind and filthiness of speech and conduct. Note therefore that the apostle goes farther and says: “Perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” This means an absolute and complete separation of oneself from everything that has to do with the Devil’s organization, and to be completely and absolutely devoted to God.
We must be “in the world”, of course; but we must be fearless and faithful witnesses of Jehovah God while in the world. We must be completely and unreservedly devoted to God, and the inducing cause for so being must be our love for God. About this there can be no doubt; because at Ephesians 1: 4 it is written: “According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love." This does not mean merely perfection in intention. A man may deceive himself by saying, “I intend to be faithful to the Lord, I intend to be a true Christian,” and yet hide his light under a bushel or speak softly concerning the Devil’s organization for fear he might offend someone; and thus fail or refuse to be a true witness for the Lord God.
If a child of God loves his Father he will keep God’s commandments and keep them joyfully. That rule is stated at 1 John 5: 3. No one can keep the commandments of God at this time without engaging in the service as a witness for Jehovah. The Watch Tower has been severely criticized by some for urging active service upon those who have entered into a covenant with God to do His will. It is apparent that such criticism comes either from those who are “holier than thou” or from religionists who have sympathy with the Devil’s organization. The Watch Tower stresses service because of its great importance to the Christian at this time. One of Jehovah’s commandments to his children is: “Ye are my witnesses, saith the Loro [Jehovah], that I am God.” (Isa. 43:12) There are no other witnesses for Jehovah God on earth than those in a covenant with Him to serve him. God expects those who are consecrated to him to dedicate themselves to his service and to serve joyfully. It is the solemn duty of every Christian to point out these things to his brethren.—Rom. 12:1.
In corroboration of the foregoing, the apostle J ude says: “But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the holy [spirit], keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.” (Jude 20, 21) Our “most holy faith” is complete confidence in the divine purpose of Jehovah to vindicate his name by means of his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and to deliver and bless faithful humankind. We know from physical facts and Scripture that that kingdom is at hand and that the Devil’s time is short until he is destroyed at the battle of Armageddon and that he is striving to destroy the remnant of the Seed of God’s promise and their faithful earthly companions, and that our only safety from his wiles or demonism is to abide in or under Jehovah’s capital organization and keep His commandments. (Rev. 12:12,17) Only those who love the Lord God and prove their love for him by maintaining their integrity toward Him are holy in his sight.
In Hebrews, the eleventh chapter, a long list of faithful men of old is given. It includes the holy prophets, which
“holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy [spirit]”. (2 Pet. 1:21) These men were counted holy by the Lord, not because they were perfect in the flesh, not because they had “developed a character”, but because of their unswerving and absolute devotion to God. These are set forth as examples to the Christian today. “Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.” (Jas. 5:10,11) The Bible records stern truths about these men and women; and, judged by the false standard that the Devil holds up by his representatives, they could never be counted holy. Amongst these was David. Although he had weaknesses, yet God calls him “a man after mine own heart”. And why? Because there never was any question about David’s devotion to God.—Acts 13: 22, 23.
God’s course is one of steadfastness in righteousness, and always was and always will be. Remember that the apostle says that ‘without holiness no man can see God’. The holy ones, those who shall see God, will be those who love him and who are faithful to his Theocratic cause “0 love the Lord, all ye his saints; for the Lord preserveth the faithful.” (Ps. 31:23) That rule applies today both to the faithful remnant and to their faithful earthly companions.
At this time God has furnished such faithful ones with a clearer vision of the adversary’s organization than ever before, and He shows us our privilege of being on His side, the side of The Theocratic Government. If at one time the Christian in ignorance desired certain things of the Devil’s organization which appeared to be good, such things as religion or demonism, no longer shall these be desired. Now will every child of God be holy even as Jehovah God is holy. Such one will be counted holy if prompted by love, which is the perfect expression of unselfishness. All such devote themselves faithfully and earnestly to the cause of Jehovah God as his true and faithful witnesses.
Holiness is not merely a standard which the mind can reach up to and endorse, but it must be attained. Absolute holiness, within the meaning of the Scriptures, must be attained by the overcoming Christian on this side of Armageddon if he would be preserved by the Lord from destruction during that decisive battle between God’s organization and the Devil’s organization. Holiness means that the Christian must be pure in his thoughts, words and actions, so far as that is possible with his imperfect organism; but it means much more than this. It means a complete and absolute devotion to God’s cause and Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and this prompted by love. It means the faithful performance of the Christian’s covenant as a witness for Jehovah. A Christian can now, before Armageddon, refuse to sympathize with or support in any way the Devil’s organization which shall be completely destroyed at Armageddon. The Christian can devote every faculty that he has to the support of and to the witness for God’s organization. Thus doing, he will attain to the standard of holiness. Continuing in this attitude and holding fast his integrity faithfully unto the end, he shall have a part in the vindication of the holy name of Jehovah God.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
GLIMPSES OF UNOCCUPIED FRANCE
“Last week we had a wonderful evening here with a pioneer publisher from France, telling us of the marvelous protection the Lord gave his children on different occasions. Persons of good-will are coming out there more than before. Said pioneer living in Lyon, unoccupied France, had been charged with having organized meetings; which was not true. He had just visited some friends, but unfortunately these friends were arrested and forced to admit that he had conducted a meeting; which was not the case. Five signed a document to this effect; one refused and was beaten. When his trial came he defended himself with the Bible. First the Attorney General was furious and much against him. Then the pioneer said: ‘First I was charged with being under German influence. Today I am charged with being under English influence. Tomorrow you may accuse me of something else; and just now you charged me with being a prophet 1’ Then he gave a fine witness for Jehovah and His kingdom. The Attorney General was quite changed then and said he did not want to start a religious persecution of this man. The pronouncing of the judgment was delayed eight days, and when it came out he was acquitted and the judge reproached the five friends very hard for having signed a document only because of being forced, and said that they must be punished for that—for giving in! (How like Jeremiah and Urijah!—Jeremiah 26:20-24) They were sentenced at 50 francs each. Another who had not signed was acquitted as well. Isn't this like an indication from the Lord that we must do right? There are many other fine things which, of course, cannot all be written, but a careful watcher sees how bountifully Jehovah rewards in each and every case the full faith of his children. Over there, of course, freedom is gone completely, together with many of the commodities of life; potatoes are missing, and when once in a while they can get a kilo for a family they have to pay 40 francs for it. Everything is rationed (as is the case with almost all of the more valuable things here in Switzerland) ; you certainly know this from the journals. But until now we are cared for properly and especially with the farms we have. We got on fine!”
IN RELIGION-HIDDEN LOUISIANA
“Kingdom publisher, witnessing to a venerable old Frenchman, a lifelong Catholic: ‘What do you think of The Watchtower and other Kingdom literature?’ Frenchman : ‘Ah! you witnesses for God make the Catholic church do something it never do before, give the Bible to the people.’ During street-witnessing at Franklinton, placing Consolation on ‘Hitler’s Religion’, a man took a copy of the magazine and eyed the publisher grimly and suspiciously : ‘What is your name and address?’ Straight to the courthouse he went with the magazine. Back he came in fifteen minutes and said to the publisher: Tjet’s go get a Coca Cola.’ Time being up for street work, the publisher gladly accepted the offer for cooling refreshment. Said the man: T am the commander of the American Legion here. We carefully investigate everything bearing Hitler’s name. Your work is fine. Keep it up. Put out plenty of that here. I fought with the American army in the World War, trained with the British army four years, and we are determined that nothing of
Hitlerism shall get ahold in this area. Good-bye, and best luck to you in your work.’ This bears out the statement by Judge Rutherford in Uncovers Fifth Column that there is an element in the American Legion that is sincere and whose intentions are to preserve liberty in this land. The Catholic Hierarchy has not put its collar on every Legionnaire.”
FROM PIONEER HOME NO. S, LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND
“Last Friday night our little boy had been put to bed at the usual time and was fast asleep when the raid started. As there appeared to be no immediate danger, we left him there; but suddenly the thought struck us that it would be wise to take precaution and bring him down to the living room. We had thus acted only but a very short time when a shower of incendiaries came down. On running upstairs, to our surprise we found one was fiercely burning at the foot of the boy’s bed, which quickly set the latter on fire The bed was eventually thrown through the window and the bomb extinguished. His life was thereby saved. It surely was a miracle! The adjoining room was also penetrated by two incendiaries; these also were quickly brought under control. All together, total damage sustained is about £8. All around us, for six consecutive nights, hundreds of bombs of the largest caliber and land mines have descended on their deadly mission, bringing terror and destruction to thousands of people and wiping out at least half of the homes of the people in our Unit’s territory, together with the major portion of the business and industrial premises. The sights here are too ghastly and terrible to adequately describe. Within 70 to 100 yards of this pioneer home many houses have been smashed and many killed. It has been a most nerve-racking experience, but, by the Lord’s grace, we have held up our heads with a smile of confidence in the power and care of our God, whose mighty power can well thwart the combined demoniacal onslaught that would ordinarily frighten the hardest of humans. Although up until 4: 30 a.m. and 5 a.m., yet after a few hours of sleep we have risen, eaten and proceeded with the Theocratic witness, and many are the joyful and interesting experiences we have had during these terrible days. We have prepared ourselves for the worst, fully believing that whatever happens to our dwellings and earthly possessions, if we have taken proper steps to safeguard such, the Lord has his wise reasons tor allowing certain things to happen to his own people. We are determined, by His grace, to press on with all our might in the ‘strange work’ despite the many difficulties confronting us just now.”
THEOCRATIC DETERMINATION
“The following Resolution was passed by the Southend (England) company of Jehovah’s witnesses this evening. At their request I have the privilege to forward it to you. ‘This company wishes to register its appreciation of the Society’s most encouraging letter of April 22 last and its unanimous resolve to individually and unitedly endeavor to serve Jehovah with greater zeal and activity in bold and sustained obedience to all organization instructions, until forcibly compelled to desist, fearless of all enemies, visible and invisible, by Jehovah’s gracious aid.’ The fervency with which the Resolution was put and carried persuades that it will be perseveringly fulfilled.”
272
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and aH people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British_________________..... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian .......  _......40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W , Australia
South Afncan ________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society tn every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have Tne Watchtower tree upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“CHILDREN”
Announced and released Sunday morning, August 10, at the Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in St. Louis, Mo., and at the conclusion of the climax speech on “Children of The King”, the new book Children won instant acclaim from the thousands assembled. Written by Judge Rutherford, Children bids fair, as shown by its initial reception at St. Louis, to be his most popular book, and with good reason. It is written in narrative and conversational style, presenting interestingly and simply the latest Bible truths concerning the glorious hope early to be realized by the persons of good-will today living. Children is bound in sky-blue cloth, with an embossed, gold-stamped cover design that is unusual. The text within is adorned with frequent color illustrations, and is supplemented with an index of subjects. You will prize the author’s edition, as it contains the facsimile of a special letter in the author’s own hand and addressed “To the Children of the King”. You may obtain it on a contribution of 50c a copy, mailed prepaid to you. This edition is limited.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 19: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 1), If 1-18 inclusive, The Watchtower September 15, 1941. Week of October 26: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 1), fl 19-40 inclusive, The Watchtower September 15, 1941.
“COMFORT ALL THAT MOURN”
This new booklet was released at the conclusion of the publicaddress by Judge Rutherford at the recent Theocratic Assemble at St. Louis, on the subj'ect “Comfort All That Mourn”, and contains the full text of that speech as given and also the “message of comfort” adopted by that vast assembly. It is the first publication to correctly identify “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” foretold m Daniel 11. The booklet contains 32 pages and is self-covered, the front cover bearing the title “Comfort All That Mourn” and with a rectangular sign above it bearing the fateful words “End of Axis Powers”. You may now obtain the booklet at 5c a copy, mailed to you postpaid.
“JEHOVAH’S SERVANTS DEFENDED”
The release of this valuable booklet was a feature of the St. Louis Assembly this past summer. The Assembly received it with great appreciation and thankfulness, and it will be received in like manner by all who are interested in, if not also participating in, the fight which Jehovah’s covenant people are putting up in the exercise of the God-given and Constitutionally guaranteed freedoms, to wit, of assembly apd of publication and of open speech in the worship of Almighty God and in proclaiming the joyful news of his Theocratic Government. In this booklet you will find the expressed rulings of the highest courts of the United States (Continued on page 288)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	September 15, 1941	No. 18
DEMON RULE ENDING
PART 1
"The END shall be at the time appointed.’’—Dan. 11:27.
TEHOVAH has suffered Satan, the chief of deI mons, together with his associates, to exercise
J ruling power over the nations for many centuries, but the end of that rule must come some time. Responding to the challenge of the chief of demons, Jehovah long ago said: ‘For this cause have I permitted thee to remain; for to show thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.’ (Ex. 9:16, Leeser) It must be concluded that it was then that God appointed the time for the end of Satanic rule; for “known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world”. (Acts 15:18) By his prophets Jehovah has frequently told of the “time of the end” and what shall take place at that time. By his prophet Daniel the Almighty says: “The END shall be at the time appointed.” Those words are a guarantee from Jehovah that the end of the rule of the world by the demons shall come, and that at the time he has appointed. Nothing can change that time.
2 Daniel was in a covenant with Jehovah God and was faithful to that covenant. Jehovah permitted him to be carried away as a prisoner into Babylon, where God used him for His own good purpose. Daniel was a faithful prophet and witness for Jehovah. He is included among the list of faithful witnesses described by the apostle at the eleventh chapter of Hebrews, where he is referred to as one “who through faith . . . stopped the mouths of lions”. (Heb. 11:33) Daniel is certain to have a “better resurrection” and to be one of the “princes in all the earth”. (Heb. 11:35; Ps. 45:16) He finished his course as a faithful servant and prophet of God, and died like other men and went to rest in the grave, where there is no knowledge nor device, and there to remain until God’s due time to awaken him out of death. The time of his resurrection may be any day now, when he, as one of earth’s governors, shall appear on the earth and assume his divinely appointed office. About this there can be no doubt, because God said to Daniel when he had completed prophesying: “But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words and seal the book, even to the time of the end; many
276
shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.” —Dan. 12: 4,13.
8 Many students of divine prophecy have sought to understand the prophecy of Daniel; but the rule concerning the understanding of prophecy is undoubtedly this: That prophecy cannot be understood by human creatures until it is in course of fulfillment or has been fulfilled. The physical facts, which God permits to come to pass, we may put along beside prophecy, and when they fit we may know that is evidence of the fulfillment. God told Daniel that the full understanding of prophecy would be only at “the time of the end”.—Dan. 12: 8, 9.
4 It is first necessary, then, to ascertain what is meant by “the time of the end”. Since time never ends, the words “the time of the end” must mean a time when that which opposes Almighty God, and continues to do so without interruption or hindrance from God, comes to an end; and that is when the divine hindrance of the wicked rule begins. There are two positive lines of Scriptural proof showing “the time of the end” began in A.D. 1914. Just how long thereafter the final end comes is not revealed to creatures up to the present time. No one has authority to attempt to say just what day or hour the final end arrives.—Matt. 24: 42.
5 Jehovah God made known his purpose to create and set up a Theocratic government by the Messiah, whom he describes as “the seed of Abraham”, and which seed is The Christ. (Gal. 4:28-31) Jehovah had a typical Theocracy, which began when he delivered the natural descendants of Abraham from the land of Egypt. That typical Theocracy was bitterly opposed then and thereafter by the chief of demons, Satan, and his associate demons and agents. The great issue which the Devil had raised was world domination. The descendants of Abraham, that is to say, the Israelites, the typical people of God, were taken into a covenant. That people became unfaithful to their covenant, and in the year 606 B.C. God permitted that typical Theocracy by Zedekiah, who
276
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
was king, to be overthrown. (Ezek. 21: 24-27) There Satan became the “god”, or invisible ruler, of the world, because then and thereafter no nation was in a covenant with Jehovah. There “the times of the Gentiles [that is to say, people not in a covenant with God]” began. God there fixed the period of the Gentile times at 2,520 years, and which period of time came to an end in A.D. 1914. (Luke 21: 24; Dan. 4:16,23,25,32) The invisible rule by Satan continued throughout that period of time by the sufferance of Jehovah and until the enthronement of Christ Jesus, the Messiah, which enthronement took place in A. D. 1914. (Ps. 2:6) The facts are fully supported by the prophecy uttered by Jesus and recorded at Matthew 24 and Luke 21. It was at that time, A.D. 1914, that Jehovah sent forth his anointed One, the King of The Theocracy, to rule while the enemy, Satan, was still holding on to and exercising his power. (Ps. 110:1, 2) That date therefore marks the end of Satan’s rule of the world without hindrance or interruption. Therefore it marks “the time of the end”, that is to say, the time beginning when Christ Jesus began his work of ousting the enemy Satan. The beginning of “the time of the end” is therefore definitely fixed by the Lord’s Word. From that time forward the name of Jehovah and his kingdom must be proclaimed as a witness to the nations of earth, and when that is done then shall the final end come (Matt. 24:14), and with the world’s greatest tribulation, which is “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”, resulting in the complete destruction of Satan’s rule and power and putting out all of his agencies and associates. (Matt. 24:21; Rev. 16:14) The length of “the time of the end” is not stated in the Scriptures, but the beginning of “the time of the end” is fully and definitely stated. (See Book Prophecy, chapter 6.) Be it noted that there is a clear distinction between “the time of the end” and the final end of the rule by demons. Both are fixed by the Lord and, of course, both are well known by him, but the latter date is not revealed yet to man. By the circumstances and physical facts now observed the fulfillment of the prophecy strongly indicates that the final end is very near. The promise to Daniel was that the understanding of the prophecy would be impossible “until the time of the end” {Rotherham,'} ; and therefore the prophecy could not be understood until after the coming of the Lord Jesus in 1914. The fact that the Lord now begins to reveal the meaning of this prophecy to his people is strong circumstantial proof that Daniel may be expected soon to return to the earth.
• That part of Daniel’s prophecy set forth at chapter eleven of the Bible record is of peculiar interest to the people of Jehovah at the present time, because it deals with two separate wings of Satan’s organiza
tion, both of which oppose The Theocracy. It also makes clear that the day of deliverance is near. The prophecy of the eleventh chapter of Daniel was given to him by the Lord about 534 B.C., at which time the angel of Jehovah said to Daniel: “Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days; for yet [after that time begins] the vision [shall be] for many days.” (Dan. 10:14) The prophecy of the eleventh chapter of Daniel was then delivered to Daniel, which he states that he did not understand. (Dan. 12:8) Daniel therefore pictured or represented God’s faithful people who are on the earth at and during “the time of the end”, that is to say, in the “latter days”; hence it is Jehovah’s witnesses that are given the privilege of understanding the prophecy at the present time.
' The prophecy at Daniel the eleventh chapter was delivered “in the third year of Cyrus king of Persia”. (Dan. 10:1) That was two years after the decree of Cyrus, the king, was made and entered directing the Jewish captives to go free from restraint from Babylon and to return to Jerusalem to there build Jehovah’s temple. Cyrus was there used in picture as a type of Christ Jesus. To correspond with that decree issued by the king of Persia, Christ Jesus, the Greater Cyrus, began his reign in full authority in 1914, and thereafter in 1918 came to the temple of Jehovah and gathered unto himself his faithful servants and followers to the temple: “Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut; I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways; he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts.”—Isa. 45:1,13.
’ Christ Jesus has builded the temple of Jehovah and has released the faithful servants of God (pictured by Daniel), to wit: Jehovah’s witnesses, “the remnant,” releasing them from modern-day Babylon, that is, Satan’s organization, and sets them free to go forth and have part in the temple work of the Most High; and therefore now is the due time for God to reveal to his faithful people the meaning of the prophecy under consideration. That being true, the time for Daniel’s resurrection and return to his place, or “lot”, on the earth as one of the princes of the earth is very near. The faithful followers of Christ Jesus now on the earth may look forward with confidence to seeing Daniel among them almost any time.
* Daniel’s prophecy, recorded at the eleventh chapter, from verses one to twenty-two, seems to refer to sequence of events that came to pass prior to the crucifixion of Christ Jesus, and probably the record
September 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
277
of that part of the prophecy was the means employed by the Lord to conceal the meaning of the latter part until his due time to make it known. Verse twenty-two of that eleventh chapter of the prophecy, to wit, “And with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from before him, and shall be broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant,” appears to mark the crossing over of the prophecy from the time before Christ to the period Anno Domini, or period after Christ. It foretells the violent death of “the prince of the covenant”, that is, Christ Jesus, who was in a covenant with Jehovah for the great Theocratic Government. (Luke 22:29,30) Christ Jesus, “The prince of the kings,” was killed by the representatives of the Roman power, being crucified at the instigation of religious leaders of the Jews. There “the prince of the covenant” was broken.
10	At verse twenty-seven, of chapter eleven, is the beginning of the prophecy relating to modern times, that is, since the coming of the Lord Jesus in power and glory to the temple. It now appears to be Jehovah’s time for his covenant people to receive from the Lord an understanding of the prophecy, and so with full confidence in Jehovah and his King they reverently and joyfully approach the examination of the prophecy.
PROMINENT
11	The prophecy places emphasis on two prominent powers, to wit, “the king of the south” and “the king of the north”. Those kings are not two men, but are two visible ruling powers in the world, in which men play a part but in which individuals or men are not the chief things or part. The word “king” is a symbol which stands for the power that rules. As an illustration, the king of the nation, that is, the individual with that title, usually is a symbol of a government; whereas the real directing power of the kingdom or government is composed of a number of men. Be it noted that both “the king of the south” and “the king of the north” are engaged in actions that are unrighteous and wicked, and hence they could not represent Jehovah and Christ or any part of The Theocracy. On the contrary, they are both opposed to The Theocracy. They are rival powers in this world, both seeking world domination; and since the Scriptures make it clear that ‘the whole world lieth in the wicked one’, it follows that both “the king of the south” and “the king of the north” are controlled by the demons, of which Satan the Devil is the chief. Both of those kings or ruling powers are instruments of Satan, created and organized by him to blind the people to the truth and to turn them away from Jehovah God and Christ his King. The identification of those two world ruling-powers, designated as “kings”, is necessarily essential to an understanding of the prophecy. Their identification is named below, and evidence is
submitted in support thereof, which evidence embraces the language of the prophecy and the physical facts which have come to pass, and which are now well known. They fit the prophecy, and hence can be confidently taken as a fulfillment thereof.
IDENTIFICATION
12	“The king of the north,” is that satanic ruling power, created and organized by Satan, who declared that he would sit in authority “in the sides of the north” as a rival of and in defiance of the Almighty God Jehovah (Isa. 14:13,14); and which ruling power over humankind is totalitarian and dictatorial, and which rules and claims the right to rule the nations of the earth. It is violently opposed to The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and opposes and persecutes and wickedly ill-treats those who advocate and proclaim the Theocratic rule. Religion and politics are the chief or prominent visible elements of “the king of the north”. Religion is demonism, and is so defined by the infallible Word of God, set forth in the Bible at Acts 17: 22, Diaglott translation.
” Such dictatorial ruling power was first brought into action by the chief of demons when he put his servant Nimrod on the throne, who became the dictatorial or arbitrary ruler of Babylon. Nimrod caused the people to recognize him as a mighty one before the Lord, that is, one in advance of Almighty God. He required them to hail him and to bow down before and worship him. He ruled the people with an arbitrary and iron hand. Thus religion (or demonism) and politics operated together to exercise dominion or ruling power over the world. (Gen. 10:8-12) This is further supported by the following: "Nimrod persuaded mankind not to ascribe their happiness to God, but to think that his own excellency was the source of it. And he soon changed things into a tyranny, thinking there was no other way to wean men from the fear of God than by making them rely upon his own power. The Targum of Jonathan says: ‘From the foundation of the world none was ever found like Nimrod, powerful in hunting, and in rebellions against the Lord.’ The Jerusalem Targum says: ‘He was powerful in hunting and in wickedness before the Lord, for he was a hunter of the sons of men, and he said to them, “Depart from the judgment of the Lord, and adhere to the judgment of Nimrod!” There is it said: “As Nimrod (is) the strong, strong in hunting, and in wickedness before Jehovah.” ’ The Chaldee paraphrase of 1 Chronicles 1:10 says: ‘Cush begat Nimrod, who began to prevail in wickedness, for he shed innocent blood, and rebelled against Jehovah.’ Nimrod was the founder of Babylon, which [symbolizes Satan’s organization and] partook of his character as being
278
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the great antagonist of God’s Truth and God’s people. We cannot fail to see, in Nimrod, Satan’s first attempt to raise up a human universal ruler of men.” —The Companion Bible, footnote, Appendix No. 28.
14	Evidence aside from the Bible shows that from Nimrod’s time to the present day every world dictator has been a religionist. Each and every one employs demonism to keep the people in subjection while the dictator exercises complete political ruling power, controlling the people arbitrarily. The unbroken line of testimony is that all world dictators have been demon-controlled and their rule therefore has been demon rule, and that rule is always exercised in defiance of Almighty God and His commandments as set forth in the Bible. Nimrod has been followed by many world dictators, and those of the present time manifest the same spirit as that manifested by Nimrod.
15	Today (1941) “the king of the north” is easily identified as being represented in the so-called “Axis powers” composed of Greater Germany, Italy, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, with chief offices at Vatican City. Here again politics and religion, or demonism, form a combination to rule and to keep the people in ignorance of Jehovah’s gracious provision for mankind. The chief objective of this present-day “king of the north” is world domination. Politics and demonism work together, forming an arbitrary or totalitarian combine, the present objective of which is to establish once again what is called “the Holy Roman Empire”. The New York Times of February 17, 1940, published the following pertinent statement: “The German war aims were outlined tonight [at Washington] as a re-establishment of the Holy Roman Empire by [the Roman Catholic priest] Doctor Edmund A. Walsh, regent of the Foreign Service School of Georgetown [Catholic] University. . . . Dr. Walsh said that he had heard Adolf Hitler say that the Holy Roman Empire, which was a Germanic Empire, must be reestablished.” The undisputed facts show that Hitler and his allies are moving forward with that very purpose in mind.
16	“The king of the north,” as the same now exists and operates, is the religious and political totalitarian Corporate State, which controls and regiments the people of the nations under the same, by employing strong military force, all of which receives the approval and blessing of the clergy, particularly the pope. It is a Hierarchy government. It is violently opposed to The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and viciously persecutes Jehovah’s witnesses, who announce The Theocracy and who proclaim the supremacy of Jehovah and his King, the rightful Ruler of the world, that is, Christ Jesus. That “the king of the north” is a child of the chief of demons,
Satan, there cannot be the slightest doubt. The authoritative statement of the Lord is that the Devil is the father of lies and a murderer and that in him there is no truth, and that religious leaders are the children of their father the Devil; and such are the ones now used to make up “the king of the north”. (John 8:44) The present-day 'Ling of the north” is given entirely to lying and to murder on a worldwide scale, and its every mark testifies that it is the offspring of demons and under demon control.
17	Well knowing that he could not fool the people with one world-wide scheme the Devil organized another, which on the face of it appears to have some regard for the people; but that same other scheme or kingly power is used to blind and mislead the people and turn them away from The Theocracy. That other scheme is designated in the prophecy of Daniel as “the king of the south”. The Bible and physical and historical facts plainly identify “the king of the south” as the world ruling-power that claims the right to rule and rules in the name of Democracy. The correct definition of “democracy” is: “A rule of the people, by the people, and for the welfare of the people.” The nations of earth which claim to be democracies do not measure up to the correct definition of Democracy. “The king of the south” is controlled by the combined elements of politics, religion and commerce, the binding tie being religion or demonism. That form of world power had its beginning with ancient Egypt. That first world power was visibly ruled by the combined elements of religion, politics and commerce. The Bible plainly shows that that was a demonized rule and was against Almighty God and opposed him and his servants.—Ex. 12:12.
18	The modern-day “king of the south”, since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, is represented in the British Commonwealth of Nations, and other nations which claim to be democratic and which therefore are allied with the British Empire. The British are more nearly democratic than any other nation on earth, and yet there is no real democracy on the earth. The World War of 1914’s slogan was: “This war will make the world safe for democracy”; but that prediction did not come to pass. “The king of the north” and “the king of the south” are both violently opposed to each other, and both claim the right to rule, and hence both are seeking world domination. Only in one thing do they agree, and that is, both are against The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. “The king of the north” is openly opposed to The Theocracy. Both of said kings claim to be Christian, but not one of them is for Christ. There is no so-called “democracy” on earth that advocates The Theocratic Government by Christ; and Christ Jesus testifies: “He that is not with me [and my kingdom] is against me.” (Matt. 12:30) Clearly,
September 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
279
then, both “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” are world powers, contending one with the other for world domination, and hence both against the world's rightful and righteous rule, to wit, The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus.
18	Some historical facts concerning “the king of the south” here seem pertinent to the matter under consideration. Ancient Egypt was a rival of Rome for many centuries, but in the year 31 B.C. Egypt became a province of Rome and remained in that condition for some time. After the battle of Actium (31 B.C.) Egypt passed into the condition of a province of Rome, governed always by a Roman governor of the equestrian, not senatorial, rank. On the dividing of the great Roman Empire by Theodosius (A.D. 337) into the Western and Eastern empires, Egypt became a province of the latter (the Eastern Empire), and sank deeper and deeper in barbarism and weakness. Thus Egypt became separated from Rome. It then became the prey of the Saracens, ’Amribu-el-asr, their general under the Caliph Omar, taking Alexandria, their capital, by assault. This happened A.D. 641, when Heraclius was the emperor of the East. As a province of the caliphs it was under the government of the celebrated Abbassides—Haroun el-Rashid and Al-Mamon, and that of the famous Sultan Saladin. (1516-17) Egypt became a Turkish province, governed by a pasha. (1798) The French then conquered the whole of Egypt and held it until 1801, when they were driven out by the British under Abercromby and Hutchison. Suez Canal was opened in 1869. In November 1875 the British government bought from the viceroy of Egypt his interest in the Suez Canal, consisting of 176,602 shares, for $20,000,000.
20	Further, says the Americana, Volume 9: “In May 1882, a rising took place in Alexandria, when many Europeans were killed and their houses pillaged. . . . The French refusing to interfere, Great Britain determined to act, and on 11 July a British fleet bombarded the forts at Alexandria, causing the rebels to retreat. In August a force under Sir Garnet (afterward Lord) Wolseley landed at Ismailia. . . .
“Egypt During the European War.—Owing to the entrance of Turkey into the war on the side of the Central [Teutonic] Powers, and to the adhesion of the khedive [of Egypt] to the king’s enemies, a British protectorate was declared and the Khedive Abbas Pasha deposed on 18 December, 1914.” This protectorate terminated on 28 February, 1922.
21	Says the 1940 World Almanac, page 226: “The Suez Canal . . . Great Britain owns 295,026 of the 652,932 shares now outstanding and carries them among its assets at a valuation of £93,200,000. . . . Originally a part of the Turkish Empire, Egypt became a British Protectorate (December, 1914) and
remained under the British flag until a kingdom was established with Sultan Fuad as sovereign (March 15, 1922). An Anglo-Egyptian treaty of alliance was signed (August 26, 1936) which limited British military occupation to a garrison of 10,000 troops and 400 airplanes at the Suez Canal, and which accorded the British the right to use Alexandria and Port Said as naval bases. The treaty further permits the British government to move troops over Egyptian territory in the event or threat of war.”
22	Under the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of 1936 Egypt is supporting Great Britain in the war against the Axis powers. In September, 1939, the German nationals were ordered to leave Egypt. Some more physical facts recorded in a world Encyclopedia follow:
Tn A.D. 1531 King Henry VIII of England broke away from the Papacy and established a Protestant nation. Under his daughter, Queen Elizabeth, England began her commercial expansion and the foundations of the British Empire were laid. In 1588 the Spanish Armada, blessed by the pope, was defeated by the British in its attempt to invade, which Roman Catholic attempt Hitler is trying to duplicate at present. One hundred years later, in 1688, came the “Glorious Revolution” and the final overthrow of despotism in England, and the establishment of constitutional government. A Bill of Rights was established, the third great guarantee of English liberty. The year 1759 was the “Annus Mirabilis”, the most wonderful year in England’s history; it gave her Canada, and overthrew the Roman Catholic French supremacy, and led to the Treaty of Paris, and the establishment of England’s great Colonial Empire. Meantime the 13 American colonies were part of the British Empire. In 1776 the American Republic was established, and in 1783, at the close of the American Revolution, the absolutism of King George III of Great Britain was overthrown. Thus Great Britain and America constituted the stronghold of liberal, democratic, Protestant government.’
23	In the Bible the name “Egypt” is used symbolically and there symbolizes commercialism, in which politics and religion also play a prominent part. The British Empire and its present-day ally, America, represent particularly commerce, politics and religion. The Axis powers denounce the so-called “democratic powers” as money-grabbers or commercialists.
24	When Jesus the King was a child God directed that he be carried down to Egypt, the land of “the king of the south”, where He had protection from the murderous spirit of the representatives of “the king of the north”; thus indicating that “the king of the south” was more favorable to the Christ-child. (Matt. 2:12-16) Likewise in these last days, when the desire of “the king of the north” is to destroy the
280
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
faithful “remnant” of Christ, who are witnesses for Jehovah on the earth, they are directed to carry on the work assigned to them, particularly within the territory occupied by “the king of the south”, where they have had some measure of liberty and receive much greater favor than from “the king of the north”. Wherever the representatives of “the king of the north”, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy portion thereof, have exercised influence and power over the representatives of “the king of the south”, there Jehovah’s witnesses have had their liberties curtailed and have suffered much persecution. Even within the realm of “the king of the south” the influence and power of Satan and his allies is now made manifest on every part of the earth. Demonism has laid hold on every nation even as in Noah’s day, but without any exception, exactly as Jesus foretold, his faithful followers, the witnesses of Jehovah, are now hated of all nations for his name’s sake. (Matt. 24: 9) There could be no doubt about the fact that God’s covenant people are subjected to the enmity of both “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, and both of these kings are against The Theocracy, and those who are loyal and faithful to The Theocracy are pilgrims and strangers in the enemy’s country. The supporters of The Theocracy, therefore, must be entirely neutral as to all controversies between kings that rule under the demons’ influence. At the same time it is clearly the will of Jehovah that his covenant people now on the earth, and who are pictured by Daniel, should diligently seek to gain an understanding of the prophecy, and which understanding brings to them great comfort. This prophecy, supported by other scriptures, clearly points to the early collapse of demon-rule. Since the prophecy of Daniel, chapter eleven, beginning at verse twenty-seven, points to present-day events, the examination of the prophecy and its consideration are here undertaken.
25	“And both these kings’ hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.” (Daniel 11:27) In 1914 Jehovah enthroned his King, Christ Jesus, and sent him forth to rule while the enemy still held on to his power. In A.D. 1914 “the king of the north” included Germany, Austria and Italy, with the Vatican riding on all of them as religious adviser and dictator; the so-called “Dreibund” at all times had the blessing of the pope. And in that same year, 1914, the British Empire set up a Protectorate over Egypt, and therefore represented the interest of Egypt and stood for “the king of the south”. The British Empire was supported by its ally, the United States of America. For a brief space Italy followed her father’s practice of deception and lined up with the British
Empire, expecting to gain some benefit therefrom; but in 1922 Mussolini seized the power and again Italy returned to the fold of its father, the chief of demons, and became the ally of and associate with the Vatican. Mark this, that "both of these kings’ claim to be Christian, that is, to follow Christ, but their hearts are exactly in the opposite direction, that is, their motive and purpose is bent on ruling in opposition to Christ, the King of The Theocracy. Hence, their course of action or claim is hypocritical and deceptive.
20 Their “hearts shall be to do mischief”. This part of the prophecy translated by Rotherham reads: “Their heart will be set on acting wickedly.” They are set on acting contrary to the Almighty God Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus; hence their course of action is wicked. While claiming to be Christian, if they ever were, they both have forgotten God. Their course of action ignores the Theocratic rule by Christ Jesus the King, and they act in defiance of Almighty God, devising their own wicked schemes for world domination. The schemes of these two kings clash with each other, and both are against The Theocratic Government. Those two “kings”, that is, “of the north” and “of the south”, do not look to Jehovah and his kingdom for which Christ Jesus had commanded all of his followers to pray, but each has his heart set on world control under demonism; and since the determination is to rule or ruin, those kings set about to destroy each other, so that ‘the nations are angry and God’s wrath is come’. (Rev. 11:18) They both prepare in advance for their destructive work.
22 “And they shall speak lies at one table.” Both of these kings resort to tactics of their father to cover up their real selfish purposes. Both practice diplomacy, which is usually deceptive, and which is particularly made manifest by the Axis powers in recent years. By that is meant that the Axis powers promise one thing and do the very opposite. But the chief lie in which both kings engage is this: By their course of action both deny that Jehovah God is the Supreme One, the Owner of the earth, and that He has appointed and anointed His beloved Son as the Ruler of the earth. Contrary to God’s purpose, both of these kings attempt to set up a rule of their own to control the earth, and both indulge in speaking falsehoods, claim to be Christian and yet denying God and Christ. They speak lies, of which their father the Devil is the past master and author. Looking back a few years before the World War, both of these kings were members of the Hague Court of International Arbitration and claimed to be, and presumably were, for peace. But they were not for the “peace of God”, most assuredly. As workers of lawlessness they “speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief
THE WATCHTOWER,
September 15, 1941
is in their hearts”. (Ps. 28: 3) While claiming to be for peace, outwardly both were arming, and about the time of the coming of Christ Jesus both of these kings, under the direction of their father, the chief of demons, began a war with each other.
28	The prophecy identifies them -as “at one table”, where they sit and diplomatically speak flattering and peaceful words. They sit at what table? Certainly not the table of Jehovah; because all of His ways are truth and righteousness, and not even a “shadow of turning” from the truth is at his table. (Ps. 33: 4; Jas. 1:17) It must be, therefore, that both kings sit ‘at the table’, which table is provided because the Devil is the father of fraud, deception and lies, and both kings sitting at the table, as the prophecy declares, “speak lies.” No one can sit at Jehovah’s table and partake of the things thereof, and at the same time partake of the Devil’s provender. “Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table, and of the table of devils.” (1 Cor. 10: 21) The Devil’s table is the table of demon religion, filled with nauseating provender. The clergy, who are the spiritual advisers, have become intoxicated on the Devil’s wine, and says Jehovah : “But they also have erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment. For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean.”— Isa. 28:7, 8.
29	Both “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” have false notions as to the kingdom of God, and their blindness is due to the teachings of their spiritual advisers, the religious clergy. Both kings are sparring and fighting for a position of advantage concerning world domination. Both of such kings are bent on ruling the earth contrary to the purpose of Jehovah God, and are therefore in agreement on one thing, to wit, that they are both opposed to the witnesses of Jehovah who proclaim the name of the great Theocrat and of his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus.
30	Furthermore, both of those kings think to “change times and laws” to suit their own convenience and schemes. (Dan. 7: 25) For some time prior to 1918 the Lord had caused his truth of and concerning his government of righteousness to be proclaimed throughout the realms of those two “kings”, making known that the Gentile times were about to end and that the time for the coming and setting up of The Theocratic Government under Christ was at hand. Both “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” ignored that message and went on selfishly working at their own schemes to rule the world. While sitting at the same table and using words con
281
cerning the arbitration and settlement of all world disputes by the Hague Court, both were using all their means to prepare for a deadly conflict that the successful one might rule the earth as desired and contrary to God’s appointed way of rule. But how about the success of such schemes for world domination? Shall the same prosper? The prophecy gives the answer.
51	“It shall not prosper,” says Jehovah. The two opposing kings did not and can not thwart Jehovah’s purpose. When 1914 arrived Jehovah enthroned his King, Christ Jesus, and said to those opposing conspirators : “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill [the top of my capital organization] of Zion.” Then Jehovah gave fair warning to the two opposing kings in these words: “Be wise now, therefore, 0 ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.”—Ps. 2: 2-12.
82	The chief of demons was determined to continue his rule of the world in defiance of Almighty God. The “war in heaven” was then begun in which Satan, the chief of demons, and all of his demon-forces fought against Jehovah’s King, Christ Jesus, and his angels, with the result that all the demons were cast down to the earth. (Rev. 12:1-9) At the same time [A.D. 1914] Satan plunged the nations of the two opposing kings into a terrible war, the announced purpose of which was to determine which of the two kings should rule the earth. Neither side won a decisive victory in that war, but the war came to an end in 1918 and a makeshift of peace was brought forth. The Lord had cut short that earthly war to give opportunity for his servants to go about in the earth and ‘preach this gospel of the kingdom as a witness’, after which the final end shall come. (Matt. 24:14, 21) It was in 1918 that Christ Jesus, the great King and Judge, came to the temple for judgment and there separated the selfish ones who had covenanted to do God’s will from the unselfish and approved ones, and sent the latter forth as his servant to bear testimony to the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. It was not then and is not now within the power of demons to stop the onward progress of Jehovah’s Kingdom. The scheme of the two kings for world dominion cannot prosper, and therefore, in the language of the prophet referring to demon schemes, “it shall not prosper.”
83	“For yet the end shall be at the time appointed”; which means, of course, at the time appointed by Jehovah, and which must come exactly in his due time. “The time of the end,” therefore, had beginning in 1914, and nothing could change Jehovah’s purpose, and the final end of demons’ rule shall come exactly
282
THE WATCHTOWER,
at the time which Jehovah has appointed. Satan’s uninterrupted rule came to an end in 1914, when Christ Jesus, the righteous, rightful King, was sent forth to rule. (Ps. 110:2) From 1914 onward until the final end there must be done chiefly the witness work to the name of Jehovah, and which is God’s “strange work”. (Isa. 28: 21) As to the final end, that is to say, the conclusion of “the time of the end”, Jehovah said to Daniel, and hence to the faithful ones on earth whom Daniel pictured: “Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of the indignation ; for at the time appointed the end shall be.” (Dan. 8:19) That positive and unchangeable declaration of Jehovah is that demon rule shall for ever cease exactly on time, which he has appointed, and his promise is that he will make his faithful servants to know what shall be concerning that time. During the period of “the time of the end”, that is, from and after 1914, Jehovah by Christ Jesus has been revealing to his faithful servants the meaning of various prophecies recorded in the Bible. It therefore appears that Jehovah’s due time is now here to make his people know more about the final end. With full faith in God and in Christ Jesus his King, the faithful servants of the Lord now diligently seek an understanding of prophecy, well knowing that the Devil’s scheme shall not prosper but shall end disastrously at the time God has appointed. The movements of the two kings opposing are described in the prophecy of Daniel, and it will be noted how the physical facts or events stated hereinafter fit the prophecy. “The king of the north” makes the next move, as verse twenty-eight shows.
84	“Then shall he return into his land with great riches; and his heart shall be against the holy covenant ; and he shall do exploits, and return to his own land.” (Dan. 11:28) Having in mind now who is the representative on earth of “the king of the north” note the following historical facts. Kaiser William II was enthroned June 15, 1888. He there headed the “Dreibund”, or triple alliance, which at this point in the prophecy stood for “the king of the north”. The kaiser quickly showed that he was in his father’s 'land”, having returned or moved into it, and that his motive was to gain riches and power. “Then shall he return into his land with great riches.” He did so; and he and the pope worked hand in hand. The Encyclopedia Americana notes some pertinent facts, to wit: “Bismarck’s [anti-Catholic] kulturkampf legacy William sagaciously disposed of through concessions which he turned to profit by making an implicit alliance of the Vatican and the German schools in his anti-revolutionary policies and by remodeling the schools themselves. With all his alleged autocratic tendencies William undoubtedly sought the aggrandizement of Germany, her industrial and com
Brooklyn, N. Y.
mercial supremacy, colonial expansion and primacy amongst the great powers. He extended the imperial influence to Turkey and Asia Minor, and strengthened German interests in the Far East and in Africa and South America.”—Encyclopedia Americana, Volume 29, page-333.
” Representing “the king of the north”, and hence heading the triple alliance, the kaiser sought to dominate the world. Was he acting in the interest of The Theocracy? or under the direction of demons? The prophecy answers:
“And his heart shall be against the holy covenant.” It is Christ Jesus who is in the “holy covenant” with Jehovah for The Theocratic Government, and into which covenant he invited his faithful apostles: “Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me.”—Luke 22: 28, 29.
” That the kaiser was under demons’ influence and power is further shown by the fact that he often spoke of himself as “the instrument of the Lord”. Probably he did not recognize his lord, however, who is and was then Satan, the chief of demons, “the god of this world,” and who blinds the minds of men. (2 Cor. 4:3,4) The kaiser was blinded by the chief of demons concerning the truth and misled many people of the nations. The record of his reign and that of his allies plainly shows the purpose thereof was to dominate and rule the world contrary to The Theocracy by Christ Jesus. From the Encyclopedia Americana some further pertinent facts are quoted: “Notwithstanding William’s general good conduct, his occasional outbursts of ambition, and his persistence in building up the army and navy, constantly aroused suspicions of his intentions. . . . With all his wonderful abilities for organization and domination William had a streak of indiscretion in many of his public utterances, and was frequently expressive of ideas appropriate to sovereigns of the Middle Ages. He was a firm believer in the divine right of kings and of kaisers in particular. On numerous occasions he spoke of himself as ‘the instrument of the Lord’, and took such excessive interest in the army, so often spoke of his confidence in it, and permitted and even fostered such arrogance in his officers, that the whole world came to recognize that the army-ruled Germany and the kaiser ruled the army. . . . It is now generally conceded that almost from the first day of his reign he began to plan for world domination; that he dreamed of what Napoleon might have done had he been a little more shrewd and painstaking, and resolved that he, William, would show the world that one man could raise himself to the topmost pinnacle and not only rule Germany, but through Germany might rule the civilized earth.”
September 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
283
37	Austria-Hungary was then and still is Roman Catholic and under the religion of the demon-controlled Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The Papacy could be expected to take the course only of supporting the Triple Alliance and to oppose Protestant Britain and France and Russia, which formed the Triple Entente, which Entente also sought world dominion, seeking it in the name of Democracy, but in fact under the influence of the invisible demon rule. The Triple Entente was certainly not for The Theocracy by Christ Jesus, but sought world dominion contrary to Almighty God, Jehovah.
38	The Triple Alliance then headed by Kaiser William claimed to be Christian, but that claim was and is far from the truth. Had they then or since been Christian that alliance would have supported The Theocracy by Christ Jesus. On the contrary, those composing “the king of the north” were against “the holy covenant”, and when the King, Christ Jesus, was enthroned in 1914 “the king of the north” had no ear for the message of Jehovah declared by his people throughout the earth. In Germany the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society maintained an organization, and in that land there was a wide witness to The Theocracy prior to 1914. But the German ruling powers wholly rejected that message. In that
land the Photodrama of Creation was widely presented in the year 1914, in the early part of it proclaiming the fact that Armageddon was approaching; but that message was opposed by “the king of the north”. The prophecy further says:
” “And he shall do exploits, and return to his own land”; meaning “the king of the north” would return to “his own land”, which means the earthly condition with the ambition to the rule of demonism, headed by “the god of this world”. (1 John 5:19) All the exploits or acts of “the king of the north” were done in utter disregard of Jehovah’s Word, whereby it was made known that the Gentile Times had ended and the Kingdom, or The Theocracy, was at hand. “The king of the north” did not go up to Zion, Jehovah’s organization, and submit to Jehovah’s King, the Rightful Ruler of the world, but, on the contrary, turned to his own land or organization under the demons that he might through his own ambition have world domination as the so-called “Holy Roman Empire” once had and ruled.
40	Faithful servants of the Lord, and hence sincere students of God’s Word, will pursue the remainder of Daniel’s prophecy with keenest interest and with real joy, because it seems clearly to be Jehovah’s time for them to have an understanding thereof.
(To be continued)
THEOCRATIC ASSEMBLY AT ST. LOUIS (By an interested observer)
UNIVERSAL domination as the great issue before all creation was powerfully brought to the fore at the opening address of the president of the Watch Tower Society, to the Theocratic Assembly in St. Louis, Mo., August 6-10. Referring briefly to the prophetic drama in the Bible concerning patient Job and the severe test of his integrity toward God, the speaker said:
“The issue between Satan and Jehovah was not raised for the first time in Job’s day, but centuries before that time. The prophetic drama of Job discloses what Jehovah requires of all creatures who shall receive his boundless blessings. While the question for determination raised by the prophetic drama was and is, 'Can Jehovah put men on earth who, under the most severe test, will prove faithful and true to God ?’ yet that great issue embraces much more. . . . Long before that time Satan had challenged the supremacy of Jehovah and raised the great issue. Many other scriptures support that conclusion. Satan’s accusing charge was made before the angels of heaven, and hence was known among the host of heaven, but not properly understandable and appreciated amongst men till the present time. God’s due time now appears when those on earth devoted to him are given an understanding of the real issue. The primary issue raised by Satan’s defiant challenge was and is that of universal domination.”
To successfully hold the five-day Theocratic Assembly
in St. Louis in the face of both contemptuous official indifference and bitter religious opposition of those who would now rule the earth in the place and stead of God’s Kingdom by Christ, this in itself was a triumphant answer to Satan’s challenge of Jehovah’s universal domination. It also proved to be a test of the integrity of Jehovah’s covenant people, but which was faithfully met by a multitude, 115,000 strong, to the honor and vindication of Jehovah’s name.
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6
This was the opening day of the assembly at The Arena. Everything was now in readiness. The mammoth bowl of The Arena, with seats for 25,000, was now first opened to all, besides those having assigned duties there. At the southern end of the huge oval was the speakers’ platform, large and spacious, with purple and white drapings and with the platform railings all overlaid with shimmering gold. It was also bedecked with ferns and pink gladioli. Up above this, and thirteen feet above the Arena floor, was the orchestra pit, with a broad banner in front, having a background of brilliant red, upon which was the 1941 year-text, “Salvation to our God . . . and unto the Lamb.—Rev. 7:10,” all in letters of white bordered with glittering spangles of gold.
Shortly after 2 p.m. The Arena and the Hall “A” eastward and the Hall “B” westward were all filled, besides
284
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
many on the lawns outside hoping to hear by the sound-cars and those at the trailer camp, a total attendance of 64,000. At three-thirty o’clock the assembly was brought to order at the playing of the song “The Glory of Jehovah” by an orchestra of 114 trained musicians, playing fourteen different types of instruments, stringed, woodwind and brass. Then a song by the united assembly, “Give Praise to Jehovah,” followed by prayer to the great Theocrat who made possible this greatest assembly of true ministers of Jehovah God ever on earth. After a brief address of welcome the convention chairman presented, amid tremendous applause, the first speaker on the program, who then addressed them on the subject “Integrity”. (Ps. 41:12) Never before this was the primary issue for determination made fully clear to God’s covenant people, to wit, universal domination. The test of Job’s integrity was only incidental thereto, just as the test of the integrity of those whom Job pictured is only related to that issue. The drama of Job was recorded in the Bible for the benefit of those today living who were foreshadowed by him, to wit, Jehovah’s anointed remnant of witnesses and their faithful earthly companions, the “other sheep”. Never before was it more necessary than in these days of rampant demonism for such to maintain their integrity toward God, even as Job maintained his for our example. The faithful prophets and witnesses of old maintained theirs, and are included in the class of innocent, blameless ones pictured by Job, and a brief record of them is given in Hebrews 11. God will resurrect them shortly in due time.
The drama of Job is fulfilled at the end of the world, where we now are. The facts today completely fulfill Jesus’ prophecy at Matthew 24: 9 concerning the persecution of devoted Christians at the end of Satan’s world. Now God’s approved ones must hold fast their integrity and must fear the King of The Theocracy. We see the end is at hand! Satan has blinded man by religion. Religion has caused all nations to forget God. The demons, of which Satan is chief, are now fighting against The Theocracy and God’s remnant who announce it. Satan is wroth, knowing that the final battle to determine the issue of universal domination is at hand. “We must hold fast our integrity; and this, by God’s grace, we can do by refusing to compromise with any part of the demonized organization of the enemy. We must and will be entirely, wholly, unreservedly and completely devoted to The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. We can have no part in and nothing in common with Satan’s organization. We are wholly and steadfastly for The Theocratic Government, and here, by God’s grace, we will remain. We know it shall vindicate Jehovah’s name and bring deliverance to all who love righteousness and who serve Jehovah under his righteous government ” (The full text of this address has now been published in the August 15 issue of The Watchtower. You will review it with profit.)
The visible audience responded warmly to this clear-cut exposition and loving exhortation with much applause. Such counsel and admonition were never better timed nor presented on a more suitable occasion. It was what God’s people needed, and the Lord provided it as “food convenient”. This speech was also radiocast by the Lord’s own station, WBBR, at Brooklyn, N.Y., to which the speech was carried by special wire, and it was heard by an eager invisible radio audience, many at a distance of more than 100 miles therefrom, including those faithful ones who had to stay behind “with the stuff” at Kingdom Farms, South Lansing, N. Y., who acknowledged the broadcast with a telegram to the St. Louis assembly.
After the close of the address the chairman announced a new issue of the popular paper Kingdom News, Number 9, and entitled “Victories in Your Defense—America’s Gain by the Fight”. After dismissal a copy was issued to each one on hia way out, by the ushers.
During the day the registration of children between the ages of five and eighteen was in full swing in Hall “B”, west of The Arena. The multitude of children on the grounds was very notice
able. There were many of far less age present; yes, a number of mothers of unborn children came risking all in the earnest desire and effort to attend, and a number brought to light of day children, some on the grounds of the trailer camp, and which children it will henceforth be their obligation and privilege to “bring . . . up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord”. (Eph. 6:4) On the whole, the registered children were very orderly as they took part with their parents in the meeting, and paid good attention, and showed good fortitude during the summer heat wave and the great press of attendance. It called one’s mind back to when Jerusalem was threatened with assault by Moab, Ammon and Mount Seir, and all Israel assembled with King Jehoshaphat before the Lord at the temple at Jerusalem, they “with their little ones, their wives, and their children”. (2 Chron. 20:13) At St. Louis a few children got lost, for part of the day, reminding one how Jesus also became separated from his parents at the temple, for three days. (Luke 2:46) Like Jesus, these lost ones had not strayed frdm the Assembly precincts.
A period of joyful songs and two discourses, one on “Zone and Regional Servants’ Duties” (of which servants all were at the Assembly and on duty), and another on “Day of Deliverance”, finished off a day in which Jehovah’s assembled people gratefully acknowledged that Jehovah had arranged this assembly and that he had rewarded their efforts in proceeding with the preparations for it and that on this very first and opening day he had answered their prayers beyond their expectations.
THURSDAY, AUGUST 7
Today marked the stepping up of the tremendous advertising power of the Assembly for the Theocratic message as the legions of organized field workers rose from their night’s rest on lawns, park benches, camp grounds, floors or beds in private homes and hotels, and snatched breakfast at the cafeteria in Hall “A” or elsewhere, and swung into united action.
The day’s program began with a gathering at 9 a.m at The Arena for Theocratic activities afield, opening with song, prayer and the day’s text and comment. Two forms of service were announced for this day: (1) during the morning a witnessing from home to home offering the literature, but also inquiring about rooms for the many thousands of new arrivals that had poured in through the night and others still due to arrive. For this work special combinations of literature were provided, all done up in neat packages, and now, too, Kingdom News No 9 was available for every home; (2) information marching, with signs suspended from the shoulders announcing the president’s two public speeches, marching at 10 a.m.-l p.m. and 5:30-6.30 p.m. and 9 3010.30 p.m. Also volunteers were called for to put signs in all prominent windows of business places Added to these advertising mediums were, to wit, the lecture-announcement signs on the front of the city streetcars; the fine ad on the $1.25 Weekly Pass of the St. Louis Public Service Company used by passengers during the entire week of August 3-9 on all streetcars and buses, the signs displayed on all the motorcars and trailers of the conventloners (thousands of signs were stenciled on the sides of the cars free of charge at Hall “A”). All such constituted the most telling and impressive Theocratic advertising ever concentrated and displayed in any one area on earth. Besides which was the magazine work on the city sidewalks and from one business place to another, exhibiting and placing the August 1 issue of The Watchtower and the August 6 issue of Consolation, both magazines containing articles on the St. Louis assembly and its outstanding features Due to all this unparalleled Kingdom publicity there was great public inquiry and comment. No high-priced ads at commercial rates in the worldly newspapers were needed. In the convenient time they had scorned their opportunity and privilege, and now their day has for ever passed!
Today the public press further manifested its unworthiness by its misstatements on the assembly, by its lying and garbled
September 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
285
report on the vitally important speech on “Integrity” by Judge Rutherford, and by its untrue personal slaps at the speaker. A swift and deserved retribution and judgment came: at five o’clock this evening there was released for circulation among the people of St. Louis the printed copy of what the speaker actually did say in his speech. The August 15 issue of The Watchtower contained the full text of the speech, and now thousands of copies of this issue were made available to magazine distributors to put out immediately. This unexpected chance to return the fire of the enemy thrilled God’s people, and forth they went with this new ammunition with boiling zeal, and shortly the entire supply of all magazines was exhausted. The pro-Catholic Globe Democrat of St Louis spoke of the speaker (a native Missourian) as a “tall, balding, wing-collared Californian”, much after the manner as when the prophet Elisha was on his way to Bethel and many religious youths came out and mocked, saying, “Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head!” and Elisha turned and uttered Jehovah’s judgment upon them and two she-bears from the forest came and ‘tore’ 42 of them. Doubtless by the time this assembly closed the public press felt it had been torn by the claws of something far worse than two literal bears and that a “curse” rested upon it for its stubborn course of willful, lying mockery against the Elisha work today and those doing it.
Attendances at the sessions increased, as the assembly increased to 70,000 attendants, the number originally published as expected; and thousands more were yet en route to St. Louis. Much profit was derived from today hearing capable speakers deal with such subjects as “Magazine Route Work”, “Magazine Street Witnessing,” “Courage,” “Jael’s Experiences,” “Zone Assembly and Its Purpose,” and “Covenant Obligations”. These speeches stressed Jehovah’s Theocratic organization and its structure, and the work it is now commissioned to do, and the effective ways of getting the witness done; also the requirement to obey organization arrangements, and our obligations as consecrated Christians to fulfill our side of the covenant with Jehovah God as his faithful and true witnesses, if we would gam life and have part in the vmdication of his greatly reproached holy name.
FRIDAY, AUGUST 8
This was notably Pioneers’ Day. Due to Jehovah’s loving provision through his visible organization more than 5,000 pioneers from America and other lands were enabled to come and share the glorious Kingdom service at St. Louis. All registered as such on arrival, and the Society provided free meals for them and also rooming accommodations for as many as needed it This supports that the Society is in very truth a “charitable” organization even according to the definition of the worldly law. There was a booth in the Arena corridor marked “New Pioneers”, and up till this point 300 new pioneers had already signed up at this assembly, one being a seven-year-old. (Before the convention closed more than 700 had signed up.) The present pioneer band includes some men 86 years old and some women 77 years old, and some children nine years of age. ‘According to the faith of all such be it unto them,’ as Jesus said.
At 3 pm. all the pioneers had assembled in the main auditorium in front of the speakers’ platform, their identification cards admitting them. The rest of The Arena was all packed out again, by other publishers. Dwelling on the subject “Pioneer’s Place in the Organization” a speaker emphasized that “the time of independent isolation of the pioneers is past” and now they must faithfully co-operate also with the regional and zone servants and with the organized companies with which many are associated. Another speaker considered “Pioneer Requirements” and stressed the need for meeting the “hours” requirement to remain permanently in the work, and that the back-calls made by pioneers should be increased. In the United States only 6.5 percent of all publishers were pioneers, whereas in the British Isles 11 percent are such, and hence this country could well increase
its percentage of pioneers. In this connection the speaker read a letter from a St. Louis radio announcer setting out the frank statement by a prominent religious lecturer from Britain concerning the stabilizing and heartening effect the fearless witness work of Jehovah’s witnesses has upon the morale of the British people during this war, and also concerning their faithfulness in concentration camps in Germany, to the dismay of the Nazis. (Incidentally, copies of this letter were thereafter released to the press for publication, but not a single newspaper dared print such favorable publicity concerning Jehovah’s servants.)
Then Judge Rutherford greeted the pioneers. He expressed i( as a privilege to greet such fighters for The Theocracy, and that the activities of such a band as these must “make some of the ‘old woman' mighty sick”. Pioneering men fled from Europe to seek and establish here freedom of speech, of assembly and of worship of God; they never imagined that such freedom would ever be hampered here as it is today in this land. This is all traced to religion and its allies. When these have finally closed down on our work here and cry “Peace and safety1” then a mighty explosion will occur and blow off the lid. “You pioneers are in this witness work not for selfish aggrandizement, nor to make a name for yourselves, but for the Lord’s name’s sake.” Isaiah 62.10 includes a command for the pioneers: “Go through the gates!” The gates are open for all now, particularly the Lord’s “other sheep”. “Prepare ye the way of the people!” This it is your privilege to do by telling them the truth. “Cast up the highway!” That is, .to walk in the Lord’s way of righteousness. “Gather out the stones!” These are religion’s stumblingstones; gather them out by taking to the people God’s Word. “Lift up a standard for the people!” What standard! Not Hitler’s swastika! The flag of America is a dignified and beautiful symbol, whose real meaning is “freedom” and “rights” of free men. Demonized flag-wave: s try to force you to bow down thereto in violation of God’s law. Such ones are the first to violate the laws of the United States. “I say to the people of Missouri, where I have fought for the principles of democracy, because I believed them right. ‘Jehovah’s witnesses have the highest respect for what the flag represents, but, by God’s grace, they will not bow down to anything!’” (Applause) You pioneers are real liberators of the people. When you go out from this convention you will have lots of scoffing, reproaches and ridicule, but not by honest men and women. Rejoice in tribulation. Don’t think you are the whole thing because you are a pioneer. Keep on encouraging those who love the Lord “Now get busy!”
Immediately following, the assembly chairman briefly reviewed the legal aspect, and the legal battles the enemy had thrust on God’s faithful witnesses, and that the Society had directed them to fight to the last ditch, and that at the greatest expense they had done so and gone up to the Supreme Court of the nation, and the Society was fighting for the things for which the flag stands, and now many legal victories had been won. In Germany hundreds of legal cases were won before the witness work was closed down there; likewise it may be here in America. Then a great outburst of gladness broke at the chairman’s announcement that Judge Rutherford had caused to be published a new 32-page booklet entitled “Jehovah’s Servants Defended”, setting out the judicial decisions of high courts in cases we had fought and won; he now authorized the release of the booklet and a copy to be given free to each one there. This gracious provision and gift put a new weapon in the hands of the battling witnesses for use m meeting the enemy both in the field and before the tribunals
This same day a sharp judgment of the great Lawgiver against the “evil servant” class (Matt. 24:48-51) was expressed at the beginning of the afternoon’s sessions. An ex-army officer of the United States appeared on the platform and asked and was granted the privilege to present a Resolution concerning one Moyle. Said lawyer proved unfaithful to his position of trust in the Lord’s organization, slandered and abused the Bethel family at
286
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Brooklyn, quit his post of duty, and thereafter sued the Society and its board of directors and others for $100,000 for libel because the facts were published in The Watchtower for the protection of Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the land. The Resolution condemned such course of action and such recourse to worldly courts as unscriptural, unwarranted and unjustified. Put to a vote, the Resolution was adopted with a unanimous “Aye” by the vast assembly of more than 75,000. Thereafter copies of the Resolution were given free to all, to take home with them.
The afternoon’s program concluded with a stirring speech by one from Canada, where the ranking prelate of the greatest religious foreign power has dictatorially caused Jehovah’s own organization to be declared “illegal” and forbidden, and its adherents to be imprisoned; but where true Christians continue to obey God’s commands rather than man’s, and of whom 2,000 were then in attendance at the assembly and rejoicing. An example of a well-ordered Theocratic service meeting, presented by four young workers from headquarters, and a discourse on “Ehud and His Dagger” closed another blessed day.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 9
The event everywhere advertised for today and eagerly awaited was the delivery of the public address by the president on “Comfort All That Mourn”, at 3 p.m The great publicity campaign had gone over! Now 105,000 persons jammed The Arena and auxiliary buildings, the grounds all around, and the eleven-mile-distant trailer camp. A private telephone line connected .The Arena platform with the Watch Tower headquarters at Brooklyn and the administration building of radio station WBBR on Staten Island, N. Y., where other audiences assembled. Both when the speaker ascended the platform and when the chairman presented him to speak the audience gave him a great ovation. The orchestra, now augmented to 126 instruments, rendered a selection suitable to this significant hour. Then the speech began. The public-address system was working at its best, and everyone in every location could hear well. The speaker’s voice was in excellent condition, and filled with the quality of comfort. All hung on his words in rapt attention, only to break out in repeated applause, on nineteen occasions.
Referring to the cause of mourning, the speaker stated: “It is the truth that will make the people free from fear and mourning. Receiving the truth, their joy at once begins, and that’s why 100,000 on these grounds today are all smiles!” (Applause) A reference to the “Axis Powers” and then to Daniel chapter eleven and “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” quickened the audience into unusual alertness. Both “kings” are npt men, but world ruling powers! Then the scales fell from the listeners’ eyes as Judge Rutherford identified the ‘northern king’ as the ruling power which is totalitarian and represented in the Axis combine and opposing Jehovah’s Theocracy and its servants; and the ‘southern king* as the world ruling power which rules and claims the right to rule the nations in the name of Democracy, and is represented in the British Commonwealth of Nations and supporting nations, but which also does not support The Theocratic Government. A brief survey of Daniel 11: 27-45 followed, and ended all too soon. But when he added, "The Watchtower will publish the same, that the people of good-will may be enlightened,” there was a joyous expression of satisfaction. More applause, later, when he commented, on Daniel 11: 45, “that will mean the end of the Axis Powers, including Nazism, Fascism, and Romanism!”
Concerning the good news of The Theocracy he exclaimed: “Thank God that the message does not proceed from any man!” (Applause) The fulfillment today of Daniel’s prophecy and its understanding mean the “end of the days” is here, and “which is proof that we may confidently expect Daniel the prophet of God to soon stand amongst the peoples on this earth and many will see him and rejoice”. (Applause) The audience thrilled again
into applause when he added that the Lord’s people “are looking for those faithful men of God and they will not be surprised when they come”. He then proceeded to detail the blessings of God’s kingdom, and interrupted to cry out, “I challenge any government under the sun to point out any hope that they hold out!” (Applause) More blessings described, and he turned his words to his auditors: “And it is the duty and privilege of the people of this convention to tell the people of Missouri and of all parts of the land about The Theocracy.” (Applause) Next a glorious description of “the Holy City”; then “no more death!” (Rev. 21:1-4) As to our period of transition from the wicked to the Theocratic rule, “soon the combined elements of wickedness will put forth their supreme effort in their final endeavor to destroy all who support The Theocracy, and they will cry ‘Peace and safety!’ because they have all of Jehovah’s witnesses in the jug!” (Applause, with smiles of understanding) “They shall fail, and none shall help them, because God has decreed it so.” Then came words of hope concerning the Armageddon survivors, followed by a contrast between the wicked and the wise: “They that be wise will choose to serve the King of glory and receive the blessings of everlasting life.”
With the words, “And now, my good friends, I am sure you will want to join in sending a message of comfort,” Judge Rutherford read a prepared “message”, addressed “To all persons of good-will toward Jehovah and His King, Christ Jesus”. Concluding it, he put the question, “If you believe that this is the message of loving-kindness that you wish to send to the people, say Aye!” There was a unanimous “Aye!” seconded by great applause. During the speech Judge Rutherford appealed “to the people of my native state [Missouri] to calmly look into the Bible for the hope of eternal life” (Applause), and now he expressed it as a “great privilege to speak to the children of the people of this state”, and he asked: “What do world powers hold forth! Nothing! What does The Theocracy hold forth!” Everything worth-while!
The speech ended and Judge Rutherford retired, but a further joy awaited. Before the speech the chairman announced that, anticipating the great demand for it in print, the speech had been published and copies were on hand. Now it was announced that ten copies of the new booklet “Comfort All That Mourn” would be given free to each one there to distribute at once to the people of St. Louis, and without contribution; but any recipient so desiring and asking might contribute whatsoever he felt inclined. The response to this opportunity after such a public address was electrical, and parties and individuals scattered to all parts, the slums, the sidewalks fronting the “cockatrice hatchery” the Vatican maintains in St. Louis, and other locations convenient for the quick-distribution work.
Other presentations on the day’s program were “Advice for Kingdom Publishers” by the Society’s legal representative, and also discourses on “Transition” and on “Theocracy”, all which were received with much aid and benefit. The supply shipped of the new booklet “Comfort All That Mourn” was quickly exhausted and distributed far and wide, and thus comfort from above was spread to other hundreds of thousands.
SUNDAY, AUGUST 10, “CHILDREN’S DAY”
On an occasion last spring Judge Rutherford stated at headquarters in Brooklyn, “This is the day of the children.” Today at the assembly marked the time even as such. The full significance of what Almighty God here caused to come to pass on this day will only be realized later under His revelation. He knows the end from the start.
Early this morning, at seven-thirty o’clock, there was an assembly of the candidates to hear the discourse on “Baptism”, prior to their immersion; where 3,903 presented themselves therefor, of whom 1,357 were children, and out of almost “all nations, kindreds, people and tongues”. Pools had been contracted for in
September 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
287
the adjacent amusement park and at the Colored institution downtown, whither available motorears quickly transported candidates. Never since Pentecost of A.D. 33 was there such a great number baptized at one time at one place, in symbol of their consecration to Jehovah through Christ Jesus to do the divine will. It took two hours to perform this act of faith and obedience, so great was the number of those presenting themselves.
Other discourses marked the early and the closing hours of the day, but the address which was advertised by all channels of information to take place at the morning hour of eleven o’clock was “Children of The King” The appeal of the subject was such that the tremendous throng that turned out increased today to 115,000, exceeding all estimates. Today the Lord’s hand wrought more marvelously among the assembly than even yesterday, and those listening m by private wire at New York pomts must have tingled at what they heard and perceived taking place. For the fourth time The Arena was overflowing. This time, however, in the main arena directly m front of and in the box seats all round about the speakers’ platform was assembled an extraordinary audience, all children between the ages of 5 and 18 years, unattended by their parents. When Judge Rutherford strode to the front of the platform he beamed at the sight. Said the chairman by way of introduction, “You have come to hear a man who loves God’s Kingdom tell you about ‘Children of The King’—Judge Rutherford.”
The speaker then began in a calm, clear voice, as of a father quietly instructing his own children at home in obedience to the divine command. Early he described the Paternal Government of Christ Jesus, “The everlasting Father,” when “there shall be no more religionists, no more politicians, no more commercial gangsters”. (Applause) The enemy shall be pushed out: “let the gangsters take notice now and begin to move!” (Applause) Those surviving Armageddon were pictured by Noah’s sons surviving the Flood, and they may never die. “That’s the hope of you children.” (Applause) Now the children are telling forth the Kingdom message, but “the religionists with their long robes and greased hair and lace-curtain skirts try to make you keep still”. (Applause) Such religionists are the ones ‘who have been the defamers of God’s name, but his faithful witnesses have continued on, regardless of such religionists’. (Applause) “They will go down m defeat, biting the dust as they go.” (Applause) “Probably some of you are listening in. [Applause] Stop kissing the toe of a man, and kiss the toe of the King. [Applause] Quit making jackasses of yourselves and dress yourselves like men. [Applause] Christ’s kingdom is marching to complete victory, and let all of them take notice today. [Applause] The Lord says the fear of man leads into a snare, and they are already in.”
The judgment of the nations is now on, and the Lord is separating the “sheep” from the “goats”, “those billy goats that smell loud.” (Applause) The “sheep” will inherit on earth the blessings of the Kingdom. They will have dominion over the animals as Adam first had it, “and it will be nice for these birds and animals to become friends of you children.” (Applause) Ezekiel 34:25 describes the safety then, so that they “shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods”; “and some of them are learning it here now” (meaning those unable to find rooms or those at the trailer camp). (Applause) They shall be children of the King, and he will be their King-Father. The earth belongs to Him by right of purchase, and they will hold it in trust as his children-subjects and have part in beautifying it. Then the divine mandate shall be carried out, to fill the earth with a righteous, perfect offspring, and this by marriage and childbearing. “Some of these desecrators of His name claim that they only have the right to say who shall get married”; but they are presumptuous. In the Kingdom the “great multitude” will look to the Lord to guide as to selecting each a mate for himself. “Why, then, should a man who has the prospect before him of being of the great
multitude now tie himself up to a stack of bones and a hank of hair!” (Applause)
Then timely words were addressed to the parents of the children, especially any who “send your children to those devilish movies to learn all the wicked things. Keep them at home and teach them the truth. The child that is encouraged by its parent to spend time in those movies that adulate religion does not show any real love for his own child”. Parents should “teach their children concerning The Theocracy. In this do not fail!” The children should keep always m mind Ephesians 6 • 1 ■ “Children, obey your parents in the Lord." “If your parents are not devoted to the Lord, then you had better get somebody else to instruct you.” (Applause) “You may soon meet Abraham, Daniel and other faithful men of old who shall be here as perfect men.” (Applause) Matthew 8:11 says: “Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.” To “sit with them does not mean to be inactive, but to rest m complete confidence with them, knowing that they are right and, being with them, you are walking in the way of righteousness". Hear the command of the Lord written in the Bible at Revelation 22:11 to “Come!” “Come where! Come and take your stand firmly on the side of The Theocratic Government, if you would live.” (Applause) The world to come is described at 1 Peter 3:13 as a new heaven and earth. Those resurrected faithful men of old, in the visible rule as princes, will be the “new earth”, and “these princes are due now any day'” (Applause) All the nations are now afflicted with war, famine, pestilence, sickness, death, and religion, but under The Theocratic Government “the people shall work together exactly as you see upon these grounds”. (Applause) Then Psalm 148- 10-14 was finally quoted as a grand climax, biddmg all that live, beasts and fowl, kings (Christ and his church), and princes and all judges of the earth, both young men and maidens, old men (Armageddon survivors), and children (born of the great multitude), to praise the name of Jehovah.
The speech concluded, Judge Rutherford fixed attention directly on the children before him, commenting that “consecration is an individual matter; no one can consecrate for you A question is about to be propounded to each one of you All of you . . . children who have agreed to do the will of God and have taken your stand on the side of his Theocratic Government by Chnst Jesus and who have agreed to obey God and his King, please stand up.” (The children before him arose as one body ) “Behold, more than 15,000 new witnesses to the Kingdom'” (Applause) “All of you who will do what you can to tell others about God’s kingdom and its attending blessings, please say Aye ” (Cry, “Aye!”) (Applause) “If you had an instrument in your hands that you could use to the honor of Jehovah and learn of his kingdom, would you use it!” (A unanimous “Yes!”) “Then be seated, and I will tell you about it. . . . The Lord has made possible the preparation of this book as a message for you [holding up the new book]. [Great, prolonged applause] The title of this book is ‘Children’. [Applause] There are registered at this convention, and I see before me, more than 15,000 children between the ages of five and eighteen. All of those children have stood up and have likewise signified their devotion to The Theocracy. Thank God that I have come to this day when it is my privilege to speak to such an army of young men and women taking their stand on the side of Jehovah! When they try to silence you, the Lord will put his hand over you and see to it that they do not silence you Millions of persons of good-will to this hour desire to know the truth, but the long-skirted, lace-curtamed religionists will try to keep them in the dark.” The book called “Children” will do a work of enlightening them.
Concerning the faithful ones of old who shall be resurrected Judge Rutherford commented: “Soon you will see Barak and Deborah (I got a picture of her in this book), and when you see her you will love her very much. She is a real woman, and will
288
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
be able to give you girls proper advice, you girls who are looking for a husband. When you see Daniel, David, Moses and all the prophets, listen to what they have to say, and they will properly advise you boys and girls. I am going to have handed to every one of you 15,000 children one of these books as a gracious gift. I ask that you first study it faithfully. Ask someone else to sit with you under the shade of a tree and study that which leads to life and endless blessings. ... It is your privilege between now and before the day school opens to spend six hours a day in taking the book Children to others.” The parents should encourage their children to do this very thing, if they would have them live.
Cartons of Children that had been deposited in The Arena were now opened, and Judge Rutherford instructed the children how to come and each get a copy thereof, those in the rear half of The Arena marching in two columns out through a side exit, and those in the front half of The Arena marching up over the platform and out through a rear exit. As the march began, the orchestra (minus all its children instrumentalists) struck up and rendered songs, “Children of the Heavenly King,” “The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon,” and “Who Is on the Lord’s Side!” while the vast audience sang. Never was there a more moving sight in these “last days”. Many, including strong men, wept at the demonstration. Receiving the gift, the marching children clasped it to them, not a toy or plaything for idle pleasure, but the Lord’s provided instrument for most effective work in the remaining months before Armageddon. W'hat a gift! and to so many! The manner of releasing the new book Children was an outright surprise to all, but the almighty hand of the All-wise One, Jehovah, was in it, and the maneuver was most blessed indeed. Thereafter Children, the author’s edition, was disposed of to adult conventioners, on a contribution.
The blessings of the Assembly were further enhanced by the afternoon session, which provided a delightful anticlimax to “Children’s Day”. The Arena was agam packed out to hear about “Your New Work” and the president’s parting words. For weeks the question had been upon many consecrated minds, and at 3 p.m. the first speaker, the factory and office servant at Brooklyn, disclosed the “new work”, to wit, the placing of Children, and thereafter, over a period of three weeks, sending each obtain-er, at no extra cost to him, the “Children Study Course”, to wit, three attractive, illuminated question-and-answer folders, these to be followed the fourth week by a back-call service by the one placing Children. Another speaker, on “Solving the Problem”, showed how the new book, together with the “Children Study Course”, provided the solution for the problem of company publishers to reach their individual quota of twelve back-calls monthly and one model study weekly, as suggested in the recent communication of the president of the Society. Three speakers then spoke, each briefly on “When to Begin”, and were in concert as to the answer, that now is the time.
When, next, Judge Rutherford came on the platform, he talked extemporaneously, but the unspeakable blessing the Lord bestowed in the morning appeared to have put him in the best of condition and filled his heart and mouth full of words “in season” and “fitly spoken”. For forty-five minutes the audience spent a most delightful time listening. Said Judge Rutherford: “It is not exactly a new work, but it is putting on a little more steam for the final roundup.” Then concerning the book just released, he added: “We had on the grounds this morning only 40,000 of the autographed edition. . . . But I am glad to tell you that, while that 40,900 are gone, there is another 150,000 copies on the grounds ready for use. [Applause] So you will have 150,000 on the grounds here to start with now, and I think it might be well for two or three thousand first-class workers to go into the St. Louis field and get those in the hands of the people here who want to know something about it before you go away.” (It developed that more than 3,000 persons of good-will turned in
their names at the public meetings, requesting calls by Jehovah’s witnesses and further information.)
Then in most interesting fashion he told of his visit to the trailer camp Saturday, and also of the opposition and the difficulties caused by the public service bodies, such as the Chamber of Commerce and the Convention Bureau, all due to their subservience to the religious organization, whom he symbolized under the figure of one distressed “Fayther O'Hooligan”. The description of the actions and the bossy orders of this “Fayther O’Hooh-gan” in his own brogue to local businessmen and Catholic population caused great amusement, and the assembly laughed again and again. (Pss. 2:4; 37:12,13; 52: 6) Then he told of the good people of St. Louis and showed how the parable of the “sheep” and “goats” had thus had local fulfillment.—Matthew 25.
The city editor of the Globe Democrat sent him a question. “Do you not think it discourteous to criticize another person’s religion in his own community!” but, due to “Father O’Hooligan”, they refused to publish the answer submitted, though it was of great public interest. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy in America have treated in like manner all proposals, challenges and petitions to public discussion in debate over radio. They have all been warned, and now “we are going to spend our energy and time and strength in going to the people of good-will toward God and his Theocratic kingdom, carrying to them the message”. Hope-rousing and stirring was his statement: “I feel absolutely certain that from henceforth . . . those who will form the great multitude will grow by leaps and bounds.” The arising of 15,000 children this morning was a decisive answer and reproof to the “evil servant" class who say, “Humph! where’s the great multitude!”
For ever to disprove all published false charges and slurs that he is the leader of Jehovah’s witnesses, he said: “I want to let any strangers here know what you think about a man being your leader, so they won’t be forgetting. Every time something rises up and starts to grow, they say there is some man a leader who has a great following. If there is any person in this audience who thinks that I, this man standing here, is the leader of Jehovah’s witnesses, say Yes.” But there was a unanimous “No”! emphatically. “If you who are here believe that I am just one of the servants of the Lord, and we are working shoulder to shoulder in unity, serving God and serving Christ, say Yes.” The unanimous “Yes!” was strong and unequivocal. “Well, you don't have to need me as an earthly leader to get a crowd like that to work ” He now asked them to return to their respective parts and “put on more steam . . put in all the time you can” Then he offered words of benediction.
Briefly referring to the coming convention in Britain in September he asked them to join with him in a cablegram, as follows: “To the Leicester Assembly: Your fellow servants, assembled 115,000 strong at St. Louis, bid our British brethren be very courageous and hold fast your integrity. Theocratic victory is certain. [Signed] Jehovah’s witnesses in America.” This was adopted with a unanimous “Aye”.
His final words were, “Well, my dear brethren, the Lord bless you. Now I won’t say Good-bye, because I expect to see you at some time again.” By this the brethren were greatly encouraged, and their hearts and minds were turned to the still greater and grander event, “the general assembly” spoken of at Hebrews 12: 23. Till then they would keep covenant and maintain integrity toward Jehovah God, and endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ, and continue on in God’s “strange work” as his faithful and true witnesses, till done.
[A more detailed report of the convention will appear in Consolation.]
(Continued from page 274) in support of Jehovah’s witnesses and m defense of their rights and liberties in His service. The 32 pages of this important documentary matter are enclosed in a neat and strong cover. It is 5c a copy, mailed postage prepaid.
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.’* - Isaiah 54:I3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, *150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Omers
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The "Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the poet office at Brooklyn, N. Y , under the Act of March S, 1S79.
“LIGHTNING-WAR” TESTIMONY PERIOD
October as the “Lightning-War” Testimony Period is notable in three ways: it begins the new 1941-1942 service year, it is a Period of like united activity world-wide, and this year it also marks the opening of a general campaign with a most potent weapon of truth, recently released at the Theocratic Assembly at St. Louis. “Lightning” not only suggests enlightenment for humankind, but also speed m enlightening them and in exposing the dark deeds of enemies of truth and righteousness The people’s crying need of the hour and also the enthusiasm over the feature offer for this Period, to wit, the new book Children, should speed up the activity of all Kingdom publishers as never before, in further fulfillment of the prophetic drama of Deborah and Barak, whose name means “lightning”. Children, together with a unique Home Study Course by mail, and the new booklet Comfort All That Mourn, will be offered on a mere contribution of 25c. The swift approach of the real lightning-war of Armageddon behooves all persons of good-will to join in this round-the-world educational campaign before it closes. Apply either to this office or to the foreign branch supervising your territory, for references to the local organized service company. Promptly at the close of the month’s work turn in your field report to aid in compiling a world report on “Lightning-War”.
“CHILDREN”
Announced and released Sunday morning, August 10, at the Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in St. Louis, Mo , and at the conclusion of the climax speech on “Children of The King”, the new book Children won instant acclaim from the thousands assembled. Written by Judge Rutherford, Children bids fair, as shown by its initial reception at St. Louis, to be his most popular book, and with good reason. It is written in narrative and conversational style, presenting interestingly and simply the latest Bible truths concerning the glorious hope early to be realized by the persons of good-will today living. Children is bound in sky-blue cloth, with an embossed, gold-stamped cover design that is unusual. The text within is adorned with frequent color illustrations, and is supplemented with an index of subjects. You will prize the author’s edition, as it contains the facsimile of a special letter in the author's own hand and addressed “To the Children of the King”. You may obtain it on a contribution of 50c a copy, mailed prepaid to you. This edition is limited.
“COMFORT ALL THAT MOURN”
This new booklet was released at the conclusion of the public address by Judge Rutherford at the recent Theocratic Assembly at St. Louis, on the subject “Comfort All That Mourn”, and con-(Continued on page 303)
&W3CTTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	October 1, 1941	No. 19
DEMON RULE ENDING
PART 2
"My covenant will I not
"TEHOVAH’S covenant cannot be altered or hin-I dered. His covenant named in the above text is
J his unbreakable word that his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, his Beloved One, shall be established and rule the world in righteousness. Let this be firmly fixed in the mind of every one who loves Jehovah: that The Theocratic Government is of greatest importance, because by it Jehovah’s name shall be vindicated; that the completion and operation of that Theocracy is about to be revealed to all creation, and that now the demons have mustered all their force and power to resist The Theocracy that they might continue to rule the world in wickedness. The controversy is that all the demons are against The Theocracy, and which controversy will be settled finally at Armageddon. The prophecy of Daniel now being understandable makes clear the issue and enables servants of Jehovah to see and to appreciate that individual salvation, while important to creatures, is of small importance when compared to The Theocratic Government.
2	That Jehovah’s everlasting covenant is his expressed purpose to set up The Theocracy by Christ Jesus, who w’ill rule the world in righteousness, is made certain by the Scriptures: “He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the earth. He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations: which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac.”—Ps. 105: 7-9.
3	Jehovah’s covenant with Abraham was a unilateral, unconditional declaration that he would bring forth his Seed, Christ Jesus, the King, and the associate members of his kingdom, and that Christ should be King of The Theocracy and rule the world in righteousness. David, whose name means “Beloved”, was a type of Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God, and concerning him and his covenant Jehovah long ago said: “I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant, Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations. Selah. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips."—Ps. 89:34.
have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. It shall be established for ever, as the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. Selah.”—Ps. 89: 3,4, 34-37.
4	It is that covenant which Jehovah promised to make clear to those who love and serve him, and concerning which he says: “The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will shew them his covenant.”—Ps. 25:14.
5	It is against that everlasting covenant, The Theocracy, that Satan has fought from the beginning of his rebellion until the present time. Now in these last days all the demons, with their chief in the lead, have mustered all their forces to fight against The Theocracy. The demon forces include all nations and creatures on the earth that are against the kingdom of God by Christ Jesus. The forces are lined up for the great battle; and concerning this Jesus said to John, and now reveals to the people whom John represented, the remnant, the meaning thereof, to wit, “And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty.”— Rev. 16:13,14.
6	Upon the earth there is a “remnant” of the anointed of Jehovah, all of whom are entirely devoted to The Theocracy and who now must and shall hold fast their integrity or blamelessness before God. “And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God.” (Rev. 14: 5) All the demons invisible and visible are against these faithful servants of God. Jehovah and his King are for the remnant, and therefore they rejoice.
7	At this point it seems fitting to call attention to that text of the Bible which for many years has been known as a “Sunday school text”, and which has been much misunderstood and greatly misapplied, to wit:
291
292	WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N.Y.
“For God so loved the world, that he gave his only The salvation of creatures from death and the givbegotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, hut have everlasting life.”—John 3:16.
8	Religionists have said that God so loved the world of mankind, human creation, that he gave his Son to save them. Certainly that is not the meaning of the text. The words of the Lord are, “For God so loved the world”; the world of righteousness is that which God loves. Certainly God does not love the world controlled by the Devil and his demons, which was destroyed in the flood. Certainly he does not love the present wicked world, of which Satan is the god, nor does He love the wicked agencies in the earth that defame Jehovah’s name and persecute his people and continuously oppose The Theocracy. From the beginning it was God’s purpose to have a new world wherein dwelleth righteousness. The apostle Peter, under inspiration, wrote: “Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness?’— 2 Pet. 3:13.
9	The promise here referred to is the promise God made to Abraham that in his Seed all the families of the earth that live shall bless themselves, that is to say, all nations and peoples that ever live must receive their blessing by first accepting Christ and devoting themselves to The Theocratic Government by Christ. They take the step of receiving the blessing by believing and obeying.
10	“The seed according to the promise” is The Christ, Head and body, which constitutes the “new heavens”, that is to say, the official Theocratic Government, the capital organization. The “new earth” is God’s faithful princes on earth carrying out the orders and judgments of the King, Christ Jesus. The world of righteousness consists of the invisible, which is The Christ, and the visible, which' is the representatives of The Christ on earth. It is this “world”, that is, the world of righteousness, The Theocracy, that God so loved that he appointed, anointed and gave his beloved Son to be the King and Ruler of it. It is this new world, the Holy City, that comes down from heaven and rules the things in the earth, and now the time has come when Jehovah is making clear to his people through Christ the meaning of his great love for the world of righteousness.
11	God sent forth his beloved Son Jesus to carry out his purpose, and, in order for any of the human race to be changed from human to spirit and to be associated with Christ Jesus in his kingdom and thereafter be a part of The Christ, they must be redeemed. Therefore, says the scripture, God “gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life”.
ing to them of everlasting life is secondary to God’s great purpose to establish The Theocracy, the new world, the new heaven and the new earth. It is only those who devote themselves to The Theocracy that can ever have life everlasting. Their devotion must be to Almighty God and to Christ Jesus, his King; otherwise they perish. Then the Scripture adds: “For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.”—John 3:17.
12	Certainly this means not the salvation of individuals as a primary purpose, but means that God, for his name’s sake, would establish his Theocratic Government, the new heavens, and through it establish a new earth of righteousness, wherein dwelleth righteousness and where righteousness shall prevail and persist for ever. Religionists have given too much importance to themselves, and thereby Satan has succeeded in blinding their minds to the great and important thing of The Theocratic Government. Today God makes this matter so plain that The Theocracy stands out far and above everything else and is therefore of paramount importance, for the reason that it is The Theocracy that vindicates Jehovah’s name. This is “the everlasting covenant”, his unbreakable word that he would have a Seed that would honor His name, vindicate his name, and provide a means of salvation to all of those who willingly put themselves under The Theocracy and devote themselves to God and Christ.
18	John was given a vision of the new heaven and the new earth. In vision he saw the Holy City, which is The Theocracy, coming down from God out of heaven to rule in righteousness. It is that Theocracy by Christ Jesus that will carry out God’s purpose to wipe out wickedness and bring joy and everlasting peace to those that live. It is in that Theocracy, Zion, where God shall dwell; as John wrote concerning his vision: “Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.” Certainly that means that every human creature that lives everlastingly must be wholly and completely devoted to Almighty God and to his beloved Son, Christ Jesus. This is the covenant that Jehovah God remembers for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations, which covenant he made with Abraham and swore to Isaac, the antitypical Christ Jesus, that in his Seed, The Christ, blessings shall come to those who obey. It is concerning this covenant that Jehovah said to his Beloved One: ‘I will establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations.’—Ps. 89: 4.
14	We here return to a consideration of Daniel’s prophecy concerning the two “kings”. To deceive the
October 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
293
people generally and to keep them from hearing and understanding the Word of Jehovah God, the chief of demons pushes the nations into war and he sets the heart of his “king of the north” “against the holy covenant” (Dan. 11: 28), that is, against The Theocratic Government. “The king of the north,” which is the demon-controlled, totalitarian organization of the present time, is blind to the truth and holds to the fallacy that the world can be and shall be ruled by human creatures who trust in religion or demonism as their god.
111 Another wing of earth’s organization, called “the king of the south”, holds to the delusion that the nations can be ruled and shall be ruled by so-called “democracies”, contrary to the Theocratic rule. Both of those kings are against Christ, the world’s Rightful Ruler, and are against all of the Lord’s faithful servants now on the earth; and therefore Jesus says to the faithful: “And ye shall be hated of all nations [of those two ‘kings’] for my name’s sake.” (Matt. 24:9) The prophecy now turns to the events that come to pass within the period of “the time of the end”.
19 “At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter.” (Dan. 11:29) “He” named in this verse is “the king of the north”, represented in the nations that formed the Dreibund, with the Papacy riding on top as spiritual adviser and ally, the purpose of the combine being to restore the so-called “Holy Roman Empire” and to gain world dominion. “The king of the north” began the World War against “the king of the south”. The military leader of “the king of the north” was the kaiser of Germany, who set out to get the Suez Canal and to invade Egypt. Great Britain then dominated and controlled the Suez and hence stood as representative of “the king of the south”. That world war, beginning in 1914, raged for four years and ended without success to “the king of the north”.
” “But it shall not be in the latter time as it was in the former [time].” (Am. Rev. Ver.) In the former time, that is, in the days of the Caesars, the military power of Rome defeated “the king of the south” and Egypt fell to Rome. “In the latter time,” beginning with the 1914 war, the result was different, as the prophecy states. When the armistice was signed in A.D. 1918 “the king of the north”, with Germany in the lead, had suffered defeat. “The king of the north” not only lost out, but suffered a dreadful wound in the head. “And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.” (Rev. 13:3) “The king of the south” inflicted that wound, as shown by what follows: “For the ships of Chittim shall come against him; therefore he shall be grieved,
and return, and have indignation against the holy covenant; so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.”—Dan. 11: 30.
18 The “ships of Chittim” are easily identified as the naval power of Great Britain. Like Britain, Chittim is an island, which island, meaning Cypress, was ceded to Great Britain by the Convention of Constantinople in 1878; and on November 5, 1914, Great Britain annexed Cypress, which therefore became part of the realm of “the king of the south”. The navy of Britain imposed a blockade against Germany and allies during the 1914 world war, which had much to do with the defeat of “the king of the north” at that time. In 1917 the United States of America, the then leading democracy of the earth, entered the war on the side of Britain, and that had much to do with bringing about the defeat of “the king of the north”.
10 “Therefore he [the king of the north] shall be grieved, and return.” “The king of the north,” with Germany in the military lead, was defeated in November, 1918, and was thereafter greatly humiliated by the Versailles Treaty, and the wound which it had received in the head caused great pain and suffering. Hence “the king of the north” withdrew to his own realm in Germany and set about to recover from the disastrous effects of the war. Before the World War “the king of the north” had his heart set against the Holy Covenant, that is to say, determined to oppose the rule of the earth by Jehovah’s government by Christ Jesus. Following the disastrous results of the World War “the king of the north” began to express hatred against those who supported the covenant kingdom, that is, The Theocracy, and hence against the “holy covenant”, and this hatred was manifested by punishment heaped upon those devoted to and supporting The Theocracy. Hence following the World War and his return to his own realm “the king of the north”, as stated, expressed
“INDIGNATION AGAINST THE HOLY COVENANT”
20	That indignation was expressed and continued to be expressed against the Kingdom covenant, The Theocracy, and which indignation has grown in intensity until the present time. (Luke 22:28-30) Instead of giving heed to the message of the truth proclaimed of and concerning the Holy Covenant, or Theocracy, “the king of the north” apparently for a time set up a democracy, which lasted only a short season, but which in fact was not a democracy. Shortly thereafter Italy came into control of former Austria-Hungary territory and quickly lined up with the Papacy to start “the king of the north” on the way to conquest. Germany hastened to do its part. On October 30, 1922, the Fascists assumed control
294
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the Italian government and Mussolini made himself dictator.
21	The Versailles congress had brought forth the League of Nations and set that up in the place and stead of The Theocracy. The religious element of “the king of the south” hailed the League of Nations as “the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth”, but failed to state which god was meant. By approving the League of Nations the Holy Covenant was opposed. But in the latter part of 1926 Italy, Austria and Germany were all in the League, and hence both of those “kings” showed themselves against the Holy Covenant
12	Shortly following the World War Jehovah’s message of and concerning the “holy covenant” Kingdom began to be widely proclaimed throughout Germany, and many of the German people rejoiced to hear that message and they put themselves on the side of The Theocracy. The World War had brought great distress upon the German people, and they were greatly humiliated by the position in which they had been placed; and while the politicians and religionists smarted under their humiliating condition, sincere persons of good-will in Germany gave their heart devotion to Jehovah’s kingdom, and that angered the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and that religious organization poured more poison into the cup of Germany to be dished out to those who favored The Theocracy.
23	“He shall even return, and have regard unto them that forsake the holy covenant.” {Am. Rev. Ver.) That is to say, “the king of the north” gave heed to the counsel of the spiritual adviser, the Vatican. Crafty effort was put forth and made by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy operating in Germany, inducing Germany to forsake freedom of speech and of worship and to return to the arbitrary state previously followed by “the king of the north”. Hence the Nazi movement was launched in Germany in May, 1919. Hitler rapidly forged to the head of the Nazi party. In 1922 Cardinal Ratti became pope, and shortly thereafter organized “Catholic Action”, the purpose of which is world domination and the suppression of the proclamation of the message of and concerning the Theocratic or “holy covenant” Kingdom. The Papacy, as a part of “the king of the north”, took the lead against the “holy covenant” Kingdom and, at the instance of the chief of demons, moved forward for world domination in defiance of Jehovah God.
2‘Note that the prophecy says that “the king of the north” shall have regard unto the forsaker of the Holy Covenant. That means that the forsaker had at least claimed to be for the kingdom of God but had taken a contrary course. Such forsaker or forsakers of the Holy Covenant constitute what the Bible describes as “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” the most prominent part and powerful part thereof
being the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. (2 Thess. 2:2-13) The Hierarchy and their religionist allies have claimed to be supporters of the “holy covenant” Kingdom, that is, the kingdom under Christ, but they show a determination to have part in world domination and rule in defiance of Almighty God and his Covenant Kingdom. No doubt there were sincere men among the Catholic clergy in times past, who had a desire to see the kingdom of God rule the world; but in due time all members of the Hierarchy stumbled over the King, pictured in the Scriptures by the 'stone laid in Zion’, and over which religionists, Catholic and Protestant, have stumbled.—Isa. 8:13,14; 28:16.
25	Note these facts in fulfillment of Jehovah’s prophecy: The totalitarian political rulers have taken recognition of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy as an ally in the program for world domination. They made a deal which is in fact an agreement and conspiracy against The Theocracy. The totalitarian political wing of the combine offer themselves as the political power and agency to bring about the rule of the world contrary to and in defiance of Almighty God, and in which conspiracy the pope and other members of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy fully join and continue to participate. The Lord denounced such an alliance between the political and the religious element that operate in the name of Christ as political and religious “whoredom”, and plainly states that the religious element falsely operates in the name of God and Christ and is the “whore”, and that the political element that rules is the “beast”. Thus the religious “whore” climbed on the back of the totalitarian “beast”, and there she sits and rides. To such covenant-breakers the Lord says through his inspired witness: “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.”—Jas. 4: 4.
26	Mussolini offered himself as a political tool of the combine on February 11, 1929, when he and the pope, Pius XI, signed a concordat or agreement defining the joint program of operation of the political and religious parts of the combine and whereby the pope became an independent political nation and ruler, and Vatican City became the political state of the religious Hierarchy. That concordat the political legislative body of Italy ratified.
27	Also the further facts showing the alliance between the political and religious totalitarians to rule the world contrary to The Theocracy, followed, to wit: On January 30,1933, Hitler became the chancellor of Germany; on March 23, 1933, the German Legislature, the Reichstag, voted dictatorial power to Hitler; then on July 20, 1933, Hitler entered into a secret concordat or agreement with Pope Pius XI,
October 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
293
and the pope performed his part by withdrawing support from the Catholic Center party of Germany, and the Nazis, or Hitler party, became the only one party of Germany; and with that party the Roman Catholic Hierarchy participates, thus showing the combine, “the king of the north,” with determination to gain world domination.
28	Furthermore the facts show that in carrying out of the combination or conspiracy these things came to pass, to wit: March, 1933, Dollfuss, chancellor of Austria (a part of “the king of the north”), dissolved the Parliament and ruled as dictator. On September 11, 1933, Dollfuss announced a program of national reconstruction, based upon authoritative leadership of the dictator and the Corporate State. That change brought him more support from the Fascists. On April 1, 1934, Austria ceased to be even called a republic and by its Constitution became a federal state. Its laws were declared to emanate from God (that is, meaning the pope as “God’s representative”, but in fact “the god of this world”), and not from the people. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy church organization was made the established church in Austria. There was to be no freedom of press, of the stage, of the cinema or of the radio, but all must come directly under governmental control. A Council of Culture, composed chiefly of priests and Jesuits of the Roman Catholic organization, was created and it sought secretly to carry into operation the will of the Corporate State religious combine, and concerning which Cardinal Innitzer of Vienna called that dictatorial combine an “independent Christian German Austria based on the Corporative principle and under authoritative leadership”.
29	These historical facts are here stated for the purpose of showing that the Axis powers, made up of the political and religious combine aforementioned, form and stand for the present “king of the north” mentioned in the prophecy of Daniel. The indisputable facts so fully and completely support and fit the prophecy that there can be no doubt about the proper identification of “the king of the north” and also about the forsakers of the covenant. After the ‘forsakers of the covenant’, meaning the “man of sin” (the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in particular), and the political element of “the king of the north” had entered into the arrangement above mentioned, a movement went forward for totalitarian rule or domination of the world, in which the politicalreligious Roman Catholic Hierarchy has at all times played a very active part. All of the activities of that “king of the north” combination have been and are against The Theocracy.
30	“And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the
abomination that maketh desolate.” (Dan. 11:31) Considering this part of the prophecy, note first this: “And arms [allies, helpers] shall stand on his part”; that is, on the part of “the king of the north”. By the Treaty of Versailles “the king of the north” had been disarmed; but the victorious allies, “the king of the south,” also agreed to at least a partial disarmament, but failed to carry out that agreement. That failure of “the king of the south” furnished the excuse for Germany to re-arm, contrary to the terms of the Versailles Treaty. Italy, under the dictator, pushed its program for military preparedness; and the program for totalitarian rule of the nations of the earth put in action by “the king of the north” progressed as follows:
October 14, 1933, Hitler, acting for Germany, quit the Disarmament Conference and the League of Nations. On March 16, 1935, Hitler proclaimed the renewal of military conscription on behalf of Germany. The following further historical facts here seem to be appropriate:
June, 1935, Hitler and Britain agreed to Germany’s building up a navy to 35 percent of the strength of Britain’s navy. Germany was also to build submarines again.
October 2, 1935, Mussolini, as he announced in advance, invaded Ethiopia, pope not protesting.
March 7, 1936, Hitler marched German troops into and occupied the till-then demilitarized zone of the Rhineland, thereby finishing his complete violation of the Versailles Peace Treaty and also the Locarno Pact. Cardinal Schulte, archbishop of Cologne, hailed the entry of the German army of occupation.
July 9, 1936, Mussolini proclaimed restoration of the Roman Empire of the Caesars tonight, and decreed total Italian sovereignty over conquered Ethiopia and proclaimed Victor Emmanuel his king to be emperor of Ethiopia.
July 18, 1936, Catholic General Franco rebelled against the constitutional Republic of Spain, and the pope, Hitler and Mussolini promptly went to his aid.
November 18,1936, Hitler and Mussolini officially recognized the Spanish rebel government.
July 7, 1937, Japan started her undeclared war on China.
July 8, 1937, Pius XI formally recognized the Spanish rebel government of Franco.
September 14, 1937, the world press announces that Pius XI instructs all Catholic missionaries in China to collaborate with the Japanese to bring the Chinese around to submission to Japanese rule.
December 11, 1937, Mussolini announced Italy’s withdrawal from the League of Nations.
February 4,1938, Hitler assumed personal charge of both the armed forces and the foreign policy of
296
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Germany, and reorganized the high army command.
March 12, 1938, German troops invaded Austria. Hitler proclaims the union of Austria with Germany. Thus he becomes the creator of the so-called “Holy Germanic Reich of Teutonic Nationality”.
October 1,1938, German troops entered Sudeten-land of Czechoslovakia.
March 2,1939, Pacelli is elected pope (Pius XII).
March 15, 1939, German troops entered Prague and Hitler set up a German protectorate over Czech territory of Bohemia and Moravia; and next day over Slovakia.
March 29,1939, the Spanish republic surrendered to the rebels under Franco, and civil war ends.
April 7, 1939, “Good Friday,” Mussolini’s troops invade Albania.
August 24,1939, Germany signs a non-aggression pact with Communist Russia.
September 1, 1939, Hitler starts his “Blitzkrieg” on Poland.
September 3, 1939, England declares a state of war with Germany; Australia does also.
September 10, 1939, Canada declares a state of war with Germany.
December 14,1939, the League of Nations dropped Soviet Russia from membership in the League.
December 23, 1939, President Roosevelt announced his appointment of Myron C. Taylor as his personal representative to the Vatican.
December 28, 1939, Pius XII visited the king of Italy at the Quirinal Palace.
April 9, 1940, German troops invaded Norway and Denmark.
May 10, 1940, German troops invaded Holland, Belgium and Luxemburg.
May 17, 1940, German troops pierced the French Maginot Line.
June 10, 1940, Mussolini declared war on France and Britain.
June 14, 1940, German troops entered Paris.
August 15, 1940, more than 1,000 German planes raided Britain.
September 14, 1940, Fascist troops of Italy invaded Egypt in drive toward the Suez Canal.
October 28, 1940, Fascist troops of Mussolini invaded Greece.
31	The Axis powers, that is to say, “the king of the north,” the political and the religious element acting together and with full understanding, have continued their “lightning-war” with the undeniable purpose of gaining world domination. In that program of wickedness The Theocratic Government, by Christ Jesus, is denounced and openly attacked, and while the Papacy element of the combine tries to conceal its opposition to God’s Kingdom and falsely
claims to be Christian, the facts to the contrary stand out boldly, as the prophecy foretells.
” “And they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength.” Undoubtedly the sanctuary here is the same as meant by the prophecy of Daniel at 9:17, to wit: “Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord’s sake.” The “sanctuary” is Jehovah’s organization, which is now represented on the earth by his spiritual “remnant”, the last remaining members of the capital organization yet on the earth bearing witness to the great Theocracy by Christ Jesus: “Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you! If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.” —1 Cor. 3:16,17.
” The sanctuary of Jehovah is the only “sanctuary of strength”. That sanctuary, or temple company, is “strong in the Lord and in the power of his might” and filled with the joy of the Lord: “The joy of the Lord is your strength.” (Neh. 8:10) “The Lord is the strength of my life.” (Ps. 27:1) “He is the saving strength of his anointed.” (Ps. 28:8) That strong sanctuary is built of “living stones”, the Chief Corner Stone of which is Christ Jesus the Lord, and the other stones the members of his body. (1 Pet. 2:1-10) According to other translations of this text (Dan. 11:31) of the prophecy it is “the fortress”, or “stronghold”, which the enemy cannot overthrow. The remnant now on the earth is a part of and represents that sanctuary. They represent, therefore, the great Theocracy by Christ Jesus the King, and that Theocracy is the great stronghold to which those who love Jehovah and his King have fled for safety.
3‘	“To pollute [or defile] the sanctuary of strength" is to oppose the Theocracy, to reproach the name of the great Theocrat and his King, and to persecute the remnant now on the earth, namely, Jehovah’s witnesses, who represent and proclaim The Theocratic Government. It was in 1931 that the faithful servants of God on the earth learned that the name of Jehovah was called upon the remnant. (Isa. 62:2; 43:10-12; Rev. 2:17) Since then in particular “the king of the north” has attempted to suppress the witness work and to destroy the witnesses who proclaim the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and who tell the people that The Theocracy is the real hope of the world.
35	To the modern political element, particularly of the totalitarian combine who practice demonism, Jehovah says by another prophet: “Say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord God: Thus saith the Lord God, Because thou saidst Aha, against
October 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
297
my sanctuary, when it was profaned,” you shall be punished.—Ezek. 25: 3; see Vindication, Book Two, page 27.
PROOF OF POLLUTING
” Some facts are here set out showing how Jehovah’s sanctuary class has been defiled and polluted by the combine of “the king of the north”, particularly the religious element thereof, and these facts are here published to show that the prophecy has been partially fulfilled and is in further course of fulfillment now, to wit:
Since 1922 the dictator of Italy has never permitted the name of Jehovah and his Theocracy to be proclaimed in that Fascist land. Jehovah’s witnesses have been arrested and imprisoned and to this day are still held in prison with the full connivance of the Papacy.
When Hitler came into power as chancellor of Germany he promptly issued an order against Jehovah’s witnesses, and which order was issued at the connivance and demand of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The property of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society was seized in 1933 and much of its literature was burned by the Nazis. The property of the Society was again seized in April, 1934, which seizure and confiscation was in violation of the treaty between the United States and Germany. The United States intervened in behalf of the Society, and its property was released for a short time. Then again its property was seized by Germany, without hearing the facts or even giving notice to the Society. The work of witnessing for the Kingdom was stopped by the Nazi government. Then the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses were broken up by the Nazis and thousands of Jehovah’s faithful servants were arrested and imprisoned, and many of them have been killed because of their faithfulness to The Theocracy. All that wicked persecution and defilement is done at the instance and demand of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and is a part of Catholic Action to suppress everything that might hinder world domination by the Axis powers.
A letter of protest against the wicked treatment of Jehovah’s witnesses was sent to Hitler February 4, 1934; and on October 7, 1934, companies of Jehovah’s witnesses, assembled in many places throughout the earth, sent the following message by cable and other means to Hitler, to wit: “Your ill-treatment of Jehovah’s witnesses shocks all good people of earth and dishonors God’s name. Refrain from further persecuting Jehovah’s witnesses, otherwise God will destroy you and your national party.” The persecution continues against Jehovah’s witnesses to this day, which shows that such action is a deliberate and determined effort to defile God’s sanctuary class.
Austria closed the office of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society in .June, 1935, and stopped the public witness wTork of God’s people in that land.
June 8, 1935, French Catholic Quebec, under the Vatican’s direction, entered a judgment in the Appellate Court convicting Jehovah’s witnesses of seditious conspiracy, which judgment was based solely upon evidence that Jehovah’s witnesses were distributing free literature telling of The Theocracy and the blessings it will bring to the people. In 1940 the Roman Catholic dictator of Canada declared Jehovah’s witnesses and the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society an “illegal organization” and stopped the public witness work in that country.
Since 1935 and up to 1941 the public witness work of Jehovah’s witnesses has been banned or suppressed in many of the countries, to wit: West Africa, France, Spain, all of the Nazi- and Fascist-occupied territory, Austria, Japan, and other places, and all at the instance of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses is carried on in practically every part of the earth, and these faithful servants of the Lord are “hated of all nations” because of their faithfulness to God and to his kingdom.—Matt. 24: 9.
” Further the prophecy (Dan. 11: 31) says: “And shall.take away the daily sacrifice” ; according to the Revised Version: “Shall take away the continual burnt-offering.” The many Scripture texts bearing upon the use of the words “daily [or continual] sacrifice” show that the same have reference to the continuous or unceasing activities of Jehovah’s servants in giving praise to his name and proclaiming his Theocratic government. (See 1 Chronicles 23: 28-31; Isaiah 62:6; Hosea 12:6; Psalm 34:1; Hebrews 13:15; 1 Corinthians 15: 31.) That daily or continual sacrifice is the continuous praise of Jehovah by his servants’ bearing testimony to his name and to his government, and doing so publicly by publishing the message of the kingdom of God. This is done by the distribution of Bible literature, which informs the people of God’s gracious provision for them, and by their going from house to house and delivering to the people these truths and reproducing recorded speech, and by other means proclaiming the gospel in obedience to the command of the Lord. That public witness work is designated in the Bible as God’s “strange work”. (Isa. 28:21) The proclamation of the name and the kingdom of Jehovah greatly angers the demons and all that are under demon control. Mark this, that the prophecy says: “They shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the [continual] sacrifice.” Thus it is seen that both “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” indulge in the same persecuting work against Jehovah’s witnesses, and they bitterly and relentlessly
298	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
oppose The Theocracy, proving that they are both of Satanic origin and creation.
88 The two “kings” succeeded in taking away this “daily sacrifice” in 1918, during the World War, and under the pretext that the same hindered the war. After the war “the king of the north” continued to hinder and take away the “daily sacrifice” or service of Jehovah by his faithful witnesses. Now both kings, under the influence and power of the demons, continue to suppress the message of The Theocratic Government and both look forward to the time near when they shall be able to say: “Peace and safety”; particularly for the religious element thereof.
39	Everywhere the totalitarian-religious crowd are against the true worship of Almighty God because that worship is to worship God in spirit and in truth and emphasizes the great truth that The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus is the only hope of humankind. The reason for the cruel opposition of the two “kings” against Jehovah’s witnesses is that the demons are desperately fighting to now hold control of the world. Therefore the demon-controlled ruling powers of the nations try to compel Jehovah’s witnesses to “worship the beast and his image”, that is to say, the rule of the world by dictators. It clearly appears from the prophecy and from all the physical facts that both the “kings” are bent on world domination in defiance of The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and hence both are in fact totalitarian and dictatorial.
‘DESOLATING ABOMINATION’
40	“And they shall set up the abomination that maketh desolate.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) That prophetic statement foretells the setting up by Satan and his agents of a mimic or substitute for Jehovah’s Theocratic Government. The purpose is to desolate Jehovah’s servants and to bring about the desolation or destruction of all the people at Armageddon, thus desolating all the earth. That action of setting up the ‘desolating abomination’ is taken by the demons, with “the king of the north” being used by and acting for the Devil on the earth. Watch then further the nations of the earth claiming to be democratic that walk into the same trap of the demons. The setting up or placing the “abomination of desolation” has for its purpose the turning all the nations of the earth totalitarian. It is a conspiracy, drawing into and associating the nations of the earth in one confederacy against The Theocracy. “The king of the south” brought forth the League of Nations as a substitute for Jehovah’s kingdom, and on which the Papacy tried to ride but failed to get on the back thereof. The Papacy thereafter said little about or for the League of Nations. Italy was in the League of Nations from the beginning, and at that time
Mussolini was against the pope. The League of Nations, organized by “the king of the south”, came into existence by the terms of the Versailles Treaty. Austria got into the League in December, 1920. Germany entered the League in 1926. Japan also went in. The League of Nations served as a temporary substitute for The Theocracy until the chief of demons and his associates brought forth and placed the more abominable thing where it has no right to be. Mark now the sly, subtle movement of the chief of demons and his principal religious representative on earth toward setting up “the abomination that maketh desolate”.
41	In Germany the Nazi party, with the full sanction, approval and co-operation of the Papacy, planned their own League, and an order to that end was, to wit: Hitler assumed the office of dictator on March 23, 1933, by the vote of the Reichstag. On July 20, 1933, Hitler concluded his concordat with the pope. October, 1933, Hitler quit and withdrew from the Disarmament Conference and the League of Nations. The same year Japan withdrew from the League of Nations. April, 1933, the pope inaugurated the “Holy Year”, and the so-called “Protestant” nations began to walk right into the trap of Satan set for that purpose. In 1934 President von Hindenburg died and Hitler took full control of the nation. Was the Vatican supporting that movement?
42	The Roman Catholic bishops held a conference at Fulda, Germany, August, 1935, at the conclusion of which a letter of Roman Catholic Hierarchy authority was read from the pulpits of all Catholic churches in Germany; and concerning the Nazi rule of Germany that letter said: “The Catholic Church indisputably contributed a large share towards German obedience and respect for the leaders of the State”; meaning the Nazi leaders, of course. Thus the Roman Catholic Hierarchy reminded the German people that the Catholic church had rendered real and valuable assistance in bringing the dictator Hitler into power. Shortly thereafter, to wit, October 28, 1935, at Berlin Hitler announced that he would lead the Nazi party along the path of “positive Christianity” [that is, Catholic Action pathway], and not along the false path of anti-Christian doctrine; and he there gave assurance of such purpose to the Catholic bishop of Berlin.
DEMON-WORSHIP
48What is the ‘desolating abomination’? Practically everywhere in the Bible where “abomination” (Hebrew: shikutz) is used it means or refers to images employed in demon-worship, that is, idol images. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy always uses images. Note what the Bible says about graven images used in the worship of demon gods: “The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire;
October 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
299
thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein ; for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God. Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it; but thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.” (Deut. 7: 25, 26) “Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.” “Chemosh, the abomination of Moab.” “Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon.” (1 Ki. 11: 5,7) “Ashto-reth the abomination of the Zidonians.” (2 Ki. 23:13, 24) For other Bible texts concerning images, see 2 Chronicles 15:8; Jeremiah 7:30; Jeremiah 32: 33, 34; Ezekiel 20: 30, 31. Unclean animals when eaten as food were called abominations.—Lev. 11:11,13,43; Zech. 9:7.
44	The Israelites claimed to serve Jehovah God, and turned to demon-worship. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims to serve God, but turns to demonism and employs images in demon-worship. The “abomination that maketh desolate” represents an offering, presumably to God and Christ, and is claimed by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to be so offered; but in fact it is actually offered to the demons, the chief of which is “the god of this world”,
Satan. To partake of that offering means to partake of the “table of devils”, whereas the ‘continual sacrifice' was a living sacrifice on the part of God s anointed servants in that these witnesses of Jehovah served him by proclaiming “this gospel of the kingdom” and gave praise to him with their lips.— Heb. 13:15.
45	The mimic theocracy set up by “the king of the north” is the idol, or “abomination”, which is placed or set up at the instance of the demons. It is the totalitarian rule, which is blessed by religious leaders of the Roman Catholic system. That totalitarian rule is put forward in the place and stead of the kingdom of Almighty God, The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. It is a desolating abomination. That desolating abomination has been placed or set up and now stands where it ought not to stand. (Mark 13:14) It is the announced purpose of that abominable thing to rule the world in the place and stead of The Theocratic Government, while at the same time that mimic thing claims to operate in the name of Christ. It will deceive and is deceiving many. Who will give heed to the warning of the Lord and take a wise course?
{To be continued)
"ON EARTH PEACE”—TO WHOM?
IT WAS in the autumn season, toward the first of October, and at nighttime, more than nineteen centuries ago, that the angelic train from heaven arrived and stood over the modest little city of Bethlehem. A band of shepherdmen were guarding their sheep from unfriendly attacks. They knew nothing of the coming of this heavenly host; and when the leading angel stood out to announce the birth of the “holy child”, these watchers were sore afraid. To allay their fears that heavenly messenger said to them: “Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.” (Luke 2:10,11) From the presence of the Eternal God these holy angels had come.
Nine months before this the only begotten Son of God, The Logos or Word of God, had left the self-same heavenly court, having laid aside his spirit existence to become “the man Christ Jesus”, the Savior of the world. The special messenger from heaven had now made announcement to the shepherds that the Savior was born; and then the mighty host with ecstatic joy together sang: “Glory in the highest unto God! And on earth peace, among men of good-will.” Never before had ears of men heard such wondrous song. Down through the corridors of the ages its sweet melody has reverberated. Now at the coming of the new day, the day of the Lord, its meaning is understood more clearly than at any time past. That anthem, sung by the hosts of heaven, was indeed a prophecy; and its meaning to the people must in due time be understood. That due time is here!
A prophecy is the foretelling of future events. It is not
intended that men should understand a divine prophecy at the time it is uttered. (Dan. 12: 8, 9, 10) In God’s due time those of reverential mind and devoted lieart shall understand. The prominent parts of this prophecy stated m the order of importance are: (1) The honor, good name and fame of Jehovah God; (2) “on earth peace to men of good will”. (Douay translation) In every language and tongue this prophetic message has been read by millions of people, but few have understood and fewer have profited by that understanding. Blessed are they that hear and understand and heed.
The apostles of Jesus preached the message of peace and salvation, and many have heard and professed to believe the same. Since the year 800 A.D., when the pope on “Christmas Day” crowned the bloody Charlemagne emperor of the so-called “Holy Roman Empire”, even the nations have professed to be Christian nations. Each “Christmas season”, so called, the preachers have preached some kind of peace sermon; and the people have in some measure expressed a little good-will toward one another by giving gifts, particularly to relatives and friends from whom they expect to receive something in return. Some of the great financiers have on “Christmas” occasions loosened up their purse strings a little, and have given some temporary relief to the poor that they might receive the plaudits of men. The politicians, wielding the power to rule, have on such occasions released some unfortunate ones from prison cells, and at these seasons the religious clergy have boasted of the greatness and generosity of their allies, the commercial and political factors, while with honeyed words upon their lips these clergy have held forth their hands to receive more
300
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
gifts from the people. “Christmas” in December has been well marked by hypocrisy. But, with these governing factors, commercial, political and religious, the name of Jehovah God has not been honored. Neither by their combined efforts has peace come to the people, nor does there now exist good-will amongst men, one toward another, but now the prophetic words of Jesus are fulfilled toward his faithful followers who bear witness for the name of Jehovah God: “And ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake.”—Matt. 24: 9.
The birth of Jesus did not bring peace on earth at that time, nor has there been a time since when complete peace has prevailed in the world. All the religious preaching that has been done in the name of Jesus has not brought peace. Addressing his disciples Jesus said: “Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division: for from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.” (Luke 12:51-53) By this it is understood that those who heard and obeyed his message would be despised by those who rejected it, and that there would be trouble in the households where there was such division of opinion. It has been thus. The truth of God’s great purpose to establish his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus has caused the division in homes.
Further Jesus said: “And ye shall hear of wars, and rumours of wars; see that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.” And this has been true throughout the entire “Christian era”. Then referring to the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule of the world Jesus said: “For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places. All these are the beginning of sorrows.”—Matt. 24: 6-8.
There may seem to be confusion and discord between the words sung by the angelic host and the words of Jesus, but could there be real conflict and inconsistency? The angels were from God and delivered his message. The Lord Jesus, the Son of God, clothed with power and authority to represent Jehovah, spoke the truth according to God’s purpose. There could be nothing inconsistent or confusing about Jehovah. “For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace.” (1 Cor. 14: 33) How, then, shall we harmonize the message delivered by the angels at Jesus’ birth with the words of Jesus to his disciples?
Jesus’ words told of the conditions as they were and would be for some time because of the action of the enemy. The words delivered by the angels foretold God’s purpose which in his own due time must be carried out and bring peace on earth toward those for whom it is meant. Before there could be peace the name of God must be honored. Before there could be peace without end Jesus, as the great executive officer of Jehovah, must fight for it. The angel’s words (according to Rotherham and Douay), “Glpry in the highest unto God! and on earth peace, among men of goodwill,” emphasize the fact that peace on earth is to men of good-will only. Why should the kingdom of Jehovah God
under Christ ever be a blessing and a joy to anyone who is not of good-will toward God? All the enemies of Jehovah God shall perish for ever, and hence to them the Kingdom will be nothing. (Pss. 21:8; 37:20) After the battle of Armageddon never again shall Satan and his religious agents and their organization be in existence. Then the memory of those wicked ones shall perish for ever: “the memory of the just is blessed; but the name of the wicked shall rot.” (Prov. 10:7; Isa. 26:14) Today the people on earth that are of good-will toward Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government by Christ have reason to rejoice, and should rejoice, because the time of complete deliverance and peace everlasting is near. For that reason God is now making clear his purpose to those who desire his righteous government, The Theocracy.
The war and troubles on earth are due to the evil influence of the wicked one, Satan the Devil, and the demons, of whom he is chief. The people are responsible because they have not kept the law of God, but have yielded to demonism or religion. The governing factors of the world are particularly responsible because they have ignored t he Lord and have not honored his name. All mankind have sinned and come short of the glory of God. In sorrow the prophet of God, at Isaiah 48:18,19, 22, cried out: “O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea; thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me. . . . There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.”
The trouble on earth is due to rebellion amongst creatures, which rebellion includes both men and angels. This rebellion has brought dishonor to the name of Jehovah God The rebellion must be put down and the name of the Lord God honored before there can be lasting peace. From the beginning God purposed that the earth should be a part of his universal organization of peace and good-will. He created man in his own image and likeness and gave him dominion over the things of the earth. God made a covenant with man that he should exercise dominion over the earth in harmony with the Creator’s will. Adam violated the terms of that covenant by reason of the treachery of his invisible overlord, Lucifer, who turned traitor and became Satan the Devil. As written at Hosea 6:7: “But they, like Adam, have transgressed the covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me.”—Marginal reading.
Jehovah’s holy prophets were inspired to foretell the complete fall of Satan’s organization and the establishment of God’s Theocratic Government of everlasting peace on earth. Some of these prophets were given a vision of the coming of that blessed time, and they diligently sought to know the manner and the time of its coming, but they understood not. (1 Pet. 1:10-12) The mind of the patriarch Jacob was moved upon by the holy spirit of God and he declared: “The sceptre shall not depart from Judah [forefather of Jesus], nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.” (Gen. 49:10) Shiloh is one of the titles of the great Messiah, the Anointed One, and means “Peaceful One”. Centuries before this Peaceful One came to earth the prophet Isaiah took his position as though he were stand
October 1,1941
3THE WATCHTOWER.
301
ing by the side of the manger in the city of David, Bethlehem, and said: “For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.” —Isa. 9:6,7.
The obedient angels of heaven were entrusted with messages to tell to God’s earthly representatives before the birth of Jesus. These angels must have known of God’s purpose to bring peace on earth to men of good-will. Now the time had come for the greatest of all events till then to take place. A mighty host of holy and glorious heavenly creatures was organized and under the command of their leader winged their way to earth. What a joyful train! and what a blessed mission was theirs as they carried the message of eternal peace and joy to the millions of fallen men! These angels did not try to run ahead of God; and although clothed with power and authority to tell this wondrous message on earth, they did not know when the time would come for its fulfillment. About this there can be no doubt; for Jesus said so, at Matthew 24: 36. Their joy was in doing Jehovah’s will; and such is the joy of every dutiful and obedient creature to Jehovah God. Then came the miraculous birth of Jesus.
In the fullness of time the holy child grew to manhood’s estate and entered upon the performance of his divinely given commission. Could he be at peace with Satan, the traitor and oppressor of man? Satan, as “the god of this world”, offered to compromise with Jesus when he offered Him the rulership of the evil world if Jesus would fall down and worship him, and which offer Jesus spurned. (Luke 4:6-8) The beloved Son of God refused to be misled or to be purchased by flattery or by fame. A similar temptation has since been presented to the religious clergy and they have quickly fallen and hence are honored by the political rulers of the world. Jesus came to earth to glorify his Father’s name and to do this by joyfully doing the will of God He came to destroy Satan’s organization and the evil works thereof and then to establish peace on earth in God’s due time.—1 John 3: 8.
Why did not Jesus destroy the Devil and set up God’s kingdom at once? This he could have done, but it would not have established peace on earth. The human race was then terribly degraded by reason of sin and the works of the wicked one. God’s loving provision was that the Lord Jesus on earth prove his integrity under test and that the human race be redeemed by his ransom sacrifice, and that then the kingdom of righteousness be established in God’s due time and God’s name be declared throughout all the earth by his witnesses and men of good-will be afforded an opportunity to hear and call upon the name of Jehovah God for salvation by Christ Jesus, and then the Devil should be destroyed.
During the past nineteen centuries Jehovah God has made no effort to convert the world, as the religious clergy would have the people believe. On the contrary, Jehovah has been taking out from amongst the nations “a people for his name”, which people are to be associated with Christ Jesus in his Kingdom. (See Acts 15:14-18; Romans 8 16, 17.) These are they who, trusting in the merit of his sacrifice, consecrate themselves unreservedly to do the will of God and become his anointed and commissioned wit
nesses. To such the Lord gave instructions to pray: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.” Neither the true followers nor the professed followers of Jesus were instructed to set up the kingdom of God, but, on the contrary, were commanded to await the return of the Lord and the Father’s due time when his great work should be done in his own good way. The religious clergy of “Christendom” have tried to run ahead of God and set up the kingdom before the time.
During this time of the selection of the members of Jehovah’s royal family of which Christ Jesus is the Head there has been no peace on earth, but the very reverse. Brother has been against brother, father against son and son against father, because all the consecrated and faithful followers of Jesus have been oppressed by others under the control of Satan. Satan hates the truth and every one that follows the truth, and therefore he induces all that are under his control to oppose the truth. Therefore to this day we see the fulfillment of Jesus’ words: “Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division.”—Luke 12:51.
Now Satan and his demons are gathering all their forces for the great and final conflict. It is “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”. It is “the great and terrible day of the Lord”. (See Revelation 16:13-16; Joel 2 31.) In that fight the Lord God will make for himself a name, that the peoples and nations of earth may know that he is God; and then those of good-will shall appreciate the song the angels sang: “Glory to God in the highest!” “Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth.”—Ps. 46: 10, A.R F
There can be no peace on earth so long as Satan is m control of the affairs of men. Satan has now been east out of heaven and sees that his power on earth is in jeopardy (See Revelation 12:1-12.) After his dupes on earth have set up his deceptive arrangement on earth we may not be surprised to hear in the near future the prophets of demonism or religion saying more loudly than ever before: “Peace and safety!” Then sudden destruction shall come upon them, “and they shall not escape ”—1 Thess. 5: 3.
No power aside from Jehovah’s can now avert Armageddon, and He will not avert it. The Devil’s organization must fall' to make way for the kingdom of righteousness God’s prophet, describing the great and terrible day of the Lord and the waves of that trouble dashing to pieces Satan’s organization, says: “They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths; their soul is melted because of trouble. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits’ end. Then they [the men of good-will] cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distresses. He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad because they be quiet, so he bringeth them [the Armageddon survivors] unto their desired haven.”-Ps. 107 26-30.
The great tribulation will so humble the hearts of those that seek meekness and righteousness that they will cry unto the Lord and he will lift them up and establish peace, lasting peace, on earth. “He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth ; he breaketh the bow, and eutteth the spear in sunder; he buraeth the chariot [of war] in the fire.” (Ps. 46:9) Jesus has declared that this shall be the last
302
THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
trouble; and then with Jehovah’s Theocratic Government established “nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more”. (Isa. 2:4) The Prince of Peace in charge, and with the government upon his shoulder, there shall be no end of peace. Then shall the people of good-will be led forth with peace and they shall rejoice and be glad.—Isa. 55:12.
At the time of Jesus’ birth there was little good-will toward God among men. A similar condition exists today. Selfishness predominates and controls the thoughts and actions of men. Selfishness and good-will do not harmonize. Good-will means that one’s purpose toward another is for good and that one desires to see his fellow man blessed with goodness, peace, prosperity, and that he takes a keen delight in doing anything that will result to the glory of Jehovah God and in good to his neighbor.
But are there no people of good-will now on earth? Yes; there are some, but they are in minority. There is a multitude without number that have an honest desire to see peace, prosperity and happiness amongst the people, but they have been so long misled and mistaught by religion that they are in confusion and know not which course to take. These have a desire for better conditions but find no way to express it.
Now the time has come for the anointed witnesses of Jehovah together with their faithful earthly companions to lift up the standard of the Lord for such people of goodwill and to aid and comfort and strengthen them that they may see the right way and rally to it. The King of The Theocracy is here and has begun his reign in the midst of
his enemies, and now the people must take sides either for Jehovah’s Theocratic Government or for Satan’s organization. The great battle of Armageddon is approaching. Those of honest heart, who are therefore possessed of a measure of good-will, should be advised of Jehovah’s purpose that they may take the right course. It is the privilege of the witnesses of Jehovah to point all such to the Kingdom, to remove from the minds of such people the false doctrines taught them by religion or demonism, and to aid them to see the way of righteousness and holiness. The people must learn righteousness, but they will not learn it unaided.—Zeph. 2:3.
The prophecy sung by the angels at Jesus’ birth is now beginning to have its fulfillment. The first part of that prophecy is to honor and glorify the name of Jehovah. That will be done in the great time of trouble at Armageddon, which is impending. The next step is the establishment of everlasting peace, and this will be done when Satan is destroyed, and the “men of good-will” preserved. It is the privilege of the Christians to see this order of events now, to profit by it, to take their stand unequivocally on the Lord’s side, and to always have in mind the words of Jehovah: “Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God.” (Isa. 43:10,12) Consecrated Christians must be the true and faithful witnesses of the Lord God There has never before been such an important time for this to be done as now.
Such Christians can have no sympathy with or part in the Devil’s organization. As representatives of the Lord it is now their privilege to comfort those that mourn by pointing them to Zion, Jehovah’s Theocratic organization.
HERO-WORSHIP A SNARE
ONE of the Devil’s favorite methods to accomplish the destruction of a creature is to turn the mind of the creature away from the great Creator. This the Devil does by inducing the creature to laud, magnify or worship anything other than God, and to forget God. Hence the study of God and his works is the only safe course for man. Many creatures worship the Devil. It is the policy of the Devil to induce others to worship some creature, in order that their minds may be turned away from Jehovah God. Always keep this fact in mind. To accomplish his purpose the Devil not only resorts to fraud, but induces others to become hypocrites. He began this practice in the days of Adam’s grandson Enos, when he induced men at that time to call themselves by the name of the Lord, who in truth and in fact were the dupes of the Devil. (See Genesis 4: 26, margin.} The cunning and wicked policy of the Devil is here disclosed.
At all times the Devil has practiced this method of deceit upon mankind. It is only necessary to glance at the history of the great religious system operating out from Vatican City to see that the people of that system have at all times been induced to honor, worship and magnify the names of men rather than the name of Jehovah God. Some of the leaders in this great system, even though very wicked in their day, have afterwards been canonized as “saints” and thereby made objects of worship by the deluded people. Members of the Papal system, even though honest and sin
cere, are induced to worship images and men, and to pray to Mary and to address her as “the mother of God”. The Devil himself induces this to keep the people in his snare
The same condition has existed at all times in the Protestant system. The names of Arius, Calvin, Luther, Wesley, and numerous others, are recorded with reverence, and their sayings are quoted as authority, even though in direct contradiction to the Word of God. Members of the Protestant church have stood in great fear and reverence of these men and their memories. Many have put their trust in these men instead of trusting in the Lord God. For this reason they have exposed themselves to the snare of the Devil.
Proverbs 29:25 says: “The fear of man bringeth a snare; but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe.” Here the word “fear” means “trembling”, and is from the same Hebrew root as the word in Isaiah 66: 2, 5 : “Saith the Lord: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word.” This denotes a fear of Jehovah. Psalm 111: 10 says: “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” This means that a reverential fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and the reverential fear or dread of man is a snare of the Devil, to turn man away from God.
Satan began to operate this scheme in the early days of the Christian church. Then the congregation at Corinth,
October 1, 1941
37ie WATCHTOWER.
303
Greece, was divided because of trouble. Some said: ‘I am of Apollos.’ Others said: ‘Paul is the mighty one who brought me into the truth.’ This condition caused the apostle, under inspiration, to write to the church at Corinth and say to them in substance: ‘Apollos and I are merely servants being used to bring the truth to you. It is God who gives you the knowledge and the increase. We are merely laborers with you and with God. You are God’s building. Selfconstituted wise men will appear among you and tell you what to do, but do not be deceived by them. Such wisdom as they manifest is foolishness in the sight of God. Let no man glory in men. God, the great Creator, is entitled to all honor and glory. The adoration and worship of men, and the practice of calling them great heroes, is the Devil’s scheme to turn away the minds of men from God.’—See 1 Corinthians. 1:10-13; 3: 5-7, 9,18-21.
The church has never been free from this subtle influence of the enemy. It is not unusual for some man, prominent in a congregation, to be exalted amongst the others. He possesses, possibly, more than the ordinary ability; he shows much devotion to the Lord, and the Lord uses him. Some of his special admirers give him much glory and honor. He loves the adulation and receives it gladly from his brethren ; he begins to think more highly of himself than he should think, and his brethren have their minds upon him as a great example and forget to look to the Lord.
This course persisted in results in defilement of the temple of God, according to 1 Corinthians 3:17. The one who receives the plaudits of the others usually becomes impressed with his own importance, takes himself too seriously, becomes proud, and makes himself an easy victim of the Devil’s scheme. Hence Proverbs 16:18 states: “Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.” The worship of heroes, whether in the church or out of it, is surely of the Devil. It is the enemy’s scheme to turn man away from God, by inducing man to reverence some other man; and thereby many fall into the Devil’s snare.
There is nothing that man has done or can do that is worthy of glory. If he has a clear understanding of the truth, and expresses it for the benefit of others, he is not entitled to any credit or glory therefor. Ulen should view themselves in the right light, and not think of themselves too highly. When compared with the greatness of God and
his higher creation, man is a very insignificant thing When the psalmist David thought upon the mighty creation of God he exclaimed: “When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers; the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained; what is man, that thou art mindful of him 1 and the son of man, that thou visitest him?” (Ps 8: 3, 4) This is a proper view of the matter.
Let no servant of God glory in his own wisdom, nor deceive himself nor be deceived by glorying in some other man’s wisdom or greatness. No truly great men have ever lived on earth since Jesus’ time. It is unsafe to magnify the names of men. Men are never so wise that they can glory in their own wisdom, and no man is so wise that he is entitled to the glory and reverence from other men. “Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these things I delight, saith the Lord.”—Jer. 9:23, 24.
The servants of Jehovah God now see that God resists the proud ones who pose as heroes, and likewise turns his face from those who are hero-worshipers. They see that he shows his favor to the obedient ones, because these are earnestly desirous of being in harmony with his holy will These see it is their privilege now to be his witnesses, and to declare his name and his glory in the earth. As his witnesses these faithful ones the great Jehovah God bids to go and tell the glad news to the sorrowing world, and to advise mankind that Jehovah is God, that Christ Jesus is the King of kings, and that the day of deliverance is at hand
In obedience to the divine command let the Christians magnify the name of Jehovah God, lift up his standard for the people, and point them to the way that leads to life and endless joy. It is the solemn duty of each one to encourage every other one with whom he comes in contact to magnify and worship Jehovah God. Honor the Creator and not the creature. Stand shoulder to shoulder and help each other to stand. The proper study of mankind is God and his works God’s anointed servants must set this example, because Jehovah has said: “Ye are my witnesses . . . that I am God.”
(Continued from page 290) tarns the full text of that speech as given and also the “message of comfort” adopted by that vast assembly. It is the first publication to correctly identify “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” foretold in Daniel 11. The booklet contains 32 pages and is self-covered, the front cover bearing the title “Comfort All That Mourn” and with a rectangular sign above it bearing the fateful words “End of Axis Powers”. You may now obtain the booklet at 5c a copy, mailed to you postpaid.
“JEHOVAH’S SERVANTS DEFENDED”
The release of this valuable booklet was a feature of the St. Louis Assembly this past summer. The Assembly received it with great appreciation and thankfulness, and it will be received in like manner by all who are interested in, if not also participating in, the fight which Jehovah’s covenant people are putting up in the exercise of the God-given and Constitutionally guaranteed freedoms, to wit, of assembly and of publication and of open speech in the worship of Almighty God and in proclaiming the joyful news of his Theocratic Government. In this booklet you will find the expressed rulings of the highest courts of the United States
in support of Jehovah's witnesses and in defense of their rights and liberties in His service. The 32 pages of this important documentary matter are enclosed in a neat and strong cover. It is 5c a copy, mailed postage prepaid.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 2: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 2), 5 1-19 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1, 1941.
Week of November 9: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 2), fl 20-31 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1, 1941.
Week of November 16: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 2), fl 32-45 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1, 1941.
NOTICE
Due to the shortage in metal we are unable to get sufficient quantities of stitcher wire to put two stitches in magazines and booklets. To persons keeping permanent files of magazines we suggest that they sew the loose ends with thread.
As soon as sufficient wire can be obtained for double-stitching instead of single-stitching the magazines will be produced that way.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
IN ENGLISH CITY AND COUNTRYSIDE
“We arranged for a public meeting at the British Legion Hall, Marston. The people were invited by printed leaflets, and then a week before the meeting we received a card to say, owing to unforeseen circumstances we could not have the Hall. The secretary later stated the reason to be ‘You are all C.O.’s; we don’t have anything to do with “pacifists”? We continued with the advertising, and on the day of the meeting we gained permission to use a small piece of ground at the side of the Legion Hall which belonged to the hotel next door. The meeting was arranged to begin at 3: 30 p.m. At 3 :15 the Legion officials with two police officers arrived and stood outside the Hall. At 3:30 p.m. booklets were given to the public, some of whom sat on the grass outside the hotel, and the lecture began. Three parts through the lecture the Legionnaires disappeared one by one; the message was getting too hot for them, and then Judge Rutherford mentioned how some of the police joined with the American Legion to persecute Jehovah’s witnesses, and the police disappeared too. We had an attendance of 40. After the lecture was over a news reporter said: ‘You people have got a name that stinks, but I don’t know why.’ He kept the booklet Conspiracy Against Democracy and took a Kingdom News. The action of the Legion helped to advertise.”
In Gloucestershire: “In the heart of the country I arranged a model study with an elderly lady and showed her the privilege of witnessing for Jehovah; even though she was living alone she could witness to tradespeople, etc. Calling back a fortnight later for the model study I was surprised to find I was sent for by two persons living on a neighboring farm. They wished to know what this was all about that Miss-------has been telling them. I put on
the phonograph recording and told them of the Kingdom. When I had finished (1£ hours), one said she had been a religionist all her life and ‘Why had she not heard of this before?’ I left, placing five bound books and a Bible, and returned to carry out the model study with Miss---------.
One of the ladies from the farm came with me. She was so thrilled with the study that she asked if I could leave the phonograph to play to others, and could I please bring the rest of the lecture ‘Government and Peace’. I returned to the farm a day or so later with the records, and she has ordered a whole set of the books and a 'Yearbook for 1941, and has already been witnessing with the aid of the phonograph in the neighboring houses. I found Miss--------had
spent over twelve hours’ witnessing in ten days, without going a few yards from home.”
AT PIMA INDIAN RESERVATION, ARIZONA
“The Pima tribe are very kind people, but, like others, they are kept in the dark through religionists. I was playing the phonograph at one place when a Catholic priest stuck his head through a window and with rude voice ordered every listener out of the place, leaving me all by myself. He tried to stir up the Indians against me, telling them I was an impostor, not appointed by the State nnd therefore not desired in the Reservation. For the sake of those present I answered him that they have kept the people in the dark long enough and it was the Lord’s due time to expose the racket. This enraged him and he started to call for the police, seeing that the Indians were not willing to
304
do his bidding. My wife, working in the other end of town, and I succeeded in working the entire Reservation. We placed much literature and a Watchtower subscription When we worked the Reservation the second time I called on the superintendent. He said: ‘Are you the man that disturbs and brings so much strife to the Indians and preaches against their religion?’ I was told I couldn’t do this work unless I had permission from the Council; otherwise I would be taken from the Reservation by force. I told him I was willing to face any of the complainers (who were the priest and the minister, and not the Indians, which fact he did not deny) and that we will keep on with our work without a permit according to our constitutional rights and he would be responsible if anything would happen to us. I had a nice opportunity to give him a good witness. Before I left he took Keligion and Theocracy and God and the State. He thanked me and promised to investigate. When we came to the place where we placed the Watchtower subscription the lady gave us a warm welcome, saying: ‘I have been wishing with all my heart for you to come back. We have studied the books and The Watchtower and fully realize this is the truth; my husband and I want to go in this work too, and we want to know if the Society will give us the permission. We know they will not like it in the Reservation, but we would like to do this work anyhow. We are poor, but we put aside $5 for you to get all the books and the Consolation.' We gave her a Testimony card and a bag with ammunition, and two days later she had already gone out by herself, joyfully.”
WHERE THE HIERARCHY’S WORD IS LAW (NEW MEXICO)
“Two pioneers were warned at police headquarters to not continue distributing magazines on the street, or else —! The papers next day boasted in bold-face type on the front page that ‘two Jehovah’s witnesses had been given the bum’s rush, and at last reports were seen leaving town for points unknown’. (To their trailer parked by the edge of town was where they went.) The following Tuesday their ear was ticketed for improper parking at a place with no parking limit signs. On going early to the police station to present the chief with the very important message in God and the State the chief said to them: ‘Yes, I have a very important message for you, too’—and into jail they went without a chance to say a word. The parking ticket was a pure frame-up, a bait to entice them into the ‘cage’. Other publishers missed them and sent word to near-by Albuquerque, from where the zone servant, company servant and another came to their rescue. With foreheads harder than adamant these three sought a copy of the complaint from the police magistrate. The zone servant, spokesman for the group, carried a large reddish manila envelope such as lawyers use. They caused the magistrate to become very jittery and unusually courteous. In tearful tone he consulted over the phone with the prosecuting attorney, admitting, in the brethren’s presence, that there was no evidence nor witnesses against those in jail, though they were to be given a choice of $90, or 90 days, or leave town. As things developed, the two pioneers were released within fifteen minutes. Now the work is respected more than ever there, and the brethren are regularly on the streets with the magazines, unmolested."
sSBBBr^JU?/& /% iUlffilL
"They shall know that I am Jehovah!
-Ezekiel 35 15.
Vol. LXII Semimonthly
OCTOBER 15, 1941
CONTENTS
No. 20
sj;' '**.
h' •
da
Demon Rule Ending (Part 3) .	..
‘Desolating Abomination’ .... Flatteries .................
God's People ...............
The Wise ...	..............
“Yet They Shall Fall” ...	.
“Yet They Shall Fall by the Sword” .
“By Flame” ...	.	..
“By Captivity” .................
“And by Spoil” .................
Help............................
Character or Integrity—Which! ....
Lightning-War ....................
Field Experiences ................
“Lightning-War” Testimony Period ..
“Children”........	.. ..
“Comfort All That Mourn” .........
“Jehovah’s Servants Defended” ... . “Watchtower” Studies	....


307
307
30S
310
311
312
312
312
312
313
313 . 315 . 317 . 320
306
306
306
319
319
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Cljrist his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian_________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, ISIS.
“LIGHTNING-WAR” TESTIMONY PERIOD
October as the “Lightning-War” Testimony Period is notable in three ways: it begins the new 1941-1942 service year, it is a Period of like united activity world-wide, and this year it also marks the opening of a general campaign with a most potent weapon of truth, recently released at the Theocratic Assembly at St. Louis. “Lightning" not only suggests enlightenment for humankind, but also speed in enlightening them and in exposing the dark deeds of enemies of truth and righteousness. The people’s crying need of the hour and also the enthusiasm over the feature offer for this Period, to wit, the new book Children, should speed up the activity of all Kingdom publishers as never before, in further fulfillment of the prophetic drama of Deborah and Barak, whose name means “lightning”. Children, together with a unique Home Study Course by mail, and the new booklet Comfort All That Mourn, are offered on a mere contribution of 25c. The swift approach of the real lightning-war of Armageddon behooves all persons of good-will to join in this round-the-world educational campaign before it closes. Apply either to this office or to the foreign branch supervising your territory, for references to the local organized service company. Promptly at the close of the month’s work turn in your field report to aid in compiling a world report on “Lightning-War”.
“CHILDREN”
Announced and released Sunday morning, August 10, at the Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in St. Louis, Mo., and at the conclusion of the climax speech on “Children of The King”, the new book Children won instant acclaim from the thousands assembled. Written by Judge Rutherford, Children bids fair, as shown by its initial reception at St. Louis, to be his most popular book, and with good reason. It is written in narrative and conversational style, presenting interestingly and simply the latest Bible truths concerning the glorious hope early to be realized by the persons of good-will today living. Children is bound in sky-blue cloth, with an embossed, gold-stamped cover design that is unusual. The text within is adorned with frequent color illustrations, and is supplemented with an index of subjects. You will prize the author’s edition, as it contains the facsimile of a special letter in the author’s own hand and addressed “To the Children of the King”. You may obtain it on a contribution of 50c a copy, mailed prepaid to you. This edition is limited.
“COMFORT ALL THAT MOURN”
This new booklet was released at the conclusion of the public address by Judge Rutherford at the recent Theocratic Assembly at St. Louis, on the subject “Comfort All That Mourn”, and con-(Continued on page 319)
ReWETCTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	October 15,1941	No. 20
DEMON RULE ENDING
PART 3
“But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judcea flee to the mountains” —Mark 13:14.
TEHOVAH caused Daniel his prophet to write a I prophetic description of the “abomination that
J maketh desolate”, and later the Lord Jesus shows that such prophecy would have its fulfillment at the end of the world, when he, as King of The Theocracy, would take his power and reign. The Lord Jesus not only corroborates the prophecy of Daniel as authentic, but he gives warning, telling all persons of good-will what course they must take to find safety after that abominable thing is set up. (Matt. 24:15) The facts and the prophecy further show that the present is the time of fulfillment and the time to heed the warning. Now the prophecy is in course of fulfillment and the Lord reveals to those who will understand that the ‘desolating abomination’ is Satan’s substitute for The Theocracy, which abominable thing is set up by Satan’s religious agent, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies, which claim the right to rule the world. At this point Christ Jesus says to all persons of good-will: “Whoso readeth, let him understand.” (Matt. 24:15) Who shall understand? The Lord God, by his prophet, answers: “None of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.” (Dan. 12:10) Those who are of good-will toward God and his King will now be diligent to read intelligently the prophecy, together with the statement of the physical facts showing a fulfillment of the prophecy. Such will take the wise course by immediately fleeing from Satanic or demon rule and “flee to the mountains”, which mountains symbolically refer to The Theocratic Government of Jehovah by his anointed King, Christ Jesus.
•DESOLATING ABOMINATION’
2 Returning now to the examination of Daniel 11:31: “And they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate.” Further physical facts are here submitted, which show the steps taken to place “the abomination that maketh desolate” “where it ought not” to be; to wit:
At Berlin, November 25,1936, Germany and Japan signed an agreement, which is technically directed
307
against Communism, but the real purpose of which has a far wider scope. The Papacy for several years has held up Communism as a great scarecrow to induce others to support Catholic Action and to draw the people into Satan’s trap, and, without doubt, the smooth and subtle hand of the present pope did much toward the formation of that agreement between Germany and Japan last above mentioned. On November 6, 1937, Italy joined in that pact, supposed to be against Communism, but in fact a furtherance of the scheme or conspiracy for world dominion. Then in the same year, and almost immediately thereafter, Italy announced withdrawal from the League of Nations, which League “the king of the south” had brought forward.
Then on March 12, 1938, Hitler proclaimed the union of Austria with Germany, and Cardinal Innitzer, authoritative representative of the pope, gave public assurance to Hitler that Austrian Catholics fully and loyally supported Hitler; and Hitler becomes the creator of the so-called “Holy Germanic Reich of the Teutonic Nationality”. Hitler has announced that the Holy Roman Catholic-German Empire must be re-established.
On May 7, 1939, Germany and Italy announced that they would sign an open political and military alliance as a result of a conference between their foreign ministers at Rome. Whether the pope sat in on that conference is not disclosed.
On August 24, 1939, Hitler diplomatically outwitted “the king of the south” by entering into and signing with Russia a ten-year non-aggression pact, which both governments ratified. Hitler, in keeping with his demon father, did not live up to that nonaggression pact, but broke it and attacked Russia, and the Papacy approves Hitler’s putsch against Russia, Communism being given as an excuse for such approval.
In 1940 the German Blitzkrieg is carried on against Denmark, Norway, Belgium and Holland, all with the sanction of the Papacy. In June the same year Paris falls; and a life-long representative of the Roman
308
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Catholic Hierarchy is made the arbitrary ruler of unoccupied France. Then in July, 1940, France ceased to be a republic in name even, and Marshal Petain, the Catholic friend and ally of the pope, became the “Chief of State”, both as premier and president, to collaborate with Nazi Germany. The very next month following, that is to say, August 22,1940, at Fulda, Germany, the Catholic bishops voted to pledge allegiance to Hitler, giving effusive thanks at the same time to his armies.
4 In Japan Jehovah’s witnesses are all behind prison bars because they told the truth about The Theocratic Government, and their imprisonment is the result of Roman Catholic Hierarchy action. September 17,1940, Japan announced itself a Fascist State. Ten days later Germany, Italy and Japan signed a mutual assistance pact, pledging co-operation with each other for ten years. November 20,1940, the construction of the New League of Nations, the rule of earth by dictators, proceeding according to “the king of the north”, was signed at Vienna, Austria. That was a formal alliance between Hungary and Germany, Italy and Japan, and in which alliance Rumania, a few days thereafter, joined. In line with that further movement of “the king of the north” to set up or place the “abomination of desolation”, or “New Order”, in Europe, note the following utterances of the Papacy, to wit:
November 24,1940, Pope Pius XII by radio broadcast from Vatican City prays that “there be set up an order of [nations] more just and more harmonious ... an order that would tend to give to every people in tranquillity, in liberty, and in security, that portion of the earthly source of prosperity and power which belongs to each, so as to make possible the fulfillment of the words of the Creator, ‘Increase and multiply, and fill the earth.’ ” Regarding this the responsible Italian authority says that ‘the pope understands the Axis powers’ [Germans’ and Italians’] aspirations, and that he echoes the aims of the Axis powers’.
* As touching the duplicity and hypocrisy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and further showing their direct connection with the Axis powers, and hence their forming a part of “the king of the north”, which is bent on world dominion, and which is “the abomination that maketh desolate”, note the following written by an English writer under the nom de plume of David Wilkie, to wit:
“Hitler became chancellor, thanks to the papist von Papen; and he became the ‘constitutional’ dictator of Germany, thanks to the papist Centre Party.
“The Murders of June 30, 1934
“Hitler’s next task was to remove from office in the party every sincere Nazi who could by his position or
prestige influence policy, and who was not prepared to sell Germany, or betray it, to the general of the Jesuits. This was accomplished on June 30, when about 100 Brownshirt officers were massacred (by Blackshirts), and also a number of non-Nazi patriots were dealt with, such as General Duesterberg and General von Schleicher.
“The Pope Behind the Scenes
“Broadcasting to Britishers on July 3, a Mr. Crossman, an eyewitness of the scenes during the Hitler murders, said that whenever he had spoken to the German people, from Munich to Berlin, all, without exception, told him the same thing, i.e., that ‘the pope was behind the whole of the trouble’.
“To bear witness that the Nazi party was on the wane when the conspiracy which made Hitler chancellor took place, listen to the following accounts of eyewitnesses, a Russian social democrat, a biograph-erof Nazism, and a French Marxian Communist. . . .
“Germany ‘Saved’ for the Jesuits
“The Jesuits saw Germany, and their vision of the ‘Holy Roman (Catholic) Empire, slipping from their claws. ‘Down with Democracy! Down with Tolerance ! Up Murder! Up Dictatorship!’ Von Papen and Hitler ‘saved’ Germany for the Jesuits, just as Mussolini ‘saved’ Italy for ‘the Holy Church’.
“‘Fascism’ (meaning ‘Nazism’ too), wrote Ludendorff in his book The Coming War, ‘is a fighting instrument of the pope.’ ‘Fascism is the offspring of the Jesuits.’ ‘The ways of the Church of Rome and Fascism are identical.’ ‘The Papacy and Fascism are inseparably united: together they constitute what is called “Rome”. . . . ’ “What astonishes me is that the fact should have been overlooked that national socialism of the Fascist type merely means collectivism of the Romish brand.’ ”
flatteries
6 “And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.” (Dan. 11: 32) It is the political element of “the king of the north” that is here named as influencing others by flatteries, wickedly doing what is possible against the covenant, that is to say, The Theocratic Government. The political element of “the king of the north” flatters the religious element, that is to say, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, by promising to fulfill the dream of the Papacy to revive and set up again the so-called “Holy Roman Empire”. In this the political element of the composite “king of the north” serves as the active ruling power, and thus serves as the pope’s implement to bring about the desired result. To be sure, the Axis political powers do not
October 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
309
love the Papacy, but join forces with the Papacy, moved by selfish desire and hope or expectation of ruling the world. The political element expects and relies upon the religious element, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, to keep the Catholic population submissive while the scheme of world dominion is carried forward to completion. The Papacy willingly joins in the conspiracy or scheme for world domination and lends large sums of money and ecclesiastical backing and employs Catholic Action in co-operating with the political element to bring about the desired end. Supporting this conclusion, take note of the following facts, to wit:
When Mussolini became dictator of Italy he was against the pope. Catholic Action was put forward by Pope Pius XI, and shortly thereafter Mussolini became a devout Catholic and made regular trips to the Vatican to have his conscience oiled. Hitler and Mussolini, the two leading parts of the political element of “the king of the north”, had an understanding with the pope, who had dealt with Hitler through his agents and Secretary Cardinal Pacelli and Monsignor Kaas. Fritz Thyssen, German steel magnate who helped finance Hitler to his position of political power, throws some light on the result of the flattery to which the pope yielded. Thyssen wrote a letter, which was widely published, concerning the deal between the pope and the dictators, from which the following is quoted: “The idea was to have a sort of Christian Corporate State organized according to the classes, which should be supported by the church—in the west by the Catholic, and in the east by the Protestant church—and by the army. . . . Hitler then promised what to me was the most important thing: not to touch the rights of the Catholic church. He repeated this promise in a long conversation with Monsignor Kaas, who paid him a visit, following an order of the then papal nuncio to Germany, Pacelli, now Pius XII, and this without knowledge of the leader of the Zentrum party [the Catholic party of Germany at that time], Chancellor Bruening. This conference led to the overthrow of the last legal German government, that of Bruening, and marked the beginning of the epoch of German and European policies which led to the second world war, of today.” The foregoing statement by Thyssen was published in the Arbeiter Zeitung of Basel, Switzerland. (See Consolation August 21,1940.)
6	Hitler became dictator of Germany and on July 20, 1933, signed a formal concordat with the pope. Shortly thereafter the faithful servants of Jehovah, who announced The Theocracy within the land of Germany, were set upon by the Nazis, their property was seized, they were harshly ill-treated, and thousands of them imprisoned. Hitler’s Gestapo performed this act in carrying out Catholic Action.
T The Papacy yielded to the flattery of the Nazis for the selfish purpose of gratifying a political aspiration, and entered into an agreement with the Nazis and made common cause with the dictators. Then the clergy or ecclesiastical element took a positive position against the covenant, that is, The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Thus the ecclesiastical element, the Hierarchy, became corrupt, as the prophecy states, in like manner that the Protestant religionists were corrupted and perverted respecting the League of Nations brought forth by “the king of the south” by the Versailles Treaty. The Papal clergy, by joining forces with the dictators, became a party to all the cruel and bloody crimes of the totalitarians, just as the Lord foretold by another of his prophets: “The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.” (Isa. 24:5) ‘Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways. Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents; I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.” —Jer. 2: 33, 34.
8	The Lord will cleanse the defiled land with the blood of the ones responsible for the present world disaster. (See Numbers 35:33.) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy had for many centuries claimed to be for the Covenant Government, The Theocracy, and had deceived millions of people and still deceives them; but when the time arrived to dissemble, that religious or demon institution chose “Caesar”, the State, instead of Christ the King.
’Note the marginal reading of Daniel 11:32: “Cause to dissemble [that is, act hypocritically].” As to hypocritical action on the part of the flattering Roman Catholic Hierarchy, note the following: The public press of Germany on February 10, 1939, commented on the death of Pope Pius XI, who organized and started Catholic Action, and, amongst other things, said: “Although he [the pope] inveighed against Bolshevism, he also tried t,o come to terms with it in the hope of taking over the Russian Orthodox Church.”
10	For some time prior to the assault of the Germans upon the Russians in the present war of 1941 the Vatican had Jesuit priests in Russia carrying on a systematic training work to gain control over the Russian Orthodox Church whenever Germany conquers Russia. This is further proof of the hypocrisy of the Vatican and of its co-operation with the Axis powers. The public press published these facts throughout the country, among which was that by the New York Journal-American June 23, 1941, in which this statement concerning the Papacy says: “The Holy See has been training priests for duty in
THE WATCHTOWER
310
Russia for some time in the event of a religious change there.”
11	Further evidence of the hypocrisy of the Vatican is shown in the following; Der Angriff, German newspaper, says: “As late as 1936 the pope issued permission to Catholics in Japan to participate in the cult of the Emperor and of the heroes, ‘leaving Weltanschauung to the State and religion to the church.’ ” In all the political operations of “the king of the north” in recent years the Vatican has dissembled or acted hypocritically before the Catholic population in order to hide the facts, which facts show that the Papacy is fully co-operating with the Axis powers in carrying forward a campaign for world domination.
12	The Vatican is now especially acting hypocritically in England and with her allies, which are at war with “the king of the north”; and in that so-called “democratic” nation the Vatican representatives claim to be democratic and to be strongly supporting democracies and that the Vatican is being persecuted by the totalitarians, which claim, of course, is exactly contrary to the facts and is put forth for the express purpose of deceiving the common people and keeping them blind as to the real duplicity of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. God foreknew and foretold of such dissembling or hypocrisy in these appropriate words: “An hypocrite with his mouth de-stroyeth his neighbour.” (Prov. 11:9) The Vatican has played and continues to play the hypocritical game with reference to Belgium, Holland and other countries, where it carries on “fifth column” action. It follows the same tactics in the United States, claiming to be for America, yet dead against all democracies and scheming to grab control of the United States government.
18	The Hierarchy resort to flattery of the democracies, telling the officials thereof that they are the “higher powers” named in the Scriptures at Romans 13:1, and thus throw the democracy-deluded ones off their guard and blind them to the facts. The above scripture means that only Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are “the Higher Powers” and that in no sense whatsoever are political office-holders the higher powers. The political elements have also flattered the religious element by high compliments and by refraining from criticising the Hierarchy and its methods of duplicity; and these political powers have seen to it that the public press does not criticize the Hierarchy nor even mention its glaring and crooked action.
14	The demon trap of flattery has been working steadily, and into it the so-called “democracies” have been successfully caught. As an example: When the Papacy announced 1933 the “Holy Year”, Protes
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tants and Jewish religionists and politicians joined with the Hierarchy in ceremonies celebrating the year and felicitating the pope and other members of the Hierarchy and expressing the hope that ‘a golden stream of prosperity would flow to the people by reason of the actions of the Papacy’.
15	A few examples of the foregoing follow:
On October 8,1936, the presidential campaign was on, and Pacelli, the present pope, suddenly turned up in the United States and had a private visit with the then candidate for re-election, Mr. Roosevelt. When the votes were counted, Mr. Roosevelt had gotten most of the Catholic vote.
Mr. Roosevelt had stated that the United States would enter into diplomatic relationship with the Vatican as soon as the American people could be brought around to it. Becoming impatient in waiting for the American people to come around to that state of mind, Mr. Roosevelt, on December 23, 1939, appointed Myron C. Taylor as his personal envoy to the pope, and Mr. Taylor proceeded to Vatican City to felicitate the Papal head.
September, 1940, there was celebrated throughout the world the 400th anniversary of the founding of the Order of Jesuits, and the United States joined in that celebration. All fair-minded people know that the Jesuits are the most hypocritical and crooked Order that the Devil has ever placed on the earth.
GOD’S PEOPLE
18 In this 32nd verse of the eleventh chapter of Daniel’s prophecy Jehovah by his prophet draws a striking contrast between the enemies of The Theocracy, that yield to flattery and do wickedly against The Theocracy, and those who faithfully support The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. The latter, the faithful ones, are designated in the prophecy as God’s people; that is to say: “The people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.” That means the faithful servants of Jehovah who engage, by his grace, in God’s “strange work”. These do know their God and rejoice in serving him. Such are Jehovah’s witnesses, to whom Jehovah has been pleased in recent years to reveal himself and his purposes in order that they might serve him as his witnesses by bearing testimony to his name and to his kingdom. In 1919 Jehovah brought his faithful people back from captivity and the dead state or condition, where they had been held by modern Babylon. He revived them and put them to work in his service. He has made known to them that he is the Supreme One, the Almighty God, who alone bears the name Jehovah. (Ezek. 37:13,14) He has made them to know that Christ Jesus is the King of The Theocracy, who shall rule the world in righteous
October 15,1941
3ne\VATCHTOWER.
311
ness, and that his government is the most important of all matters. He has set them free from religion and has shown them that human salvation is not of greatest importance, but that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is of paramount importance; and thus has made known to them what is the joy of the Lord. These faithful ones have entered into the joy of the Lord at the invitation of Christ Jesus. God has made known to these faithful servants the meaning of the ‘two great wonders’ in the heavens (Rev. 12:1-3), that is to say, Jehovah’s organization, which is supreme, and that organization which is operated by the Devil in opposition to The Theocracy. God has shown his people what constitutes the “beast” and the “image of the beast”, that is, the totalitarian monstrosity. (Rev. 15:2) Jehovah has revealed to his people the meaning of his prophecies and has made them “strong in the Lord and in the power of his might”. He has made them strong in faith and in works and to stand up against the totalitarian forces of the demons, and to refuse to have anything in common with the covenant-breaking religionists. God has made them strong to stick to and to proclaim The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus his King.
17	Therefore Jehovah’s witnesses, as the prophecy states, “do exploits.” They have, by the grace of God and his King, been active in declaring Jehovah’s name and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and in declaring Jehovah’s judgments written against every element of Satan’s organization. Thus they have done a work and accomplished something in God’s name. This they have done particularly since the outpouring of the holy spirit in A.D. 1922. By the Lord’s grace these faithful servants of his “do know their God” and have gone forth in the strength of the Lord and have carried his message to practically all nations of the earth. They have printed and published the Kingdom message, world-wide, in eighty-eight different languages and dialects, which publications in those languages they have placed in the hands of the people to the number of more than 340 million books and booklets, and in addition thereto many millions of free tracts, besides magazines, The Watchtower, The Golden Age, Consolation; they have also broadcast over hundreds of radio transmitters to countless numbers of radio audiences, proclaiming the good news of The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, which is the bright and glorious hope of humankind.
18	Jehovah’s witnesses within that time have held the greatest assemblies or conventions of God’s people that have ever been held within the history of the church. As an example, in London in 1938 there was a large convention assembled, with forty-six other assemblies throughout the earth tied together by land wires with the main convention, together with
117 radio stations, which simultaneously broadcast the Kingdom message from London.
”In June, 1939, thirty different assemblies were likewise held, united with New York by land wires, together with 75 radio stations, proclaiming the kingdom message; in which multitudes of people heard.
20	In Detroit in July, 1940, there was a main assembly of the convention, with seventeen other American cities connected together by land wires, and by radio, who participated in the proclamation of the Kingdom message. In addition thereto numerous petitions concerning the kingdom of Jehovah God have been circulated and signed by millions of people, calling upon the nations to hear and to support the freedom of speech and freedom of worship of AlmightyGod. In the courts of the nations thousands of cases have been tried, in which public testimony has been given to the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Many of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses have been haled into the courts at the instance of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their dupes, exactly in fulfillment of the prophetic warning uttered by Christ Jesus, and thus a further witness has been given to the name of Jehovah and to his kingdom: “But take heed to yourselves; for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them. And the gospel must first be published among all nations.” (Mark 13: 9,10) Mark the facts showing fulfillment of the prophecy of Daniel, which are here corroborated by the words prophetically uttered by Christ Jesus; and mark well also in this connection the physical facts that follow.
the wise
21	“And they that understand [they that be wise {Rev. Ver.)] among the people shall instruct many ; yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days.”—Dan. 11: 33.
22	Thus the Lord God and Christ Jesus caused the light to shine into the hearts of his faithful people, giving them an understanding of their own relationship to Jehovah and to his King, and those who really love The Theocratic Government have rejoiced to receive this light and have taken the wise course: “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do his commandments ; his praise endureth for ever.”—Ps. Ill: 10.
22	The wise one is he who hears and obeys the admonition of the Lord. From and after A.D. 1922 the knowledge and understanding and wisdom of these faithful servants of Jehovah increased. Since then the wise have devoted themselves to the interest of The Theocratic Government and the Lord has made
312
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
them a part of his “faithful and wise servant” of which Christ Jesus is the Head. (Matt. 24:45-47) Daniel’s prophecy concerning the awakening from the dust and much running to and fro, which for a long while was grossly misunderstood and misinterpreted, began to be properly understood by the wise ones after the coming of the Lord to his temple: “And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament ; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.”—Dan. 12: 2,3.
24	It is those who take the wise course that increase in understanding and rejoice in the Lord. (Dan. 12:10) Many who were spiritually asleep prior to 1931 and were in the “dust” of Babylon until the Lord awakened them, when awakened, began to realize the importance of the hour and, becoming alive to that importance, they went to work, joyfully going forth to have a part, and having a part, in God’s “strange work”. The number of the pioneers rapidly increased; and those in the many companies that have been spiritually asleep, yet who had love for God, awakened and seized the opportunity of going from house to house to bring the testimony to the people concerning the name of the Most High and his kingdom. Such have become faithful witnesses of the Lord and have carried his message to those who have been hungering and thirsting for righteousness.
25	“Shall instruct many,” says the prophecy concerning Jehovah’s faithful witnesses. These faithful servants of the Lord heard and understood the command of Christ Jesus: “This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness” before the final end. (Matt. 24:14) In obedience to the Lord’s commandment here given the faithful diligently went about telling the people of and concerning The Theocratic Government. They have become instructors of many by visiting them at their homes and by holding study meetings and aiding them in studying God’s Word. Such has been and is a tremendous witness work and carried on in divers ways, to wit, by the use of books, booklets, magazines, radio, phonographs, and by traveling from place to place and from house to house and speaking to those who are willing to hear. As these faithful witnesses have gone among the people they have met with many who have had a hearing ear, and these the witnesses have instructed in the way of the Scriptures. Their journey and their work as Jehovah’s servants are along the rough and rugged way, viewed from the human viewpoint, but always the way of joy of heart to those who willingly engage in the field witness work. It is not expected it would be easy on the human or
ganism. It has not been too hard for all, and it has been too hard for some. Therefore says the prophecy:
“YET THEY SHALL FALL.”
*’ According to the Hebrew this part of the text reads: "They shall totter in their knees”; (Leeser) “yet they will stumble.” But mark this, that they do not fall down helplessly. They have not stopped pushing forward in Jehovah’s service. The pioneers and company workers have had many difficulties, but on they have gone. They know that they are backed up by almighty power, Jehovah and his King, and therefore, when hindered by the enemy and caused to stumble, they rise up again and go forward: “For a just man falleth seven times, and riseth up again; but the wicked shall fall into mischief.”—Prov. 24 :16.
“YET THEY SHALL FALL BY THE SWORD”
iT In the totalitarian land this part of the prophecy has been literally fulfilled, as the faithful servants of Jehovah have experienced. There some of the faithful have refused to compromise with the demon organization, and these have been put to death, symbolized by “the sword”; some of them literally being beheaded. The word “sword” is also a symbol of violent opposition and persecution waged against the faithful ones by mobs controlled by demons. This has also been the result in many parts of the earth, particularly in the United States, where these have been led by Jesuit priests, deluded members of the American Legion, and other demonized fanatics. The Lord foreknew that these things would come to pass, and caused it to be written down for the comfort of his people who experience them.
“BY FLAME”
22 The flame here symbolizes hot persecution and public roasting by newspapers, by radio addresses, by public misrepresentation and by false testimony in the courts. From these sources flames of malicious persecution have flared forth against Jehovah’s witnesses. (Lam. 2:3) Against such scorching flames the faithful have stood firm, refusing to yield to any part of the demonized organization. These faithful ones are deeply rooted in the truth and in their devotion to God and his King, and are not like the seed that was sown on stony ground, that “when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away”.—Matt. 13: 5, 6, 20, 21.
“BY CAPTIVITY”
28 Thus are described other things that have been used by the demon-controlled to hinder the servants of Jehovah, that is, his faithful witnesses. These witnesses have been taken into captivity, physically, in the totalitarian-ruled countries, where they have been physically dragged and thrown into prison. In Germany more than 6,000 of such faithful witnesses
October 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
313
of Jehovah have been placed at one time in prison, and many still linger in such prisons. Many have been arrested and thrown into prisons throughout the United States, in the land long boasted of as “the land of the free, and the home of the brave”, which land and its religionist-controlled officers in recent years have yielded to the totalitarian, demon spirit made manifest by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. All of such related wickedness, leveled against Jehovah’s witnesses, is in fulfillment of the prophecy ; and knowing that Jehovah permits the same for a purpose, his faithful servants joyfully endure such suffering and persecution for his name's sake, knowing that in due time he will avenge them.-Luke 18:7,8.
“AND BY SPOIL”
30	From the time that the dictator Hitler came into power in Germany that land has been a place of spoiling of God’s faithful people. The dictator agents, and agents of the Hierarchy, have invaded private homes of Jehovah’s witnesses and there, without any just cause or excuse, have seized the inmates of those homes and carried them away to prison, have seized Bibles and Bible literature, and have burned the same. On one occasion 50,000 books of Jehovah’s witnesses were destroyed in flames by the Nazis. A similar course has been followed by the dictatorial rulers in other countries that form a part of “the king of the north”, to wit, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Danzig, Hungary, Italy, Poland, Rumania, France, Spain, and other places, all of which has been wickedly done with the connivance and at the instance of the Hierarchy, directed from Vatican City.
31	In Canada the spoiling goes on. There Jehovah’s witnesses, the servants of the Most High, have been declared by the Catholic Vatican-controlled dictator to be an “illegal organization”, and their work and their property spoiled, and many arrests made because faithful servants of God meet together to talk over God’s gracious goodness provided for them. A like policy of spoiling is now carried on in many other countries, which form a part of “the king of the south”, to wit, Australia, West Africa, Island provinces, and other places.
32	In the United States, to the shame of the nation that for 150 years has held dear freedom of assembly, freedom of speech, and freedom of worship of Almighty God, such spoiling work has run wild in recent years. It began particularly in the United States, as early as 1932; and in 1940, on the same day that the dictator Mussolini, with the connivance of the Vatican, stabbed the republic of France in the back, the spoiling broke out in Texas and in other places, where Catholic, demonized persons predominated, and there mobs were led by Roman Catholic priests and other Catholic fanatics, who entered private
Bible student classes, and their homes were seized, and their Bibles and other Bible literature, and destroyed. Also they maliciously beat and violently ill-treated many Jehovah’s witnesses, destroying their property and driving them from place to place like wild beasts.
88 “Catholic Action,” organized and directed by and from Vatican City, is the chief instrument of Satan and associated demons in carrying on the spoiling of Jehovah’s servants in different parts of the earth. Referring to this matter, the prophecy says it is carried on for “many days”, and those days are almost certain to continue with increased venom and violence, manifested by the religionists against Jehovah’s servants until the Lord takes a hand in that battle of the great day of God Almighty called “Armageddon”.
34	By these wicked means named in the prophecy, sward, flames, captivity and spoiling, Catholic Action, which is a part of “the king of the north”, hopes to bring about a condition in the world when the religionists, their leaders and allies may say to one another: tfWe are at peace and safety.” That will be the sign when the Lord will move into action and clear up the demon agents.
35	Through all the cruel persecution suffered by Jehovah’s witnesses at the hands of demon-controlled ruling elements these faithful servants of the Lord have managed to stumble along. Weary in body, yet rejoicing in spirit, they have gone forward singing the praises of The Theocracy and its King. Thus they continue to have part in the “strange work” of Jehovah. Onward they march like an irresistible swarm of locusts, fully determined that in the strength of the Lord they will perform their part of the covenant. Long ago Jehovah, by his prophet, foretold this onward march of his servants in these words: “They shall run like mighty men; they shall climb the wall like men of war; and they shall march every one on his ways, and they shall not break their ranks; neither shall one thrust another, they shall walk every one in his path; and when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded [though in among the weapons they fall, they shall not stop (Rother-Aam)].”—Joel 2:7,8.
HELP
86	“Now when they shall fall [And when they stumble (Young)], they shall be holpen with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.” —Dan. 11: 34.
87	The Lord here brings to view his “other sheep”, who sympathize with the “remnant” and show their goodness of heart by rendering assistance to the remnant. These “other sheep” are very small in number when compared with the host of the wicked persecutors, called “goats”. The “other sheep” are likened
314
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to those who became companions of David when he was outlawed and hunted by Saul. (1 Chron. 12:22-24) So David wrote: “The Lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me.”—Ps. 118:7.
’• They render aid as Rahab rendered aid to the spies. So these “other sheep” of the Lord have shown their goodness of heart towards God’s remnant. (Josh. 2:1,2) Likewise as Jael rendered help to Barak and Deborah at the battle of Megiddo. (Judg. 4:17-22; 5:24-27) The Lord has further pictured such help rendered by the Jonadabs, as shown in the relationship of Jonathan and David (1 Samuel 19,20,23); also as that shown by Ebed-melech in helping Jeremiah when he was in the pit. (Jer. 38:7-13) As the “other sheep” render help to the faithful remnant, so they render it unto Christ Jesus, of which He takes notice and administers to them a great blessing.—Matt. 25: 32-40.
” Some help is also rendered by reasonable and sensible judges of the courts who have rendered honest and sincere decisions upholding the rights of Jehovah’s witnesses in proclaiming the Kingdom message, and which decisions have had something to do with keeping the “back door” open for the remainder of the modern-Ehud class. (Judg. 3: 23-26) The attitude of the British government and many of its war draft boards has shown their kindness toward Jehovah’s witnesses, and it is here noteworthy. The Lord never overlooks kindness that is ministered to those who love and serve him. No doubt the judges referred to, who have rendered favorable and righteous decisions concerning Jehovah’s witnesses, and the officials of the British government who have shown kindness to Jehovah’s servants, will receive some just recompense from the Lord in due time.
40	“But many shall cleave to them with flatteries.” There was an earlier representative of “the king of the north” in power when Jesus was on the earth in the flesh and who yielded to flatteries. (See Daniel 11: 21, 22.) Verse 32 of this eleventh chapter shows a later representative of “the king of the north” who is corrupted and who corrupts the so-called “clergy” by flatteries. The demons try their flattering schemes upon Jehovah’s witnesses. “The king of the north” and its agents and representatives thereby hope to corrupt Jehovah’s witnesses by inducing them to
compromise with the Devil, such as Satan attempted to do to corrupt Christ Jesus at the mount of temptation. Some officials of “the king of the north”, particularly the diplomatic ones, try to induce Jehovah’s servants by flattery and flattering words to compromise by having part in creature worship and paying homage to creatures. The faithful refuse to yield, and pray as they are taught in God’s Word: “Lead me, 0 Lord, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; make thy way straight before my face. For there is no faithfulness in their mouth; their inward part is very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter with their tongue. Destroy thou them, 0 God; let them fall by their own counsels ; cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions; for they have rebelled against thee.”— Ps. 5:8-10.
41	There are flatterers amongst the “elective elder” class, who indulge in flattery themselves and who believe in flattering Satan’s organization by putting on the soft pedal when it comes to the Kingdom message and by recognizing political officials as the “higher powers” and yielding to their demands. The result is that such decline to have any part in proclaiming The Theocracy and the deadly conflict of Satan’s organization with God’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. The evidence is therefore cumulative showing beyond all doubt that the composite “king of the north”, made up chiefly of political-religious elements, and demon-controlled, has boldly and blasphemously placed itself “in the holy place” and there it arrogantly stands in the place “where it ought not” to stand, in the place and stead of The Theocracy by Christ Jesus, and stands there in defiance of Almighty God. It is the present-day 'desolating abomination’, the instrument of Satan, the chief of demons, by which he would desolate the entire earth. Those who see and understand these truths will now give heed to the warning uttered by Christ Jesus the King and quickly flee to The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, symbolized by “the mountains”.—Matt. 24:15; Mark 13:14.
42	At the same time those who have taken the wise course are being subjected to the severe test, and all who will come off victorious must continue to hold fast their integrity. Who of such will now appear blameless before the Lord in this hour of final testing ?
(To be continued)
The works of Jehovah are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. His work is honor and majesty; and his righteousness endureth for ever. He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered . . . The works of his hands are truth and justice; all his precepts are sure. The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise endureth for ever.
—Psalm 111: 2-4, 7,10, A.R.V.
CHARACTER OR INTEGRITY-WHICH?
IN THIS trying world crisis “character development” and its claimed importance and necessity are repeatedly stressed from the public platform and the pulpit and over the radio. Said a Toronto, Canada, clergyman recently in New York: “Fighting and beating Hitler may involve the danger of becoming [totalitarian] like Hitler. We must return to the idea that the character of God determines our moral order.” (N. Y. Times, July 21, 1941) Expressions also are frequent, such as: “We must in this life become a perfect character or else we cannot eternally dwell with God.” “Fitness of character to meet God’s approval must be accomplished while in the flesh. Death and resurrection will make no change in our character.”
What, then, is “character”? The word in the Greek text of the Bible from which the English word “character” is taken appears but once in the Scriptures. The Greek word is there rendered “express image”, as follows: “Who being the brightness of his glory, and, the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.” (Heb. 1:3) This description of Christ Jesus relates to the time when he was resurrected and exalted to divine glory. The express image of the Father, which Jesus Christ now enjoys, is not something that he developed during his three and one-half years of suffering down on earth. The apostle, at Hebrews 1: 3, plainly says that Christ Jesus enjoyed this “express image” from the time when he “sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high”. This glory he did not acquire by his own efforts, but it came to him as a reward from God because of his absolute obedience and faithfulness and maintaining of his integrity toward Jehovah while on earth.
This “express image”, or “character” (Greek), is not something that the glorified Jesus possesses separate and apart from his person. The Emphatic Diaglott translation renders Hebrews 1:3 in this manner: “Who, being an effulgence of his glory, and an exact impress of his substance, and making manifest all things by the word of his power, having made a purification for sins, sat down at the right hand of the majesty in high places.” From this it must be concluded that when Jesus was exalted on high he then became the “express image” of Jehovah his Father and that life divine or immortality has to do with that express image That being true, it was an absolute impossibility for Jesus to develop it while in the mortal flesh. The Greek word “character” means “the figure stamped in; an exact copy; express image”. (Strong's Concordance)
“Character is that which a person or thing really is.” (Webster’s Dictionary) This definition is in harmony with the inspired Scriptures. It is true that in English usage the word “character” has many shades of meaning given to it by lexicographers, but usage by men can in no wise change the Scriptural meaning of a word or term. If the Lord through the inspired scribes plainly shows the meaning of a word used, then no man has authority to give that word a different meaning and then apply that meaning to the Scriptures.
Frequently in religious circles these expressions are used, to wit, “God’s righteous character”; “Jesus’ character”; “the Christian’s character”; etc. Observe that in each
of these expressions the possessive case of the person is employed, meaning ownership or possession of something as separate and distinct from the person or creature. Does God possess a character separate and distinct from himself ? Does Jesus own and possess a character which is separate and distinct from himself and which he has developed ’ Has a Christian a character which he owns and possesses and which he develops by his own effort?
Webster further defines the Greek word rendered “character” in harmony with the Scriptures, thus • “The peculiar quality or the sum of qualities by which a person or thing is distinguished from others, that which a person or thing really is.” What distinguishes God from all others’ The answer must be that at all times, without beginning and without ending, the four primary attributes, wisdom and justice and love and power, are expressed by and in him in exact harmony. Such cannot be said of any other. Jehovah, therefore, is The Character. That being true, the expressions “God’s character” or “God’s righteous character” are unscriptural. These attributes are a part of Jehovah. He is The Character. He does not possess or own a character.
From the time of the creation of God’s only begotten Son, The Logos or Word, afterward called “Jesus”, he was always a character and he was always perfect. When God raised Jesus up out of death and clothed him with immortality and with all power in heaven and in earth and exalted him to the highest place in the heavens, he made Jesus Christ exactly like Himself, his “express image”. Therefore and from that time he is a character like Jehovah. This does not indicate that he possesses something vhich he developed and which is called “character”, but that he is a character and he is like his Father.
Man is a creature, an entity, a soul; as shown by the account of his creation, at Genesis 2:7: “And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.” There are many people on the earth who believe themselves to be Christian and who use the expression, “I have a soul to save,” thereby meaning that they possess something called “a soul” and which is separate and distinct from the body. This is not Scriptural. No man possesses a soul separate and distinct from his body. Every man is a soul. Likewise no man possesses a character. Every man is a character. “Character is that which a man really is” Hence the expressions “Jacob’s character” and “Esau’s character” are not properly Scriptural terms. The patriarch Jacob was a good man and therefore a good character, whereas his twin brother, Esau, was a bad man and therefore a bad character.
Is it a proper expression, therefore, to say that a Christian must develop a character pleasing to God before he can be received into God’s kingdom? Such is not a correct expression, because it implies that the Christian must develop something to a point where God will approve him, that he must do this by his own efforts, and that the thing developed is something separate and distinct from himself. No wonder, then, that many Christians have become discouraged. The improper view of the matter is discouraging, whereas the proper understanding of it gives courage to the 315
316
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Christian. It should be our purpose always to encourage and help one another.
To illustrate: A printer’s type is made from metal. The letter A is a character. This letter may be cut out of a rough piece of steel. As soon as it is formed into the letter A it is a character, but it is rough and unsightly. The roughness is taken off and it is subjected to a high polish until it becomes very beautiful. The polishing process is not the developing of a character; it is the change of the identical character from one degree of unsightliness to a degree of beauty.
At the time that a man consecrates himself to God by a covenant to do God’s will as Christ Jesus does that will, that man becomes a Christian. He is then a character. He is a Christian. He does not possess a Christian nor does he possess a character. He is now in the rough. Must this Christian, this character, undergo a change, or must he “develop a character to perfection” before God can receive him? This question must be answered by the Word of the Lord. Man’s theory is unsatisfactory.
The apostle Peter, in both of his epistles, addresses Christians that have been begotten of the spirit of God as his spiritual children. To these the apostle says: “For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.” (1 Pet. 2: 21) Now the question is: Was Jesus required to develop a character before he could be received into the Kingdom, and did he develop such character while on the earth? The proper answer to this question furnishes the criterion by which the followers of Jesus must be guided, and the answer to the question must be emphatically No; because Jesus was a perfect character when on the earth. He did not have a character to develop; he was a character, and he was perfect; otherwise he could not have been acceptable as the great ransom sacrifice to redeem believing and faithful humankind.
But from the time he consecrated himself to Jehovah God and was baptized in water to symbolize that consecration and was thereafter begotten of God’s holy spirit, from that time until his resurrection from the dead did not Jesus have to develop a perfect character as a “new creature”? He did not. Had he developed such a character as a new creature while in the flesh, then Jesus would have had that likeness spoken of by the apostle before he died and was raised from the dead. He did not raise himself from the dead, but God raised him up.
At Hebrews 5: 8, 9 it is written: “Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.” Does not this mean that he was made perfect in his character? The answer is, No. Jesus entered into a covenant with his Father to do his Father’s will. He was put to the most severe tests of his integrity toward Jehovah God, and under these tests he maintained his integrity and proved his unswerving loyalty, devotion and faithfulness to God. The purpose of the things which he suffered was to prove his faithfulness under the most adverse circumstances. He met all these tests and thereby completely learned obedience. “For it became him [Jehovah God], for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the
captain of their salvation [Christ Jesus] perfect through sufferings.”—Heb. 2:10.
The word “perfect” used by the apostle Paul in the foregoing texts means to complete, to consummate, to accomplish. Note that the texts do not say that Jesus perfected his character by the things which he suffered. What is said is this: He learned obedience by the things which he suffered, and having completed or consummated his covenant with God he became the author of eternal salvation. “He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.” (Phil. 2: 8) Otherwise stated, when Jesus finished his covenant of sacrifice God gave him the reward by making him the author of the eternal salvation of obedient humankind. At the same time God gave to him immortality and a glory like unto His own, and thereby Jesus became “an exact impress of [God’s] substance”.
What Jesus did his followers must likewise do, because they are called to follow in his footsteps. All such as will ultimately be made perfect, glorious characters and “be like him” must be so made by Jehovah God in the “first resurrection”.—1 John 3:2; Rev. 20: 6.
The true Christian has, like Jesus, entered into a covenant to do Jehovah’s will. The word “covenant” is the solemn form of expressing the word “contract”. Two are required to make a covenant, and the minds of both parties thereto must agree. “Christian” is the name applied to a man who makes a full consecration whereby he agrees to do God’s will, trusting in the merit of Christ Jesus as his Redeemer. In substance, his part of the contract may be stated thus: “I believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and I promise and agree to do thy will, 0 God, whatsoever it may be.” If God takes a man into covenant with him, that is called a “bilateral” or two-sided covenant. The obligation rests upon both parties to the covenant to carry that covenant into complete operation according to its terms. Jehovah God binds himself to perform all his covenants. Almighty God makes it impossible for his side of the covenant to fail. Can a man who has been taken into a covenant with God treat his obligations under that covenant lightly and violate or break them without punishment ? Romans 1: 31, 32 answers: “Covenant breakers ... are worthy of death.” God is faithful in all things he has promised, and he requires faithfulness of all those who undertake to perform an agreement or covenant with him.
Today the worldly powers endeavor to force God’s covenant people to repudiate their covenant and to break the terms thereof by conforming themselves to the things of this world, which things are contrary to Jehovah’s commandment and will. The facts show that God’s faithful covenant people remain steadfast to Jehovah, faithful to the terms of their covenant and to The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, regardless of all threats or acts leveled against them. The faithful covenant people of God will not fear man or what man can do. They do fear Almighty God and obey and serve him. As for wicked men, their power ends with death, but the power of Almighty God is eternal. If one in a covenant dies unfaithful to God, that is the end of him everlastingly. If he dies at the hands of wicked men because he is faithful to Jehovah and to the obligations of his covenant, Jehovah will resurrect that faithful one to life eternal.
October 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
317
Why should a man hesitate to faithfully keep covenant with Jehovah in the face of all human opposition or punishment, either threatened or applied! The man who is in a covenant with Jehovah and has partaken of the knowledge of the good things to be given by the Lord God does not permit himself even to debate in mind as to whether or not he should obey man and thereby break his covenant. He who maintains his integrity toward God is determined to keep his covenant obligations faithfully to the end, regardless of what may be done against him by any human power.
At 2 Peter 1: 5-8 the apostle says: “And beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance [self-control] ; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.” The apostle Peter is not here telling Christians how to develop character, but is telling them how to perform their covenant, and then, for the encouragement of Christians, he adds (vs. 10) : “If ye do these things, ye shall never fall.”
Why read into the inspired words of the apostle that which is not there? Where in the Scriptures do we find warrant for the statement made by religionists: “Your part and my part in the eternal purpose of God depends upon our character development, and we must get busy and develop this character, a perfect character, while in this life”? Every Christian knows he cannot do anything perfectly, but he does know he can do his best to perform that which he has agreed with the Lord to do. The apostle Peter states what he must do ; and to do means to work, and that work must be done with joy.
The Christian may put forth his very best endeavors to do the things mentioned by Peter and yet he is always mindful of his many weaknesses and imperfections. He knows he is not perfect. With the wrong understanding of “character development” he would certainly become discouraged, but with a proper understanding of integrity and of his covenant with God he with joy can say: “My Father is the righteous God. He knows my heart and that I love him and am striving to be his true and faithful witness.” To such
Christians the message of the apostle joyfully rings in their ears: TBe not discouraged; if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.’ This means that if you faithfully put forth your best efforts to perform your part of the covenant you are absolutely certain to win and to gain God’s approval and the blessings he has reserved for those who maintain their integrity toward him and thus prove the Devil’s false charge a lie.—Job 2: 5.
“But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.” (2 Pet. 1:9) Some may speak gently, never express anger or displeasure, always appear to be very good, quie| and pious, read the Scriptures daily, think of holy things, and imagine they are “developing a wonderful character” ; yet they will fail of the kingdom if they have failed or refused to do the things required by their covenant. The above words of the apostle are not instructions as to how to “develop a character”, but are plain statements of what must be done by all Christians in the faithful performance of the covenant they made.
Dreaming Christians are blind. They look to their own virtties and forget that their cleansing was by the blood of Jesus and that their standing before God is only by virtue of his righteousness. Let the dreamers talk of “developing a perfect character”. Let all Christians that would main-tain.-their integrity toward God be active in the performance of their covenant. Those who thus do “shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ”, but will be appreciating the light of truth as God gives it to his covenant people and will be showing that appreciation by joyfully participating in his active service. There is a tremendous witness to be given in the earth before the final overthrow of Satan’s organization. Christians, gird up your loins, and go forth to that service joyfully, showing forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. Let us do what we have agreed to do by the terms of our covenant, and leave the character to God. It is God who will make a glorious character of him that is faithful to the end In the Kingdom, and not until then, will the Christian become a perfect character. “Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on [serve] thee.”—Psalm 25: 21.
LIGHTNING-WAR
KJ 'HE Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice; . . . I his lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled.” (Ps. 97:1-4) Jehovah is the source of the lightnings. He uses the things which he has made and which are visible to man, to teach man concerning that which is invisible to him. The things both visible and invisible which God has provided he will cause to work out for good to those who are unselfishly devoted and obedient to him. All lightnings proceed from Jehovah and are a manifestation of his power. This is proved by his words to Job: “Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, Behold us?"—Job 38:35, marginal reading.
“When he uttereth his voice, there is a tumult of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapors to ascend from the
ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasuries.” (Jer. 10:13, Am. Rev. Ver.) Lightning illuminates and reveals that which was previously in the dark or obscured. Symbolically, God’s lightnings illuminate his Word for those who wait upon him, and reveal and expose that which is opposed to God and his organization. God’s lightnings apply at the time when God manifests his presence to his people, giving them greater light upon his Word and revealing his purposes toward them and also exposing their enemies. “Thunder” symbolizes the voice of Jehovah: “Hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou thunder with a voice like him?” (Job 40:9) “The God of glory thundereth.” (Ps. 29:3) With thunder there comes rain in abundance. (Job 38:34) Rain is a symbol of refreshing truth that refreshes and
318
SEe WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
makes glad the heart of the people of God.—Job 29:23; Pss. 68 : 9 ; 147 : 7, 8.
At this time his lightnings, thunders and rains Jehovah has brought forth from his treasury and has poured out his spirit upon all his anointed witnesses on earth to the end that these may tell the people of the day of his vengeance and of his purpose to destroy the enemy Satan’s organization, and to make for himself a name and vindicate it, and to establish his government of righteousness for the benefit of obedient humankind. There could be no other reason why Jehovah God would say to his covenant people: “Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and I am God.” (Isa. 43.12, Am. Rev. Ver.) God does nothing in the corner. He will have notice given and he uses his faithful servants to serve notice upon the people, that those may know of his purposes who might desire to know. The work of thus serving notice or giving the witness to the name of Jehovah is but the prelude to the great battle of Armageddon. Concerning this approaching storm it is written, at Job 36:32,33, Am. Rev. Ver.: “He covereth his hands with the lightning, and giveth it a charge that it strike the mark. The noise thereof telleth concerning him, the cattle also concerning the storm that cometh up.”
Jehovah’s lightnings are not aimless. There is a well-preconceived purpose in bringing forth at this time his lightnings of truth. His hand is a symbol of his power, and he covers his hands with the lightnings and strikes squarely home at religion. His people are cheered thereby, and the enemy organization trembles. His thundering voice tells concerning his purpose, and he serves notice upon the small and the great, even those represented by “the cattle”. The declaration of the day of his vengeance is one part of the commission he gives to his anointed witnesses; therefore these anointed ones, in order to be faithful, must perform that commission now before Armageddon.—Isa. 61:1, 2.
At Hebrews 11:32-34 it is written: “And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets; who through faith subdued kingdoms, . . . out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens.” Here Barak is specifically named because of his faith With him was Deborah, the prophetess of God, who worked with Barak. In the prophetic drama of God’s vengeance against his demon-worshiping enemies Deborah played a part picturing God’s capital organization under its Head Christ Jesus, while Barak, the commander of the loyal forces of Israel, played the part picturing Christ Jesus the Lord. With a small army of 10,000 men, poorly equipped, Barak joined battle with an overwhelming enemy host, which host was equipped with 900 iron chariots under the leadership of Sisera. In that battle the angels of heaven fought with Barak against Captain Sisera, and Almighty God sent a great storm and flood, which swept away the disorganized and disrupted army of Sisera, and then Barak destroyed the entire lot as they fled. (See Judges chapters four and five.)
Deborah sent a messenger to the north of her place of abode, a distance of forty-five miles into the territory of the tribe of Naphtali and right close up to the Canaanite city of Hazor, the royal residence of Jabin, Sisera’s king.
The messenger of Deborah was sent to Barak, calling him into active service against the oppressors of Israel. The name Barak means lightning. Satan, the mimic god, appears to have adopted the same name for his dictatorial representative in Germany who now carries on a Blitzkrieg, or “lightning-war”. The Devil usually seizes upon the things that Jehovah uses, and tries to mimic them, and he uses the same to reproach the name of the Most High.
In the drama here under consideration the word “lightning” seems to refer to a weapon of warfare used against the enemies of Jehovah. So far in these modern days the Devil (acting through his agency, the Vatican) and the Nazis speak of their vicious assaults upon others as a Blitzkrieg, or “lightning-war”. That war of the Devil’s representatives will avail nothing in the end.
Scriptures which show the use and meaning of “lightning” as a weapon of warfare follow: Psalm 144: 5-7 says “Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down ; touch the mountains,-and they shall smoke. Cast forth lightning, and scatter them; shoot out thine arrows, and destroy them. Send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great waters, from the hand of strange children.” Psalm 18: 14: “Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them ” 2 Samuel 22 : 15 “And he sent out arrows, and scattered them, lightning, and discomfited them.” Deuteronomy 32:41, Am. Rev. Ver (marginal reading) : “If I whet the lightning of my sword, and my hand take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to mine adversaries, and will recompense them that hate me.” Ezekiel 21:9,10,15,28, Am. Rev. Ver.: “Say, A sword, a sword, it is sharpened, and also furbished, it is sharpened that it may make a slaughter ; it is furbished that it may be as lightning: shall we then make mirth? I have set the threatening sword against all their gates, that their heart may melt, and their stumblings be multiplied; ah! it is made as lightning, it is pointed for slaughter. . . . Say thou, A sword, a sword is drawn, for the slaughter it is furbished, to cause it to devour, that it may be as lightning.” Zechariah 9:14 ■ “And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning. and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.”
Barak, whose name means “lightning”, plajed the pait picturing Christ Jesus in two relations: (1) As the captain of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses now upon the earth engaged in God’s “strange work” against religion; and (2) as the Field Marshal of Jehovah leading the invisible angelic hosts of God in the “battle of that great day of God Almighty” in the accomplishment of His “strange act” at Armageddon. Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak (“Lightning”), said, at Matthew 24:27: “For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.”
When that mighty warrior leads the host of Jehovah in the final battle all the enemy will be completely in darkness and only the Lord will cause the light to shine for his faithful servants, and “his arrow shall go forth as the lightning”, smiting the terrified enemy. (Zech. 9:14) At that time there will be no hide-out for the enemy of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, and none of the enemy shall in any wise find a way of escaping the death-dealing arrows
October 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
319
of the Lord; and then before the arrows smite them they will know that this is the battle of the Almighty, the great Jehovah.
The Lord God chose the scene of battle in Barak’s day, which is evidence of his fighting for his own people. Looking down from the heights of Mount Tabor at the mighty and fully equipped army of Sisera, Barak might hesitate to move into the valley and there engage the enemy in battle without first receiving some definite instruction from Jehovah. Uttering that instruction, Deborah said to Barak: “Up; for this is the day in which the Lord hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the Lord gone out before thee?” That was the signal for Barak to move into action. That meant that the invisible forces of Jehovah’s organization were now in action against the enemy, which enemy thought himself, with his host and iron chariots, to be invincible. Sisera had not reckoned on the superhuman power being used against him. That part of the prophetic drama pictures the “strange act” of Almighty God.
Those forces that went ahead of Barak were led by Jehovah’s invisible executive officer. Likewise, at Armageddon, the forces of righteousness are led by the only begotten and beloved Son of God, even him who is “the Bright and Morning Star” and the great Executioner of God’s wrath against the enemy. Together with him is an army of other spirit “stars”, all moving in their appointed courses and fighting against the enemy. (See Judges 5:20.)
At the beginning of the battle against Sisera Jehovah called into action superhuman forces and his invisible Field Marshal used them, and with these a great and terrific barrage was laid down before Barak and his 10,000 men, which shielded and protected Barak and his army from the enemy’s view and aided in the assault they were about to make upon the enemy. Such was the “act of God”. This act of God was manifested when a tremendous storm of wind, rain and lightning came, and flooded the country. The river Kishon, whose dry bed Sisera and his chariots were crossing, was raised entirely out of its banks, and the waters rushing down the mountainsides and over the valley swept everything before them. Sisera and his unnumbered infantry and his 900 chariots could not well fight against that terrific storm. As this storm raged in advance of Barak he moved his army down the mountain into action.
“So Barak went down from mount Tabor,” to engage the enemy in battle. In this part of the prophetic drama Barak (“Lightning”) pictured Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s
mighty Avenger, and the drama shows that he will employ lightning or other superhuman weapons against the enemy host when the battle of Armageddon is fought. Even now the Lord Jesus is using “lightnings” of truth, which lightnings he shoots out against the enemy. This confounds the enemy and blinds them as to what is their proper course. Without any doubt, the Lord is now maneuvering the enemy for their destruction and confounding them, and this confusion of the enemy will greatly increase until the end. At the same time now the Greater Barak uses those faithful men and women on earth whom the Most High designates as “Jehovah’s witnesses” to herald these truths of light, which also confuse, confound and greatly incense those who are the enemies of The Theocracy. Such is Jehovah’s “strange work”, which precedes his “strange act” at Armageddon.
Up to this point Barak’s men did no fighting and killing, because the Lord God had gone out before them, confounding the enemy and driving them before the great storm, upsetting their iron chariots and sweeping them away. At this particular point the movement of Barak with his army of 10,000 Israelites down Mount Tabor pictured the presentday movement of the faithful witnesses of Jehovah, the spiritual Israelites together with their faithful earthly companions, advancing steadfastly and with unbroken ranks, pressing the battle to the gate against religion, or demonism. They go on regardless of the apparently overwhelming opposition against them. The visible enemies on earth have fortified themselves behind a “refuge of lies” (Isa 28: 15,17), religion or demonism being the enemy’s principal means of deceiving the people. It is against this refuge of Ues that Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions now press the battle by heralding the message of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government against the fortifications of the enemy. This “strange work” immediately precedes the victorious assault by the Greater Barak with his invisible heavenly hosts at Armageddon, and which assault shall result in the complete destruction of the enemy forces there, visible and invisible.
All the physical facts now indicate the battle of Armageddon is quite near, when the real fighting takes place and the enemy will be destroyed. Soon Jehovah God through Christ Jesus will fight against the enemy as he did in times of old, and will completely cut to pieces the enemy, and deliver all those who remain faithful and true to The Theocracy.
(Continued from page 306)
tains the full text of that speech as given and also the “message of comfort” adopted by that vast assembly. It is the first publication to correctly identify “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” foretold m Daniel 11. The booklet contains 32 pages and is self-covered, the front cover bearing the title “Comfort All That Mourn” and with a rectangular sign above it bearing the fateful words “End of Axis Powers”. You may now obtain the booklet at 5c a copy, mailed to you postpaid.
“JEHOVAH’S SERVANTS DEFENDED”
The release of this valuable booklet was a feature of the St. Louis Assembly this past summer. The Assembly received it with great appreciation and thankfulness, and it will be received in like manner by all who are interested in, if not also participating in, the fight which Jehovah’s covenant people are putting up in
the exercise of the God-given and Constitutionally guaranteed freedoms, to wit, of assembly and of publication and of open speech in the worship of Almighty God and in proclaiming the joyful news of his Theocratic Government. In this booklet you will find the expressed rulings of the highest courts of the United States in support of Jehovah’s witnesses and in defense of their rights and liberties in His service. The 32 pages of this important documentary matter are enclosed in a neat and strong cover. It is 5c a copy, mailed postage prepaid.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 23: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 3), 1-20 inclusive, The Watchtower October 15, 1941.
> Week of November 30: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 3), 21-42 inclusive, The Watchtower October 15, 1941.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
JUVENILE WITNESSES, NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE
“The two, one aged 10 and the other 12, are just outside the Byker Police Station, one having had a spill off his bicycle. The policeman on duty outside the station comes over: ‘Are you hurt!’ No, thank you [rubbing dust off his clothes and magazine bag].’ Police, seeing magazine bag: ‘What’s all this! The Theocratic Government!’ ‘That’s God’s kingdom.’ ‘Oh, I see; it has something to do with the Bible then.’ ‘Yes, that’s right, and we have some books here explaining the Bible.’ ‘Oh, I read the Bible.’ ‘Yes, but do you understand it!’ ‘Well, I understand it as well as the next man—Here, do you know the ten commandments!’ ‘Yes, I know them, but do you know the Beatitudes!’ ‘The Beatitudes ! I don’t seem to know those. Are you sure they are in the Bible!’ ‘Certainly they are—but I thought you said you knew the Bible!’ ‘Well, I don’t know about that—’ Second policeman, coming off duty from station: ‘Well, your bike seems O.K., pedals not bent, wheels are quite straight—’ First police: ‘Here, don’t bother about the bike; these two youngsters have me properly tied up and puzzled over the Bible.’ ‘Oh, have they! Well, if they’ve puzzled you, they might as well try and puzzle me. What’s it all about anyway!’ ‘We have a gramophone record here which will explain better than we can. Would you like to hear it! It only takes a few minutes.’ ‘Well, a few minutes can be a long time.’ ‘Yes, but this only takes four minutes.’ ‘Oh, well, we could spare that.’ Boys play ‘Awake’ recording through in the street. Second police: ‘That was a good speech. Why not bring it into the station and let the chief hear it!’ ‘Certainly !’ They enter station with second policeman, who, with broad grin, on entering says: ‘I place you two under arrest !’ The phonograph was placed on a table next to the sergeant’s, and ‘Awake’ was played through again. Six policemen were listening, including the desk sergeant. Whilst the record was running the constable who brought the young witnesses into the station rang up the A.R.P. Auxiliary Fire Service sub-station, in the police station, and held the telephone microphone near the phonograph so that the operator could hear. The constable was then seen to talk into the telephone and replace the receiver. After the record had finished, three booklets Theocracy were placed, including one to the desk sergeant. One of the constables asked the juvenile ambassadors if a policeman could be a Christian, and he was answered by both at once: ‘Anyone can be a Christian.’ While the record was running the police radio operator had removed one of his earphones, to hear better. The two young witnesses were then conducted downstairs (past the cells!) to the A.R.P. sub-station, where they found two girl telephonists sitting at the operating board, also three men and one girl A.R.P. personnel. The constable left them here, having shown them the side door leading outside. The phonograph was put on again and Judge Rutherford, in great form, exhorted all those hearing to ‘awake!’ While the record ran the telephone rang, but the operator ignored it. Finally in desperation she lifted the receiver and said. ‘I am listening to a most important lecture and I haven’t time to talk to you,’ and thereupon slammed the receiver down. On completion of the lecture the two young Theocratic ambassadors made their exit and continued on their way. Thus was concluded a first-rate witness to the polite
and A.R.P. personnel at this station. It resulted in three booklets placed and twelve of sound attendance.”
IN COSTA RICA
“On June 11, while I was witnessing in the village of Paraiso, in a public establishment, an inspector of sanitation invited me to drink liquor. I refused, and he asked to see the books. When he saw they were on the Bible he ordered me to accompany him to police headquarters. I paid no attention to him and he went out on the street to call the police. Then the young owner of the establishment came out in my defense and told the inspector I was working honestly and he immediately called witnesses, saying that that inspector was going to lose his job because he had tried to do something unlawful. Then the inspector was very fearful and did not bother me any more.—Psalm 34: 7.”
JEW MEETS CATHOLIC
“My natural brother warned me not to mention my ‘religion’ to my employer (Jew). An opportunity came. I presented The Watchtower and other publications. He took a subscription, two books, and some booklets, and expressed pleasure at receiving the information they contained. During the St. Louis convention in August he was away on business, and when he came back he told me the following: ‘I was sitting in front of the resort hotel with seyeral pieces of literature on the bench, reading one of the publications. Suddenly a man standing before me said: ‘What have you there!” I replied, “Some very interesting and enlightening literature,” offering him a piece to examine. He said: “Are you one of those Jehovah brothers!” I said I did not know, but am pleased to read these publications. He then called me an ugly name and said I ought to be thrown out of the hotel. I said: “Who are you, and where do you get the liberty to talk to me that way!” He said: “I am Dr.------
of the state medical society.” I replied: “Oh, so you are a doctor, working for humanity, and now you want to do me injury for exercising my right to seek knowledge and to worship God!” He said: “Well, I am a Catholic and I get mad when I see that literature.” “Well,’.’ I replied, “I do not criticize you for being a Catholic. I am of Jewish origin, but that is not to say I must believe the way my parents did as a matter of course. I am looking for the truth, and am ready to take it where I find it. This literature is beautiful.” He then became apologetic and suggested that we go some place where his folks would not see him. So we went into the woods, where we examined and discussed the contents of the booklets. He asked me to forgive, and when I left the next morning he went with me to the train and continued to apologize and seemed to be a changed man.’ ”
A MODEL STUDY ON WHEELS
“A witness who drives a school bus suggested we gather the interested in the bus. After those near by were gathered we drove to another home several miles away, where the entire family are interested, and invited them to take their places in the bus, where ample seats, lights, and heat aided in carrying on a delightful model study. There were seventeen in attendance.”
320
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street	•	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilt It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreion, *1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian- 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada Australasian__________I Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one mouth. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post ofice at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, 131».
“GREAT MULTITUDE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Regardless of the incoming of winter then, December marks another month-long season of special united activity known as “Great Multitude” Testimony Period. Those persons of good-will who shall form part of the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors are now quickly coming forth ere the wintertime of Armageddon sets in on the world, and they will, in increasing numbers, take part with the remnant members in this united Testimony. All such are cordially invited to join in putting in as many homes as possible the excellent combination offer of the new book Children and the new booklet Comfort All That Mourn, on a contribution of 25c. We shall be glad to give references to any wanting to get in touch with and to co-operate with the nearest organized company of publishers of The Theocracy. At the close of the Period the usual report on the full month’s activities and results should be submitted.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 7: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 4), fl 1-24 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1941.
Week of December 14: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 4), fl 25-49 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1941.
“REPORT OF THE JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES ASSEMBLY”
As previously advised in The Watchtower, the work has been going on for the compiling of a comprehensive survey of the recent Assembly of Jehovah's witnesses at St. Louis, Mo., for the five days, August 6-10. Now we are pleased to announce the publication of the full report. Like the Assembly itself, it is the best convention report yet produced. Its 80 pages set forth the important events and brilliant high lights of the Assembly, including speeches of Judge Rutherford to the mighty throng there which have not till now been published anywhere, and all visualized to you by page on page of a photographic review of the noteworthy events and scenes. To this there has been added a full, illustrated report of an identical five-day Assembly, with features like those at St. Louis, held by Jehovah’s witnesses at Leicester, England, September 3-7, in spite of the war. This Report of the Jehovah’s witnesses Assembly is a forceful witness to the actuality of Jehovah’s Theocratic organization, and should serve as a potent instrument in your field activities in behalf of the many persons of good-will. Send for your copy now, remitting 5c therefor. After you see and read it you will want others to have it too.
POWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	November 1, 1941	No. 21
DEMON RULE ENDING
PART 4
"For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth."—Heb. 12:6.
or refuses to carry out his covenant has, within the language of the Scriptures, “sworn deceitfully.” (Ps. 24:3,4) Religious teachers or preachers have induced many to conclude that the only thing required of them is to say, “I believe on the Lord,” and that because of such declaration such person at death goes straight to heaven. The Scriptures flatly contradict that conclusion. David, who pictures Christ Jesus and his faithful followers, expressed the correct conclusion in these words: “Examine me, 0 Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart. For thy loving-kindness is before mine eyes; and I have walked in thy truth.”—Ps. 26: 2, 3.
* Persons who have for years been serving Jehovah and Christ Jesus are still subjected to severe trials; and some wonder why. The answer is that all who receive Jehovah’s approval must prove their steadfastness for The Theocracy. One can prove this only by being put to the test and under that test remaining immovable and continuing steadfast for Jehovah and His King. Even now, when the King of The Theocracy is upon his throne, his servants on earth find themselves beset by many trials; but to the faithful such trials are not at all surprising. Those who are wholly devoted to The Theocracy and who see the great fight being made by the enemy against The Theocratic Government can appreciate why the individuals in God’s organization on earth are put to the test. As Job was put to the severe test and continued to hold fast his integrity, so now one who will receive the reward of Jehovah’s approval must be put to the test and prove himself entirely blameless before God.—Job 2:3-10.
5 Say the Scriptures: '‘For whom the Lord loves, he disciplines, and he scourges every son whom he receives.” (Heb. 12:6, Diaglott') All the demons are fighting against Jehovah’s covenant people, and God permits his covenant people to have such chastisement that they may, under severe trials, prove their lasting preference for and devotion to the great Theocrat and His King. The man who is in a covenant to do Jehovah’s will, and who hopes to receive Jehovah’s approval, must have and exercise un-323
TEHOVAH’S manner of dealing with his creatures I is for their good. It is therefore written of him:
J “God is love” (1 John 4: 8); meaning that Jehovah is entirely unselfish. Jehovah needs nothing from his creatures, because all things in heaven and earth are his. Religious preachers have grossly misrepresented Jehovah, and in doing so they have, no doubt, been blinded by the adversary; which blindness has resulted from their fear of men and failure to fear and serve Jehovah God. Such preachers tell the people words to this effect: “God is standing with outstretched hands begging men to come and be saved; therefore won’t you come today!” Such a statement is entirely false and is a defamation of Jehovah God’s holy name and is entirely contradicted by his Word. Jehovah places the truth before his creatures and permits them to voluntarily accept the same and willingly serve Him or to reject His Word and suffer the consequences. Jehovah neither begs nor compels anyone to serve him. Note the scriptures that flatly contradict the words of religious preachers; to wit: “But without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.”—Heb. 11: 6.
2	One cannot approach God unless he first has faith, that is, believes that Jehovah is the Almighty God and that the creature receives His blessings only when he seeks those blessings. He rewards only those who diligently seek to know and to do his will. God is no respecter of persons. (1 Pet. 1:17) He is making no effort to induce anyone to get into his organization and serve him. All who desire to know and to serve God must do so voluntarily, and not by compulsion or undue influence.
3	When the creature man exercises faith in God and in Christ Jesus as his Redeemer and then voluntarily consecrates himself to do God’s will, agreeing that he will be guided by God’s Word, then the situation changes as to him. Having entered into a covenant to do the will of God, then he must perform his covenant and be obedient to the Most High. One who agrees to do the will of God and then willingly fails
324
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
feigned faith and full confidence in God and in Christ, fully determining to remain steadfast for the great Theocratic Government, regardless of what trials may come to him.
8	Say the Scriptures concerning those who serve God and are beset by trying experiences: “Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, 0 Lord, and teachest him out of thy law; that thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit be digged for the wicked.”—Ps. 94:12,13.
7	This shows that the trials upon God’s people must continue until the wicked go down into the pit. “Blessed is the man that endureth temptation [trials]; for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.” (Jas. 1:12) Since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple Satan and his agents have desperately assaulted the servants of Jehovah and Christ. (Rev. 12:17) This the Lord could have prevented, but he has permitted it for a purpose, and one purpose is that the covenant people of Almighty God may prove their unbending devotion to The Theocracy by Christ Jesus and, holding fast their integrity to the end, may receive God’s approval. With this introduction to the subject matter, again we take up the consideration of Daniel’s prophecy as that prophecy is related to Jehovah’s covenant people at the present time on the earth.
’ “And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end: because it is yet for a time appointed.” (Dan. 11: 35) By other translators this text is rendered thus: ‘And some of them that are wise do stumble.’ {Revised Version and Young’s) In the preceding verse, thirty-four, considered in a previous issue of The Watchtower, it is seen that the demons try flattering schemes against Jehovah’s servants to turn them away from the proper course. These flatterers are lying, unfaithful, like the counselor of David described at 2 Samuel 15: 30-34. Some have yielded to such flatteries and have stumbled and fallen. Some have stumbled, but recovered; while others fall completely and are not recovered. One’s recovery from stumbling is possible only when that one is put to the test and realizes that he has taken the wrong course and then quickly repents and diligently seeks the face of the Lord for forgiveness.
’ It was in 1938 that the Lord revealed to his people that his organization is The Theocracy and that it is ruled from the Head downward, and not from the bottom upward. Everyone who receives God’s approval must come to an appreciation of this fact. The question of paramount importance is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Some fail to see that allimportant truth, but, on the contrary, they consider themselves and their individual ease and salvation
of great importance. Such persons fall, and for them there is no recovery. The rebellion against the rule of The Theocracy is disastrous. Those who rebel insist on their own selfish course. They forsake the course of wisdom and understanding and follow a selfish course evidently because they have yielded to flatteries put upon them by the demons invisible and by their visible representatives. Any man who indulges in flattery shows a lack of faith and of appreciation of God’s Word and his dealing with men.
10	The “fall” of such as forsake wisdom and understanding is not the end of the matter, but after their fall they continue in a wrongful course by trying to induce others to follow the same course of opposition to the Theocratic organization, and thus they pull others down with them. Such falling ones endeavor to turn others away from faithful service to The Theocracy; but those who receive Jehovah’s approval are not turned away. Such fallen ones become entirely blind to the paramount question of the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and they meditate day and night as to how they may interfere with the progress of the proclamation of the Theocratic message: “For they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall. The way of the wicked is as darkness; they know not at what they stumble.”—Prov. 4:16,19.
w Why has the Lord permitted the fallen ones to try to pull others down with them and to turn them away from the Theocratic organization and Government ! The Scriptures answer: “To try them”; (R. V.) “to refine them". At the temple judgment the Lord permits such things to come to pass to make manifest who is immovable and who is steadfast for The Theocracy. “And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.” (Mal. 3: 3) “And I will bring the third part [the remnant] through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried; they shall call on my name, and I will hear them; I will say, It is my people; and they shall say, The Lord is my God.”—Zech. 13: 9.
” Concerning this very same matter Jehovah by his angel further said to Daniel: “And he said, Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are closed up and sealed till the time of the end. Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly ; and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand."—Dan. 12: 9,10.
** The fiery trials that come upon Jehovah’s people have the effect of purging and cleansing the visible part of Jehovah’s Theocratic organization and those who are associated with it, even as Achan was cleared
November 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
325
out to remove the wicked leaven of poison from the typical Theocratic organization. (Josh. 7:10-26) Such cleansing or purging work continues. Even in the organization today there are some that murmur and complain, and the earth swallows them up. (Num. 16: 30-34) By “the earth” is meant the visible organization of which Satan is now in control. And how long shall such purging work continue!
14	“Even to the time of the end.” That means until the “strange work” of the Lord is completed and his “strange act” is made manifest at Armageddon. “Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.” (1 Cor. 10:12) This is exactly in harmony with the words of Christ Jesus the King concerning those who have become unfaithful at the time of the end of the world: “As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear." —Matt. 13:40-43.
15	When the faithful servants of Jehovah see the unfaithful cleared out they are drawn even nearer to the Lord and the Lord causes them to shine brightly in his organization and in his service, even as Jesus stated in the foregoing text. At the St. Louis Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions, August, 1941, this point was clearly demonstrated, when those who are walking in the light of The Theocracy, with unanimous declaration of those assembled there, put the stamp of disapproval upon those persons who have been in the organization and who have attempted to cause division amongst God’s people. Those who are devoted to The Theocracy see that they are continually put to the test, and now they are appreciating the reason for such test; and while the Lord permits his faithful servants to continue to have severe tests, all of the faithful ones now appreciate that it is permitted to test their steadfastness or integrity. And why do these tests continue upon the faithful! and how long shall the same continue!
16	“Because it [the end] is yet for [the] time appointed.” (Dan. 11: 35) Until the final end of Satan’s organization the integrity of the faithful followers of Christ Jesus will certainly be put to the test. Jehovah has permitted such for the good of those who are in a covenant to do his will. While Satan and his associate demons have been cast out of heaven and down to the earth, Jehovah permits that wicked horde to remain for a short time in order that the integrity of his faithful may be put to the test and that they may prove their immovable devotion
to Him. While this test is in progress the remnant and their companions continue to declare the name of the great Theocrat and his Government to those people on earth who will hear; and such proclamation must continue until the beginning of Armageddon. Jehovah has definitely fixed the time for the beginning of Armageddon, at which time God will show to all his supreme power. While no man yet knows the day nor the hour that Armageddon will begin, “the signs of the times” show that Armageddon is very near; therefore Jehovah bids his faithful servants now on the earth to 'redeem the time’ and to ‘slack not the hand’ in his “strange work”, the witness work. The many thousands of witnesses assembled at St. Louis in August, 1941, returned to their respective places of activity in the field fully determined to carry on to the end, and that without compromise with any part of Satan’s organization. In the meantime, and from now till Armageddon, the Lord’s four angels hold back the four winds until the work of Jehovah’s “sealed” servants is finished.— Rev. 7:1-4.
17	The final “end” is after God’s “strange work” is done, that is, after ‘this gospel of the kingdom is preached to the world as a witness’. (Matt. 24:14) Now the religionists and allies scoff at the name of Jehovah and speak of his witnesses in words of expressed malice; yet it is certain that they shall come to know ere long that Jehovah is exercising his care over his own people and showing his indignation by the execution of his judgment against the wicked. The religious element, which were principally represented by the unfaithful Israelites (foreshadowing the counterpart of such, and what is called “Christendom”), shall soon know that their end has come; and the Lord makes this so plain that there can be no doubt about it, and concerning this it is written in the prophecy of God, to wit: “Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God unto the land of Israel, An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the land. Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity; but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Thus saith the Lord God, An evil, an only evil, behold, is come. An end is come, the end is come; it watcheth for thee; behold, it is come. The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land; the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the mountains. Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee; and I will judge thee accord
326
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ing to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; I will recompense thee according to thy ways, and thine abominations that are in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord that smiteth."—Ezek. 7:1-9.
“ Have in mind now that “the king of the north” is that monstrosity, that is, the dictatorial, totalitarian combine, made up of Nazis, Fascists and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and which compose the ‘abomination of wickedness’, with the great “whore”, the Hierarchy, riding upon the back of that beastly combine, which is described and pictured at Revelation 17:1-5 and 15-18. It is now by that combined element called “the new order”, for which “new order” the present pope of Rome did pray and did extol it in his speech on December 24, 1940, and which is by him called “the new League of Nations”, that that combine is completely bent on ruling the world contrary to Jehovah’s will; and that which is called “the new League of Nations”, or “new order”, is the ‘desolating abomination’, which Jehovah will completely destroy at Armageddon.
19	“And the king shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished; for that that is determined shall be done." (Dan. 11:36) The prophecy shows that “the king of the north” would be guided by and influenced by the wicked one and that he would study to do that which is wicked, carrying out his own will, however, as he believes, but in fact doing the bidding of Satan the Devil. Mark how all these things that have come to pass in recent months fulfill this part of the prophecy. “The king [that] shall do according to his will,” as the prophecy states, is “the king of the north”; which means not merely Hitler, but “the king” here means all the component parts of the monstrosity; and since this monstrosity is the Devil’s child, it is carrying out the Devil’s purpose.
20	The objective of “the king of the north” is to rule the world. Its visible representatives, acting under demon power and influence, are determined to rule the world according to the selfish will of “the king of the north”. To do this that combine must first undo the work of the Protestant Reformation of the sixteenth century, and hence wipe out completely the result of the Treaty of "Westphalia of 1648, which treaty established toleration between Catholics and Protestants and recognized the right of each to practice his own religion within his respective state or province. Such caused Germany to be broken up into many small provinces or states. Mark this, that never has any pope approved that Treaty of Westphalia and never has he acknowledged that the Papacy was
or is bound by it. This should be kept in mind when considering that the Papacy is a part of “the king of the north”.
21	The further purpose of the monstrosity is to undo the effect of the French revolution of 1789, which led to the dissolution of the so-called “Holy Roman Empire” in 1806. Can any sane person now doubt that Petain, the puppet dictator of France, is doing the will of the monstrosity and that he is obeying the order of the pope! The liberties of the French people are gone. The “Axis powers” are determined to re-establish the old “Holy Roman Empire” at any cost of human life.
“Another purpose of the “Axis powers”, manifestly, is to wipe out the Peace Treaty of Versailles of 1919, and in which treaty the pope was unable to have his will done, and which treaty particularly had to do with the setting up of the German Republic. That treaty caused the territory of “the king of the north” to be cut up and formed into so-called “republics”, such as Germany, Austria, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Danzig, Lithuania, and by which “the king of the north" was greatly weakened. This was particularly pictured in Revelation by the wound of the sixth head of the beast, as set forth in Revelation 13:1-3: “And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. . . . And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.”
” That deadly wound was healed by Satan and his agents, and particularly by operations performed by “Catholic Action”, organized and carried on under the direction of Pope Pius XI, which pope backed and supported Italian Fascism and German Nazism, both religiously and financially; and which Hierarchy also caused many rich subjects of the Hierarchy in other countries to furnish large sums of money to put Hitler on the throne of Nazism. The pope then entered into concordats, one with Fascism in 1929, and then with the Nazis in 1933; and also on this latter date, 1933, he declared a “Holy Year” in an effort to drag other nations into the combine. “Catholic Action” in this behalf worked with both totalitarian rulers, but particularly to make Hitler the spearhead of the Hierarchy in the effort to overthrow democracies and to re-establish “the Holy Roman Empire”.
“ Another purpose of the combine is to carry out the wicked desire of the “Axis powers”, particularly the Catholic organization, in destroying the republics and bringing such countries into the combine. To this end Austria was annexed to Germany in March, 1938; Sudetenland was seized in 1938; Poland was raped and destroyed in 1939; and then followed the
November 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
327
overthrow of Denmark, Norway, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxemburg, and France. This done, “the king of the north” attempts to form a “new League of Nations” and to bring all the conquered territory into that League.
“ But the chief and primary purpose of Satan and his earthly agents aforementioned, however, is and has been to completely destroy Jehovah’s witnesses, who proclaim the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. In every country where the totalitarian power, or “king of the north”, is in control the work of Jehovah’s witnesses has been suppressed. Also in every country outside of the territory of “the king of the north” where the Roman Catholic Hierarchy exercises great power Jehovah’s witnesses have been cruelly persecuted and a strong effort has been made to completely destroy their activities and to prevent them from declaring the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. This explains why “the king of the north” has taken one country after another, destroyed its material wealth and its many people, and put a ban on the work of Jehovah’s servants. This proves that the Hierarchy is the chief visible agent of the Devil in this wicked work; and as further proof thereof it is only necessary to cite that in many parts of “the king of the south” also the work of Jehovah’s witnesses is banned, and declared illegal. In every nation this has been done at the instance and by the power of the Hierarchy. The, entire movement of Satan’s crowd is carried on to the end that the Hierarchy and their allies may soon be able to say, “Peace and safety”; then will follow Armageddon. Thus it is seen that, in the language of the prophecy, the words “his will” mean not merely the will of Hitler, but that of the combined elements that make up “the king of the north”; and that particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is the subtle and wicked instrument of Satan to carry out this work of “the king of the north”. Satan is that subtle foe of The Theocracy, and religion is the most seductive and deceptive means used by men to accomplish Satan’s purpose; and thus he uses the Hierarchy in a more effective way than some other parts of his organization.
” “And he shall exalt himself.” It is “the king of the north” here mentioned, that exalts himself by overthrowing constitutional monarchies and democracies and republics, and by exercising power over the people arbitrarily. Jehovah God does not exalt “the king of the north”, but Satan, the chief of demons, and his horde of associated demons, under the command of Gog, carry on the exaltation work and furnish the incentive by and through demonized “Catholic Action” and flatter the political Fuehrer and thus help him to exalt himself.
” “And magnify himself above every god.” The word “god” used in this text means “mighty one”, and in this text the reference is not to invisible demons, but it refers to the mighty ones on earth who are the agents and allies of the demons. The Hebrew word el, here rendered “god”, or “mighty one”, applies to earthly creatures as well as to invisible demons ; and this is shown by the following scripture texts, to wit: “Give unto the Lord, 0 ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength.” (Ps. 29:1) “God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judg-eth among the gods.” (Ps. 82:1) “For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord! who among the sons of the mighty [ones] can be likened unto the Lord!” (Ps. 89:6) ‘1 have, therefore, delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen, he shall surely deal with him: I have driven him out for his wickedness.” (Ezek. 31:11) “The strong among the mighty [ones] shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with them that help him; they are gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the sword.”—Ezek. 32: 21.
” The totalitarian combine of “the king of the north” has overthrown the mighty ones of Protestantism ; and the mighty ones of Free Masonry; and the mighty ones of constitutional monarchies; and the mighty ones of democracies; and the mighty ones of political parties that stood in the way of the combine ; and thus the facts show the fulfillment of this part of the prophecy. In addition thereto a new system of jurisprudence has been set up according to the Nazi-Fascist Canon-Law standards, and thus the former mighty ones of the judiciary of those countries in Europe have been overthrown; also all the mighty ones of the armies that do not quickly bow to the dictator, so that the dictator controls the entire military machine, which is made subservient to the Nazi Fuehrer. He has also magnified himself above the commercial mighty ones, and all of these commercial giants have been made to conform to the desire of Nazism, or the Corporate State. Also the labor organizations have been dissolved in favor of the State Labor Front; and also the farmers who till the soil are made to be entirely subservient to the dictator. The totalitarian dictator becomes the entire thing and is exalted above all mighty ones in every part of the government, and to him all such are required to bow.
” “And shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods.” In this text “God of gods” is translated from the Hebrew El elim, meaning Jehovah the Almighty God; and against the Almighty God this “king of the north” speaks marvelous things. Note the following texts showing that the reference in this text is to Jehovah, against whom “the king of
328
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the north” speaks. “Who is like unto thee, 0 Lord, among the gods [(marginal reading) mighty ones]? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?” (Ex. 15:11) “The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord, (save us not this day,).”—Josh. 22:22.
80 “The king of the north” speaks marvelous things against the Almighty God by taking adverse action against those who are the witnesses of Jehovah God. Also the natural Jews are persecuted by that same combine because they were the typical covenant people of Jehovah, the Almighty God. In the lands outside of the realm of “the king of the north” that “king”, and particularly the religious element thereof, operates by means of the “fifth column” in misrepresenting Jehovah’s witnesses, and they bring great reproach upon the name of Jehovah; and this is done even in the United States, where liberty has long been enjoyed by the people.
11 “The king of the north,” which here particularly includes the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and the head thereof, exalts the political state above Jehovah God by declaring and insisting that “the higher powers” named in the Scriptures at Romans 13:1 are not Jehovah God and Christ Jesus but are the political rulers of the present unrighteous world. The dictatorial combine condemns The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and persecutes in all countries the persons who tell that The Theocratic Government is the only hope of humankind. Within the realm of “the king of the north” one who proclaims the name and the kingdom of Jehovah by Christ Jesus is charged with sedition. Even in countries outside of the realm of “the king of the north” Jehovah’s witnesses, who proclaim The Theocracy, are charged with seditious conspiracy, and in each instance this is done at the bidding of the religious element of “the king of the north”. That “king” boastfully claims that his is the world empire which shall rule the entire earth in defiance of Jehovah and contrary to His prophetic utterances. “The king of the north” sets up a mimic theocracy, placing the present pope of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in the position occupied by Christ Jesus, the real King of the real Theocracy. Such mimic theocracy is “the abomination that maketh desolate” named by Daniel, and the Lord shows the purpose of that combine is to turn all persons away from Almighty God and to rule the earth contrary to God’s will.
” Hitler, the leader of the Nazis, declares his purpose to re-establish the old “Holy Roman Empire”. Now mark the hypocrisy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, which while carrying on within the realm of “the king of the south" attempts to induce the people
to believe that the Hierarchy is against the totalitarian rule now exercised by the Nazis and Fascists. This claim by the Hierarchy is made to induce the “Catholic population” residing within the realm of democracies to remain silent and loyal to the Hierarchy. At the same time the pope, on the 24th of December, 1940, publicly uttered a prayer for the so-called “new order” or “new League of Nations”, which is being pushed forward and set up with Hitler as the leader. What organization on the earth has the greatest desire to re-establish the old “Holy Roman Empire”? The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, to be sure! And for that purpose “Catholic Action” was organized and has been carried on for several years throughout the earth. The Hierarchy is pursuing a fixed course of its father the Devil to act with fraud and deception, making it to appear in one country that it is on one side, and in another country that it is on the other side; and this is done to deceive and mislead the people.
“ The political elements of “the king of the south” appear to be blind to the hypocrisy and duplicity of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, or else fear to boldly declare against the same as its foe. Whether blind to the truth or fearful, it leads to the same result and is the moving cause which results in mental blindness. It is Satan who blinds the minds of men, as declared by the Lord’s Word. (2 Cor. 4: 3, 4) It is the fear of men that leads men and nations into Satan’s snare. (Prov. 29:25) Thus the organization of “the king of the south” appears to be blind to its real enemy.
“As long as the so-called “democracies” oppose, ignore or fail to support The Theocracy by Christ Jesus, just that long the announced purpose of “the king of the south” is certain to fail. There is but one sure way to determine the degree of progress and legitimate end of “the king of the north” and of “the king of the south”, and that sure way is Jehovah’s sure Word of prophecy, now in progress of fulfillment. Bearing upon this particular point, note that the prophecy says concerning “the king of the north”:
” “And shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished.” Whose indignation? Jehovah’s indignation, which will be expressed at the battle of Armageddon. Manifestly Jehovah has withheld the expression of his indignation to give “the king of the north” full rope to mark himself for destruction. Beginning with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy element, Jehovah’s indignation will be violently expressed at Armageddon in the complete overthrow of “the king of the north”. That will mark the beginning of the great world trouble, which Jesus Christ describes in these words: “Great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.” (Matt. 24:21) That means the final end of all
November 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
329
of Satan’s organization. Give heed to the Word of Almighty God concerning that tribulation, to wit:
” “Behold, the name of the Lord cometh from far, burning with his anger, and the burden thereof is heavy; his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire.” (Isa. 30:27) “Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.” (Zeph. 3:8) “Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.” (Nah. 1:6) “But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King: at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.” (Jer. 10:10) “The Lord hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation; for this is the work of the Lord God of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.” —Jer. 50: 25.
" “The king of the north” has had his day in which he had permission to “have indignation against the holy covenant” (Dan. 11:30); and at Armageddon it is his turn to experience the indignation from the side of the Holy Covenant, to wit, the Lord. Is there a fixed time for that indignation to begin ? and when ?
” God’s Word answers that he has fixed the definite time. To Daniel his faithful prophet the Lord made known this fact: “And. he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of the indignation; for at the time appointed the end shall be." —Dan. 8:19.
” Daniel may be back on the earth at any time now, and he, together with the faithful covenant people of Jehovah, will know what course to take at that time of the beginning of tribulation, because to all such Jehovah says: “Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.”—Isa. 26:20.
40	“For that that is determined shall be done.” (Dan. 11:36) It is Jehovah’s “strange act”, the expression of his indignation at the battle of Armageddon, that is determined; and nothing can interfere with or prevent it. To all who hear the Word of Jehovah God now this is of great interest, to wit: “For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act. Now, therefore, be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong; for I have heard from the Lord God of hosts a consumption [a full
end; an utter end], even determined upon the whole earth [Satan’s visible organization, and particularly the religious element and all other elements composing ‘the king of the north’].”—Isa. 28: 21, 22.
41	Jehovah will make a final end of all that are opposed to The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Says Jehovah: “I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46:11) “I will work, and who shall let [hinder] it?”—Isa. 43:13.
HOLD FAST
42	Jehovah’s covenant people now on earth are very small in number. They are even so small in number that religionists speak of them with great contempt. If they were religionists they would receive no notice, because of their smallness, and it is certain that they would not then be persecuted. Why, then, is there so much opposition to Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the countries of the earth, and why are they so grievously persecuted in all these countries? Are they dangerous to any nation ? They are not dangerous, because they have no desire or inclination to do harm to anyone. Are the ruling powers of the nations afraid of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions as to what they might do to overthrow their power? No, not at all; because Jehovah’s witnesses and companions could do them no injury. Surely the armies that destroy thousands of human lives every day have no fear of falling at the hands of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions. Then why are Jehovah’s witnesses hated in all nations and so cruelly ill-treated and persecuted? The answer is plain, and is easy of comprehension. It is because these people, faithful to Almighty God and in obedience to his commandments, announce to the world that The Theocracy is the only hope of humankind; because they declare God’s vengeance against all that oppose The Theocracy. The great question now for determination is world domination. Shall the world continue under the rule of demons, of which Satan is the chief, or shall the world be ruled in righteousness by Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s duly appointed and anointed King? Satan is determined to continue his rule or ruin the earth. He sets up “the king of the north” and “the king of the south", each vowing their determination to rule the earth, and he causes them to war with each other. By this means Satan hopes to accomplish the following: (1) To turn the attention of all people away from The Theocracy, and (2) to bring about the death of many millions that they might not learn about The Theocracy ; and thus he hopes to defeat Jehovah’s purpose.
48	Since the sole purpose and work of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions is to announce the name of Jehovah and his Government of Righteousness by Christ Jesus, and this for the benefit of mankind
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
330
and to the glory of God; and since they are entirely neutral, they hold themselves aloof from the warring nations. Why does the Almighty God permit them to suffer so many indignities at the hands of their enemies? The answer from God’s Word is, in order that each one of his covenant people may now be permitted to prove his full devotion to The Theocratic Government and thus hold fast his integrity. (Heb. 12:6; Job 2: 3) This test must continue to the end. To the remnant the words of Jesus now apply: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.”—Rev. 2:10, Am. Rev. Ver.
44	The apostle and faithful witnesses of the Lord Jesus proclaim this prophecy: “And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.”—Rev. 20:4.
45	Those words mean that such faithful ones have no human leader, but that they have given up their own head and look only to Christ Jesus as their Head and Leader that they might bear witness to the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. They refuse to compromise with any part of Satan’s organization, and, regardless of all earthly persecution and opposition, they remain true, steadfast and blameless before the Lord. Such blamelessness consists of their complete devotion to The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Their integrity is put to the test, and those who receive the Lord’s approval will hold fast their integrity under that test. They are being disciplined by the Lord, and they are determined to not yield to demon influence, but that they will remain faithful
to Jehovah God and his Government of Righteousness, come what may.
“All nations hate Jehovah’s covenant people because that people declare the name and kingdom, The Theocratic Government, of Almighty God. “Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.”—Matt. 24: 9.
47	The crucial test, which must persist until Armageddon, is proof that now is the last time. The words of the apostle now apply to the Lord’s faithful servants, to wit: “Little children, it is the last time; and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time.”—1 John 2:18.
“ The antichrists, many of which now appear, are all those against The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus the King, and, says the apostle, ‘whereby we know that this is the last time.’ The words of the apostle here clearly mean that the end of Satanic rule has come: “And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.”—1 John 2:17.
48	It is therefore clearly to be seen that the crucial test is here, and thus Jesus says to those who follow him: “But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.” (Matt. 24:13) “Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) “Do all things without murmurings and disputings; that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without'rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world.”—Phil. 2:14,15.
(To be continued)
PROPHECY OF THE TRANSFIGURATION
AT C2ESAREA PHILIPPI, near the boundary between Palestine and Syria, and in the presence of Peter and the other apostles the anointed King, Christ Jesus, identified himself as “this rock” upon which he would build his church. Later he added, “For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then shall he render unto every man according to his deeds. Verily I say unto you, There are some of them that stand here, who shall in no wise taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.” (Matt. 16:18, 27, 28, A.R.V.) Thereafter came the transfiguration vision, the record concerning which is:
“And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart: and he was transfigured before them; and his face did shine as the sun, and his garments became white as the light. And behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elijah talking with him. And Peter answered,
and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, I will make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah. While he was yet speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold, a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus came and touched them and said, Arise, and be not afraid. And lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, save Jesus only. And as they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen from the dead. And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elijah must first come? And he answered and said, Elijah indeed cometh, and shall restore all things but I say unto you, that Elijah is come already, and they knew him not, but did unto him whatsoever they would. Even so shall the Son of man also suffer of them. Then un
Novembeb 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
331
derstood the disciples that he spake unto them of John the Baptist.”—Matt. 17 :1-13, Am. Rev. Ver.
The transfiguration in the mountain was a prophetic tableau giving testimony to the high office of Jesus and foretelling greater things to come to pass thereafter. That transfiguration being a prophecy, its true meaning and importance would appear to God’s people only in God’s due time to interpret the same and make it plain.
Ecclesiastes 3:1 declares: “To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven.” Greater light is given to God’s people at the end of Satan’s world and after Christ Jesus is enthroned, as is indicated at 1 Corinthians 10:11. That would appear to be Jehovah’s time to unfold the meaning or interpretation of his prophecy. For many years it has been known that the prophet Moses was a prophetic figure of Christ Jesus, but not until the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, in A.D. 1918, was it known that what Moses wrote applies particularly to the Lord Jesus and his people while he is at the temple for the judgment work. Only in recent years and since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of God has it been known that Christ Jesus is that great Prophet foreshadowed by Moses and to whom all the present-day remnant on earth of his faithful followers must now be especially obedient, and hence every one that is called to the Kingdom and that fails or refuses to obey that Prophet shall be destroyed.— Deut. 18:15-18; Acts 3: 22, 23.
What, then, is the meaning of the prophetic transfiguration scene in the mountain ? That which the prophetic transfiguration magnifies as of greatest importance is the vindication of Jehovah’s name by and through his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, and this vindication begins particularly to take place at the time of the coming of the Lord Jesus in power and glory. This statement may appear to be dogmatic, and therefore in support of the above conclusion it is important to consider the words of the apostle Peter leading up to his emphatic statement made at 2 Peter 1:20, to wit: “Knowing this first [that is, as of first importance], that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.”
Peter is here addressing his Christian brethren, not as a teacher and certainly not as a pope, but as one whom Jehovah God and Christ Jesus had specifically favored and as one who had received certain important information, which he desired to impart to his brethren that they might keep that information in remembrance for their own well-being. Peter declared that he would not be negligent to put them in remembrance of certain things, and then said: “Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance.” (2 Pet. 1:13) He expressed his opinion that shortly his earthly ministry would end, and that while he had opportunity he would stir up his brethren to greater zeal and that they might have in mind these important truths. “And I think it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to excite you by remembrance; knowing that the laying aside of the tabernacle is at hand, even as our Lord Jesus Christ declared to me. Now I will also endeavor always to have you, after my departure, to make mention of these things.” (2 Pet. 1:13-15, Emphatic Diaglott translation) “Make mention” of what things ? Manifestly the things that came to pass at the time
of the transfiguration in the mountain, of which things Peter was one of three witnesses. This is made certain by Peter’s next words: “For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount.”—2 Pet. 1:16-18.
Referring now to Matthew’s account of the transfiguration vision, it is noted that the three apostles were not permitted to tell anything about it until after the resurrection of Jesus Christ took place. As the record at Matthew 17: 9 states: “And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.” The apostles thereafter obeyed the Lord’s commandment. If the matter had been told by any of them before the resurrection of Jesus, and Jesus had confirmed their statements before others, it might have been said that the proof was much stronger and men would be more likely to have full faith in their statement of what occurred in the mountain. Probably some of the consecrated ones had said to Peter at or previous to the time he wrote his second epistle something to this effect: “It is easy for you to tell a tale like that now. Probably you were very much excited at the time and you think you saw that which you did not in fact see.” Peter’s language at 2 Peter 1: 16 is equivalent to an admission that such might have been a cunningly devised fable and that others had suggested that. To offset that very conclusion Peter said to his brethren: ‘We have not followed a cunningly devised fable; we were eyewitnesses to it.’ They were eyewitnesses of a vision that related to the ‘coming of the Lord Jesus Christ in power and glory’. That definitely establishes the fact that the vision was a prophecy relating to the coming of the Lord Jesus in glory and power for judgment at the temple. (See Matthew 25:31.) This would strongly support the conclusion that the understanding of the vision would not be given to God’s people until after the coming of the Lord to the temple for judgment.
At the transfiguration Jesus, with three of his faithful followers, was in the mountain, but Jesus is the only really important one that was there. He was the one that appeared with his face shining as the sun and his raiment white as the light. Clearly that would picture Christ Jesus at the time when God placed him on the heavenly throne as the new world’s rightful Ruler and as Jehovah’s mighty Vindicator. Modern facts in fulfillment of Bible prophecy prove that that enthronement of the Lord Jesus took place in A.D. 1914, as stated at Psalm 2:6. Three and one-half years later, corresponding to the three and a half years of his earthly ministry at his first coming, Christ Jesus came to the temple as the great Judge, to wit, in A.D. 1918. Therefore the transfiguration vision pointed forward to the time that God would inaugurate his kingdom with Christ Jesus on the throne and as his mighty Judge and Vindicator. The unfolding and understanding of the prophetic transfiguration vision could not come until the prophecy had begun to have fulfillment; hence God has kept it a secret until his due time for fulfilling the prophecy and making it known.
332
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
The record of the transfiguration says, at Matthew 17:3: “And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, talking with him.” Of course, Moses and Elijah were not actually there present, because this was a “vision”, and, too, Moses and Elijah were dead, as the Scriptures testify. But Jesus was actually there. The vision disclosed Moses and Elijah talking with Jesus, and that would clearly indicate in the tableau that those two prophets had done certain things in the past which foreshadowed greater things that Jesus would do. Moses wrote much of the prophecy of God, and Jesus on another occasion said, “Moses . . . wrote of me.” (John 5:46) The appearance of Moses in the vision, talking with Jesus, was equivalent to saying that the law, which Moses delivered to the Israelites, applies specifically to those who are followers of the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, to wit, those who are spiritual Israelites. Also, that the covenant of God given to the Israelites on the plains of Moab by the hand of Moses shortly before they crossed the Jordan river into Canaan foreshadowed a greater covenant, to wit, the covenant of faithfulness for the Kingdom, which covenant God makes through Christ Jesus with those who are called to the heavenly kingdom. Also that those who will enter into the Kingdom must faithfully perform that covenant of faithfulness, and that when Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, comes to the temple, then every soul of the temple class must be wholly obedient unto Christ Jesus or else be destroyed. This conclusion is dearly supported by the words of Peter, at Acts 3: 22, 23: “For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.” These truths the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses learned and began to appreciate after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple in glory and power in 1918.
Elijah appeared along with Moses in the transfiguration vision. Elijah delivered certain prophecies and performed certain prophetic work, and in this he foreshadowed Christ Jesus and a work Jesus would do, which work was preparatory to his coming to the temple of God in 1918. That work had particular reference to the restitution or restoration of the great and important doctrines concerning the kingdom of God or Theocratic Government; which truths had been delivered to the Israelites and to the apostles after the coming of Jesus nineteen centuries ago, but which had been lost sight of after the death of the apostles and were hid until the Lord Jesus turned his attention to the things of the earth a short time prior to his coming to the temple in 1918. That this is the correct conclusion is shown by the conversation that took place between Jesus and the three apostles on coming down from the mountain, to wit, “And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come? And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things.” This conversation was based on the prophecy recorded at Malachi 4: 5, 6 and 3:1-3, which reads: “Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord : and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth
with a curse.” “Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts. But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap: and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.” The prophetic work as foreshadowed by what the prophet Elijah did and said was fulfilled in a miniature way by John the Baptist, who, as the forerunner of Jesus, announced his coming at his first advent. But there is also a larger and complete fulfillment, and the work foreshadowed by Elijah has now been performed in completeness by the Lord Jesus Christ in the years immediately preceding the time of his coming to the temple in A.D. 1918. So, having performed this preparatory work thus prophesied at Malachi 3:1, then he suddenly (or straightway) appeared at the temple.
In the prophetic transfiguration vision the appearance of Elijah and Moses had no relationship whatever to the resurrection of the dead, because there is nothing either directly or indirectly said about resurrection. Religionists who have tried to uphold the Devil’s lie that “there is no death” and “the dead are not dead” (Gen. 3:4) have grabbed upon this transfiguration scene as recorded and used it in their attempt to prove that Moses and Elijah were alive at that time; but such have overlooked the fact also that Jesus declared their appearance to be merely a “vision”. (Matt. 17:9; compare therewith Acts 12: 9, where Peter “wist not that it was true which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision".) It is true that Moses is dead and must await the resurrection, and it is true that Elijah was taken up in a fiery chariot by a whirlwind; but that has no relationship whatsoever to the transfiguration vision.
The overshadowing important part of the transfiguration was the announcement by the voice from heaven that the Lord Jesus is the approved One of Jehovah and the One who is the Chief Officer of Jehovah for the vindication of God’s name. The voice out of the cloud said: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.” (Matt. 17:5) Here in substance is the emphatic statement from Jehovah God that Christ Jesus is God’s great High Priest, Judge and King, to whom all creation must render absolute obedience, because God in due time would send Christ Jesus to be his Vindicator and to carry out all His purposes and this would be done when Christ Jesus is enthroned as the Ruler and the Judge of the world.
The overshadowing cloud symbolically spoke of the presence of the invisible Jehovah, and the fact that the cloud overshadowed the three disciples who were eyewitnesses also suggests that the fulfillment of this prophetic vision would take place at the time of the second presence of the Lord, in the spirit, concerning which Jesus said, at Matthew 16:28: “Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.” The words which
November 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER,
333
the three disciples heard expressed by a voice out of the cloud would pjean that Christ Jesus had maintained his integrity towards Jehovah; and the further fact that Jesus warned them that they were to tell the vision to no man “until the Son of man be risen again from the dead” shows that the exaltation of Jesus to the position of honor would be after his resurrection, to which facts the apostles subsequently testified.—Phil. 2:5-11; Heb. 5:7-9.
Jesus had been sent by his Father to the earth to do his Father's will, and Jesus had been wholly obedient to his Father. Jesus declared he was sent to bear witness to the truth, and his faithfulness in the performance of his commission earned for him the title “The Faithful and True Witness”. (Rev. 3:14; 19:11) The words which the three eyewitnesses heard from the cloud disclosed the necessity for them to be likewise obedient to Jehovah God and that, since Jesus spoke with authority, therefore whatsoever he commanded they must obey. This fixes the rule that all the followers of Jesus must obey his commandments. Obedience is one of the fixed rules of Jehovah, and there is no deviation therefrom permitted. God’s inflexible rule concerning his creatures was long ago announced, at 1 Samuel 15: 22, 23, to wit: “Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice; . . . For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft [the turning away from God to the Devil], and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry [that is, as lawlessness and devil-worship].”
A fulfillment of the prophetic vision of transfiguration is after the Lord Jesus comes to the temple. Christ Jesus at the temple is the Greater Moses and the one whom Moses typified. In the transfiguration Moses there pictured that Christ Jesus is the great Prophet. When this great Prophet appears at the temple for judgment, from 1918 onward, the following words uttered by Peter apply specifically to all those who are brought to a knowledge and understanding of the truth, to wit: “For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after [him], as many
as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.” (Acts 3: 22-24) All the prophets of God had foretold the coming of the King, the Messiah or Christ; therefore upon the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple all who were called to the heavenly kingdom must render absolute obedience unto the Greater Moses, in order to maintain their integrity towards Jehovah. This great and important truth is taught and magnified by the transfiguration on the mountain and what was there said.
Those who have not been teachable and obedient to the great Prophet upon his coming to the temple have made no progress in gaining a knowledge of God’s will in wisdom and spiritual understanding. Many who were once in line for the Kingdom have since become blind, and they deny the coming of the Lord to the temple; and manifestly the apostle Peter speaks of these disobedient ones at the time Christ Jesus is at the temple for judgment, and he calls them ungodly, in the following words: “For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God! And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear!”—1 Pet. 4:17,18.
One of the specific commandments given to the consecrated Christians by the Lord Jesus at his coming to the temple is, to wit: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24:14) Some professed Christians have thought they could ignore this command and still get into heaven; but all the scriptures appearing upon the point show that they cannot ignore this commandment, refuse to have a part in the witness work amongst the people, and yet have an entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Only those who obey receive the Lord’s approval; and this was emphasized at the transfiguration vision by Jehovah’s words out of the cloud: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him”; that is to say, ‘obey him.’ To hear what the great Prophet now says means, not idleness, but diligence in performing the work which he has commanded shall be done, namely, giving the witness concerning Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus.
NO APOLOGIES FOR THEOCRACY
RELIGIOUS hypocrisy is rampant today as in the days of Noah before the Flood, the great visitation of Jehovah God. What, then, is meant by Peter the apostle when he says to those who are Christian “strangers" to this wicked world rule of Satan: “Having your conversation [conduct] honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation” !—1 Pet. 2:12.
These inspired words mean that the one who is anointed of the Lord God to serve as his commissioned witness must, amongst the nations and peoples of earth, pursue a course of action that is honest and true. He must manifest the spirit of virtue, which is true manliness, and steadfastness and immovability in things pertaining to Jehovah God and his
Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. It means that such anointed witnesses and their earthly “companions” must pursue a course of action that is consistent with one who loves God and who gives his entire allegiance to Him. It means that he refuses to compromise in any manner with the Devil, who is “the god of this world”, or with any of his systems, religious, political or commercial. It means to be kind and considerate, yet firm for God and for his cause.
By contact with the One anointed to be the King of The Theocracy Peter had learned what are the proper speech and proper course of action for an honest man devoted to Almighty God. His association with the King eminently qualified him to give advice to his fellow witnesses, At Acts of the Apostles, chapter four, verse thirteen, it is written concerning Peter and John when before the
334
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
religious trial court at Jerusalem: “And they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus.” Time and again this statement has been explained to mean that all with whom we come in contact should be able to see by our “sweetness of spirit”, by our “patience under provocation”, that we have indeed been with Jesus and learned of him. The misunderstanding of this scripture has made many a man a “sissy” and caused him to appear before others with the air of apology for being a Christian. This has caused many a Christian to quail in the presence of those opposed to the Lord God.
We are not to understand that Jesus was long-faced, easy-going, easy-speaking, and careful to say nothing that might grate upon the ears of the opponents of the truth and The Theocracy. Because many have misunderstood what manner of man Jesus was they have followed this easy-going method and have been exceedingly careful never to say anything that might grate upon the ears of the rich, influential and great in this world. Religionists have, been led to believe that this was the kind of men the apostles were, and that because of their apparent piety, long faces, sanctimoniousness, sweetness and patience others took note of them that they had been with Jesus and learned of him. Such is a misrepresentation of the Lord Jesus and a misrepresentation of his apostles. The context of Acts 4:13 shows plainly that such a conclusion is incorrect.
The real facts have been hid by quoting only a part of the above text, and that out of its proper setting. The circumstances were as follows: It was shortly after Pentecost and the outpouring of God’s holy spirit upon those devoted to him and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Peter and John had boldly declared the gospel of Christ the King, and him crucified for maintaining his integrity toward God. The ecclesiastics, made up of the priests and religious Pharisees, financiers and politicians, were offended, and caused them to be put into prison. On the day following, John and Peter were brought before the high priest and others of that august assembly. The high priest demanded to know by what power and authority these men were speaking and healing the sick. Peter, with boldness and frankness of speech, replied: “Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole.”—Acts 4:10.
There was not much apology in those words, and evidently they did not fall with much sweetness on the ears of the high priest and his associates. It was not necessary for the two apostles to be rude and harsh, yet Peter plainly said to these fellows, ‘You murdered the Lord! But God raised him up from the dead.’ The apostles made no apology for representing Jesus Christ the King, nor for trusting implicitly in Jehovah, the great Theocrat. They did not cringe and quail before that body of proud and arrogant ecclesiastics. Fearlessly and with plainness of speech they told the truth. Therefore it is written (Acts 4:13): “Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus.”
What was the effect of this! Their speech and course of action identified them as followers of Christ. Here the word “boldness” (Greek: parrhesia} means frankness, bluntness, speaking freely and with confidence, outspokenness. This proves what kind of man Jesus was, of whom the apostles learned. It also proves that Jesus has been grossly misrepresented by others. Grace was poured upon Jesus’ lips. (Ps. 45:2) But that did not mean that he had to rub his hands, stroke his chin like religionists’ pulling their beard, and look down when he spoke to somebody else. Jesus was straightforward. He was an honest man. He was a real man. He represented his Father, “the King of Eternity,” who has all power and authority.
Jesus hesitated not to tell the religious rulers that they not only were wrong, but were willingly so, and were criminals. His speech was so straightforward and frank that it could not be disputed. When the apostles appeared before the ecclesiastical body on that occasion their speech also was so bold, fearless and frank that the ecclesiastics, wagging their heads to each other, recognized that these men had been with Jesus and were followers of him. It is not necessary to think that they were rude or harsh, but they were straightforward, confident and fearless in what they had to say.
Many professed Christians have been induced to believe that they must be so sweet in the presence of the enemy that the enemy may take note of their sweetness and say, ‘That is a Christian.’ There is no scripture that warrants a Christian in taking such a course. Christians, above all others, should be real men and women. As representatives of The Theocracy, they should deport themselves in a dignified way, with frankness and straightforwardness. That is what the apostle Paul said about it. He stated: ‘Let your conversation, or course of action, be as becometh a Christian.’ To quote his words at Philippians 1:27,28 {'Weymouth translation): “Only let the lives you live be worthy of the Good News of the Christ, in order that, whether I come and see you or, being absent, only hear of you, I may know that you are standing fast in one spirit and with one mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith of the Good News. Never for a moment quail before your antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them a sure token of impending destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation—a token coming from God.”
In his epistle the apostle Peter was telling his Christian brethren to be real men, and to be so honest and straightforward in speech and in action that there would be no mistake about it in the minds of others that here are men and women who are real Christians and are not ashamed of it. If all those who go witnessing from door to door concerning The Theocratic Government would get the right view of this matter they would not fear or quail, but would feel an absolute confidence in Jehovah and that they are representing him and his Government of Righteousness. A man or a woman is most highly honored by being made the ambassador of Christ and the representative of the Most High God, the great Theocrat.
Why should anyone feel ashamed or manifest an apologetic air in the presence of others because of being a witness for Jehovah! On the contrary, the spirit of the Lord should give him such complete confidence that he would always
November 1, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
335
speak with frankness and straightforwardness concerning the great God and his King and Kingdom. This honest course of action and speech will bring reproach upon the Lord’s faithful ones; but, says the apostle, ‘in the day of God’s visitation many will glorify God that the witness was boldly given.’
Following that day of Pentecost of A.D. 33 the zeal and unswerving devotion of the apostles to God and to Christ were shown. Many of the people saw the honesty and consistency of their course. Because of their faithfulness the apostles were evilly spoken of by many. But doubtless many observed their zeal and straightforwardness for the Lord God and were inherently glad. It was doubtless the zeal and boldness of these faithful witnesses that induced Cornelius to often pray to God, before Peter was sent to him and God did there for the first time visit the Gentiles (nonJews) to take out of them a people for his name. (Acts 10; Acts 15:14) Now a similar condition arises; and it becomes the privilege and duty of the witnesses of Jehovah on earth to be equally zealous, straightforward and honest in their course of action.
Now Jehovah God has made clear what is the primary issue before all creation, to wit, universal domination. Who is for Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government, and who is not? Before the final overthrow of Satan’s organization, during the time of Jehovah’s visitation, he will have a witness given in the earth concerning his purposes toward his creatures. To the anointed servant class Jehovah God says: “Ye are my witnesses . . . that I am God.” (Isa. 43:12) That means, then, that every one who is anointed with God’s spirit is commissioned to perform this duty; and this he must do in proportion to his opportunities, in order to be acceptable to and blessed of the Lord. If one thinks that because of his standing amongst the brethren some part of the Lord’s service is menial for him he does injury to himself. Some who have been “elective elders” have thought such work as going from door to door and putting the books into the hands of the people should be done by the weaker ones or less prominent ones of the congregation.
The question is, Can it be said of suchlike that they are taking a stand on the side of Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government, and that their course of action is honest and consistent, within the meaning of the apostle’s words at 1 Peter 2:12? What is here said is not written for the purpose of holding anyone up to harsh criticism, but as a warning for the benefit of those who are neglecting their opportunities. It is not the part of one Christian to criticize another for not going into the field. It is his duty to beseech his brother to put forth the proper zeal, and when that is done the Scriptures do not advise to do more. (Rom. 12:1) The brethren would be negligent of their duty, however, if they did not mention to each other the great responsibility that rests upon the ones in a covenant to do God’s will during and up to the great visitation of God upon the nations. The day of God’s visitation upon so-called “Christendom” began shortly after his great Messenger, Christ Jesus, came to the temple for judgment, as foretold at Malachi 3:1, and it will continue with increased severity until all parts of Satan’s visible organization on earth are overthrown.
The faithful ones who with continued zeal and devotion to the Lord have consistently given a witness to the name of Jehovah and to his Christ the King have been targets for the darts of the enemy and have received harsh criticisms from many and have been denounced as evildoers. At the same time there doubtless have been and are yet many who, like Cornelius, have desired something better and have been praying for deliverance. The facts show that many are hearing the truth now who in times past have spoken against faithful witnesses of Jehovah. The effect of the witness is increasing, and the number of those who are associating themselves with the anointed remnant as their “companions” is increasing. (Ps. 122:8; Ps. 45:14) Now as never before the words of the apostle Peter come to these, saying, Tjet your course of action be honest now, that even those who speak evil against you shall see your good works and in the day of God’s visitation shall glorify his name.’ In this day of God’s visitation before his expressed indignation at Armageddon many more will yet call to mind the honest and consistent course of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and will praise Him that he had some faithful witnesses in the earth who gave them warning.
Let no one make the great blunder now of making himself believe that the “good works” mentioned here by the apostle consist in what is generally known as ‘Christian character development’. Outward piety is not what the apostle had in mind. Without a question of doubt he had in mind the same thing as that expressed by the apostle John, to wit, that love for God would be manifested in boldness in the proclamation of the message concerning the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by His King Christ Jesus.—1 John 4:17,18.
A man who is honestly representing an honest superior never feels he must make any apology, either by word or action, for pressing the interest of his cause. The truly anointed ones and their “companions” are representing the great Theocrat Jehovah and his King and Government of Righteousness. Surely there is no occasion for these or any one of them to apologize, by word or by course of action, while representing the Lord. Because of the importance to the covenant people of God, individually and collectively, and because of the great opportunity to glorify God, now that the hour is approaching for the great and final visitation of Jehovah God upon the nations of the earth at Armageddon, every one of his devoted people is urged to put forth the greatest possible zeal and earnestness in the representation of his Theocratic Government. When the work is done it will be a blessed and happy thing to be told by the Lord that their honest course of action in representing him has brought glory to his name. Such faithfulness will be rewarded in full keeping with God’s loving-kindness.
The honor now to be bestowed upon the name of Jehovah by those now on earth who devote themselves unreservedly to the Lord is to proclaim his name and his Theocracy as his witnesses. Only those who joyfully do this can have the final approval of the Lord henceforth. The necessity, therefore, for joyful participation in the service of the Lord God cannot be overstated. As the apostle Paul urged upon the brethren zealous activity, even so now we should urge upon one another the same thing.—Rom. 12:1.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEERING OUT FROM SILVER CITY, N. MEX.
“We stopped to inquire where we could find a certain interested person, whereupon the service station operator invited us to park our trailer there. As we prepared to move on the next day, the station owner strolled over to inquire if we didn’t like the little town, as we were moving on so soon. I replied such was not the case, but that as we were Jehovah’s witnesses, calling on the people with Watch Tower publications, we must be on our way to the rest of our assignment. He drew in his breath and stammered: ‘Wh-who did you say! Say that again—do you mean you are one of those people who do not have to salute the flag!’ ‘Yes; do you know why we take that stand! You know we respect the flag as much as anyone, but regard the salute a violation of God’s commandment as stated in the Bible. Let me read you our stand as stated in The Watchtower.’ T would like to know more about that—there has been a lot of trouble about that here—I had trouble—would you come into the station and explain that for me!’ As I was reading out of The Watchtower he said: 'Wait, you really feel the same as I do about the flag, don’t you! only you just don’t believe in saluting.’ Then it was my turn to be surprised; he began to relate how he was the one appointed by a committee of war veterans in a near-by large town to get rid of Jehovah’s witnesses {ind that he was the arresting officer. (We had heard about the trouble there before we came here, when the friends were ordered off the streets with the magazines and even threatened with mob violence if they didn’t leave town, and how one officer seemed to particularly have a vicious attitude—and this was the man!)
“He proceeded to say he had worried about the incident for months, couldn’t sleep nights for feeling he was wrong. He asked question after question, requesting answers then and there, stating he had truly believed he was obeying the unwritten law in ridding the large town of Jehovah’s witnesses. My husband returned and, the phonograph being secured, played the latest short record for him. By this time his manner appeared as of one really contrite of heart and seeking the truth. When Paul’s persecution of faithful Christians was read from the Bible, he asked if we would convey his apologies to Jehovah’s witnesses at Silver City (those he had accosted) and tell them he as well as the other two officers involved had resigned as police because they saw their mistake. He asked if Jehovah would forgive him, proceeded to subscribe for The Watchtower, took the book Religion, saying he had always known the churches were a racket, and asked if we had an extra Bible, which he also obtained. Just before I left he also stated that if he were going to be interested in this work he thought it best to cancel his plans to marry, because he knew the woman to be opposed to the truth; he was going to send a wire telling her to stay where she was and to forget about the wedding, which was to have taken place in the next few days. We have a cordial invitation to return, extended to all of Jehovah’s witnesses.”
DURING THE LAST "BUTZ” ON GLASGOW
“While pavement witnessing, a lady came up and took a Watchtower, saying she had all of Judge Rutherford’s books. I inquired whether she had heard any of his recordings. She had not, so I arranged a date. At the end of our
model study the air-raid sirens sounded, and they invited me to go into their air-raid shelter, as I was quite away from home. So into the shelter I went. Three others, including her son, who had not been in the room during the model study, also came. The son had previously said he would rather go to bed than listen to Judge Rutherford. However, in the shelter, he asked me to put the records on. The result was that eight persons listened, and we spent from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m. discussing ‘Government and Peace’. The young people went to sleep, but the mother and son kept me answering questions until the ‘raiders passed’ sirens sounded, at 5 a.m. I had started the morning before at 9: 30 a.m. and had put in seven hours, and my evening call took another seven hours. I arrived home in the morning and found the whole neighborhood around my home extensively damaged, but my own home was all right. The windows in the tenements above and below had been blown out. I reached home at 7 a.m. and at 10 a.m. I was on the work again. The thrill of the model study and the witness in the shelter seemed to have taken away all tiredness.”
LONDON BRANCH SERVANT IN DERBY
“I was finishing running the ‘Message of Hope’ disc to the wife when the husband appeared, trying to cut short the call. I tried to reason with him a bit, but be finally said he was fed up with religion and he didn’t want to have anything more to do with it and would be pleased if I would get going. He said there was only one real Christian in England and that was Judge Rutherford. Imagine my surprise! In a last effort before he closed the door I showed him that the book I had was written by that very same person. He quickly opened the door again and I continued the witness. He took some literature, and I arranged for a back-call. I almost missed this ‘sheep’. We are finding many people thoroughly disgusted with the ‘churches’, and to them the message of The Theocracy is like food to a famished person. Every week-end in various parts of the country where I serve the brethren marvelous experiences are related, just as the ‘Victory Song’ says: ‘There shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord.’ (Judges 5:11)”
ON A CORNER OF SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH
“As I started for my assigned corner I thought I might just as well offer a Watchtower to a man standing in front of a store. Based on the September 1 issue, on the subject ‘Is Religion Holy!’ he was soon agreeing that religion was not holy, but a racket. Said I: ‘I have a phonograph record right there in my car entitled “Snare and Racket” that you would enjoy. Do you want to hear it!’ Said he: ‘I would close up my store to hear that!’ I told him he need not do that, as I would take the record into his store; which I did, and played the recording. He thanked me for the ‘great favor’ and took a magazine. Returning to the car with the phonograph, a Spanish man asked me for a magazine ; he took Consolation. Then, while I spoke a little Spanish to him, he followed me to my car, I took out my box of foreign literature and he gladly contributed for two more booklets, meanwhile calling a Greek passer-by over to see the books. A short discussion with the Greek, and he took Conspiracy Against Democracy, in Greek. Result: In a few minutes, within 100 feet of my car, I had placed two magazines, three booklets, played the phonograph, and obtained three names for back-calls.”
336
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	» Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S. A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Ambuboh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children,” • Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose, duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents In the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, JI.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 84 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irvrin Avenue, Toronto 6, Ontario, Canada
Australasian 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W„ Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower tree upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to • Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“GREAT MULTITUDE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Regardless of the incoming of winter then, December marks another month-long season of special united activity known as “Great Multitude” Testimony Period. Those persons of good-will who shall form part of the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors are now quickly coming forth ere the wintertime of Armageddon sets in on the world, and they will, in increasing numbers, take part with the remnant members in this united Testimony. All such are cordially invited to join in putting in as many homes as possible the excellent combination offer of the new book Children and the new booklet Comfort All That Mourn, on a contribution of 25c. We shall be glad to give references to any wanting to get in touch with and to co-operate with the nearest organized company of publishers of The Theocracy. At the close of the Period the usual report on the full month’s activities and results should be submitted.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 21: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 5), fl 1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower November 15, 1941.
Week of December 28: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 5), fl 23-39 inclusive, The Watchtower November 15, 1941.
“REPORT OF THE JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES ASSEMBLY”
As previously advised in The Watchtower, the work has been going on for the compiling of a comprehensive survey of the recent Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses at St. Louis, Mo., for the five days, August 6-10. Now we are pleased to announce the publication of the full report. Like the Assembly itself, it is the best convention report yet produced. Its 80 pages set forth the important events and brilliant high lights of the Assembly, including speeches of Judge Rutherford to the mighty throng there which have not till now been published anywhere, and all visualized to you by page on page of a photographic review of the noteworthy events and scenes. To this there has been added a full, illustrated report of an identical five-day Assembly, with features like those at St. Louis, held by Jehovah’s witnesses at Leicester, England, September 3-7, in spite of the war. This Report of the Jehovah’s witnesses Assembly is a forceful witness to the actuality of Jehovah’s Theocratic organization, and should serve as a potent instrument in your field activities in behalf of the many persons of good-will. Send for your copy now, remitting 5c therefor. After you see and read it you will want others to have it too.
SieWWCHTDWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	November 15, 1941	No. 22
DEMON RULE ENDING
PART 5
"The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.”—Ps. 53:1.
TEHOVAH’S description of creatures is such that I it is easy to locate them by the course of action J they take. It is not necessary for such creatures to speak audible words, since the heart represents the motive: “Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh” and the course of action is directed. (Matt. 12:34) Consequently, as one goes about his affairs he shows whether he has faith in Almighty God or not. This is as true with reference to a composite body as with a single individual. The wise creature is guided by the Word of Jehovah God. The fool shuns the Word of God. If any sane person thinks he has reason to doubt that “the king of the north” (Dan. 11:40) is a fool, and therefore the instrument of the Devil, let him measure that composite body by the scriptures that follow, to wit:
2	“The fool rageth, and is confident.” (Prov. 14:16) The composite body of “the king of the north” now rages against many people and nations and is very confident of success, whereas his defeat is certain. The fool is wicked, and his way is darkness, and he walks on in darkness. (Prov. 4:19; Eccl. 2:14) It is certain that he shall perish.—Prov. 10: 28.
3	The heart of the creature stands for his motive or purpose, and according to his action he may be identified. “The worthless fool saith in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt, and they are abominable (in their) injustice: there is none that doth good.” (Leeser) “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity.” (Ps. 53:1, Auth. Ver.) “They are corrupt, and they are abominable in their injustice.” This scripture text exactly describes “the king of the north”, composed of Nazis, Fascists and the Hierarchy combine. Both their claim and their work are iniquitous and are an abomination in the sight of Almighty God. By their course of action this combine says: “There is no Almighty Jehovah.” They go exactly contrary to the Word of God. They afflict the people with gross injustice. A more minute description of “the king of the north” given in the prophecy of Daniel proves beyond all doubt that that “king” and every element thereof emphatically
deny that Jehovah is the Supreme One and that Christ Jesus is His Kang, who shall rule the world in righteousness. The religious leaders of the combine, that is, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in particular, claim to represent Christ Jesus; but that claim is entirely false. The Hierarchy justifies the action of “the king of the north” and publicly prays for the “new League of Nations”, which is the “new order”, so called, of “the king of the north”; and the Hierarchy also prays for the re-establishment of the “old Holy Roman Empire”, which at all times has been devoted entirely to blasphemous action and gross iniquity. At the same time the Hierarchy condemns and persecutes everyone who advocates the kingdom of God by Christ Jesus, and which is The Theocracy for which Christ Jesus taught all of his true followers to earnestly pray: “He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.”—Prov. 17:15.
‘ The poor people of many nations now greatly suffer at the hand of “the king of the north”: “As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over the poor people.”—Prov. 28:15.
3	Jehovah has put these unchangeable rules in the Bible for the aid and comfort of those who desire righteousness, and by which they may be guided in the way of righteousness; and the reason for calling attention to the same here is that those who love righteousness may see the wickedness of “the king of the north” and of every element thereof and, seeing the same, quickly flee from that iniquitous religious influence and find refuge in The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Return now to the consideration of the prophecy of Daniel and mark how completely the events that are now daily coming to light show the fulfillment of that prophecy dictated by Jehovah and written down in the centuries past.
6	“Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself above all.” (Dan. 11: 37) The “fathers” of “Christendom”, that is, the chief religious element of “the king of the north”, once sought to worship Almighty God with religion and the tradi-
339
340
THE WATCHTOWER
tions of men; but the modern-day “Catholic Action” is political and the feigned worship of God is only with outward signs and words, all of which are an abomination in Jehovah’s sight. “In vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments [the precepts] of men.”—Matt. 15:9.
7	The Hebrew word Elohim is rendered “God”. Elohim refers to the Creator of heaven and earth, and the Creator of man. He is the Maker of the everlasting covenant concerning created life. He is the Almighty God, to whom belongs the earth and the fullness thereof. “The king of the north” has no regard for Him, the Almighty Creator, but, on the contrary, by its course of action every element of “the king of the north" denies the supremacy of Jehovah, the Almighty God. “The king of the north” is very destructive of human life, having no regard for God’s living creatures, which God’s everlasting covenant forbids to be wantonly killed, as the “Axis powers” are now doing. With the full connivance and approval of the religious Hierarchy this abominable iniquity is carried on throughout the earth.
8	“Zion” is the creation and upbuilding of Elohim, the Almighty God, and is the official residence of the Most High, as He has declared. “When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.” (Ps. 102:16) “In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwellingplace in Zion.” (Ps. 76: 2) “For the Lord hath chosen Zion: he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.”—Ps. 132:13,14.
* Zion is Jehovah’s official government, of which Christ Jesus is The King. It is The Theocracy, and that righteous government is viciously opposed by “the king of the north”, and particularly the religious element thereof. Even the pope and the other members of the Hierarchy are contemptuous of God’s creation and building. While hypocritically operating under the cloak of religion they, together with other elements of “the king of the north”, ride roughshod over everything animate or inanimate to the end that they might satisfy their ambition for world domination. This is proved by their wicked and cruel persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, his faithful servants, which servants of God they persecute solely for the reason that those servants announce Jehovah’s name and his Kingdom. They support the totalitarian and cruel wars that are wickedly carried on by the Nazis and Fascists against the democracies, or governments for and by the people. They utterly disregard the rights of the people which God has bestowed upon them. They control the public prejss to a large degree and see to it that the press aids them in keeping the people in the dark by giving wide publication to the Hierarchy’s vain prayers for peace and for “the pope’s sorrowing heart”, and crocodile
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tears, publicly shed. Thus every element of “the king of the north”, the composite body, shows no regard for Almighty God; and that shows, on the authority of God’s Word, that “the king of the north” is a fool, which fool is condemned to everlasting destruction.
10“Nor the desire of women.” (Dan. 11:37) This part of the prophetic text does not refer to the female sex. “The king of the north” is not an individual man, but a composite personage. The “women” of the text, therefore, means organizations which God has created and which sincerely and honestly men have builded up by the grace and direction of the Lord. Both Mussolini and Franco of the “Axis powers” are married men with families, and members of the Hierarchy have their dealings with the opposite sex, which dealings, of course, are not fully and publicly revealed. So the text could not refer literally to men’s disregard for the opposite sex. As an illustration, the organization of the American government has always insisted on keeping the state and religion, called “the church”, entirely separate, but the Hierarchy now induces the politicians of America to cry out: “We must have more religion, else we perish.” The Hierarchy tries to put religion in politics and sets up a bogeyman called “Communism”, with which to frighten the politicians into a closer relationship of the church, politically, and state. Thus it is seen that the Hierarchy has no regard for any organization of the people that is righteous.
11 The “women”, whose desire “the king” does not regard, without any doubt, refers to God’s organization. His organization Zion is pictured by good women; that is, it was foreshadowed by Sarah and Rachel. The “desire” of these women is for children for God’s service and to the vindication of his name. (Gen. 30:1-3; Rom. 7:4) Sarah pictured God’s “woman”, Zion, which is the mother of Christ and the 144,000 members of “his body”, therefore The Christ, and which includes the faithful remnant yet on the earth. Likewise Keturah (Gen. 25:1,2) and Rachel (Gen. 35:16-19) pictured members of Jehovah’s capital organization which are brought in later. (See the book Jehovah.)
” At Revelation twelve God’s woman Zion is pictured as bringing forth the “man-child”, which is God’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. The “remnant of her seed” is described in Revelation 12:17, against which the enemy makes war. Now “the king of the north” fights against the “manchild” of The Theocratic Government and desires to destroy it to the end that the “Axis powers” might rule the world contrary to Jehovah’s will. Therefore the effort to suppress the message concerning The Theocracy, which effort is put forth with all possible vigor by the elements of “the king of the north”. The Devil sends forth “the king of the north”, particu
November 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
341
larly the Hierarchy element thereof, to destroy the remnant of God's capital organization yet on earth, to which remnant is committed “the testimony of Jesus Christ’’ and the work of proclaiming that message to the peoples of earth who have a hearing ear. Thus “the king of the north” shows absolutely no regard for “women”, that is, for God's organization. The arrogant and foolish course of “the king of the north” is further indicated by that part of the text describing him, to wit:
is “Nor regard any god.” The Hebrew word eloah is here used, and is translated by the English word god. In the book of Job, in connection with the drama therein set out, eloah is used forty-one times; and it is used to identify any mighty one, whether visible or invisible. It is used ten other times referring to Jehovah God. Hence the words “any god” used in this text of the prophecy of Daniel appear to mean any mighty one within Jehovah's organization, to wit, Christ Jesus in particular, whose name, as the prophecy declares, shall be called “Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God”. (Isa. 9:6) He is the Chief One, who as a man maintained flawless or complete his integrity toward Jehovah, and is therefore the mighty Vindicator of Jehovah’s name.—Heb. 5: 8,9; Rev. 19:11-21.
14	“The king of the north” has no regard for the Lord Jesus Christ as the Mighty God who will avenge Jehovah’s name and oust everything that is contrary to Jehovah. On the contrary, that “king” viciously persecutes those who are members of The Christ, and opposes the work which the Lord has assigned to them to do in the earth in his name. (Dan. 11:33) “The king of the north” has no regard whatsoever for Christ Jesus as Jehovah’s mighty One who shall rule the world in righteousness, nor does he have regard for “the Higher Powers” of Jehovah, namely, Jehovah and Christ Jesus, but places the law of “the king of the north” above the law of God and Christ. “The king of the north” arrogantly claims to be supreme. Further describing “the king of the north”, the prophet says:
15	“For he shall magnify himself above all.” “The king of the north” acknowledges none as “the higher powers”, but magnifies himself above Jehovah and above Christ Jesus by claiming that the composite ‘"king” constitutes the higher powers, made up of superior people. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims to be the spiritual higher powers, and hence claims to be supreme on the earth and responsible to no earthly creature, organization or government on the earth. At the same time “the king of the north”, particularly the religious element thereof, practices a form of godliness, which is demonism, and which practice is done to mislead and does mislead many peoples. They deny the power of Jehovah God and Christ
Jesus by spurning the Word of God and setting up themselves in the place and stead of The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. The “king” combination deny the existence of the Almighty God, and hence, as the Scriptures declare, say in their heart: “There is no Almighty God.” “They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.”—Titus 1:16.
” They mock the Most High and his King and proceed in the way of opposition to The Theocracy, and their course of action is so terrible that the Lord describes them as abominable in their wickedness.
1	T “But in his estate [in his place (Rev. Ver. and Rotherham)} shall he honour the God of forces; and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.”—Dan. 11: 38.
12	This word “estate” means “official position”. “Estate” is used in the place of or for the office or position of “the king of the south” in Daniel’s prophecy (11: 7). (See verses 20, 21.) “The king of the north” disregards the position or office of The Theocracy and substitutes therefor the “abomination of desolation”. “The king of the north” honors the “god of forces”, which god does not dwell in nor receive worship in the “sanctuary of strength”, for the reason it is the “sanctuary of strength” which “the king of the north” pollutes, as the prophecy states.—Dan. 11:31.
"Not being the Elohim or Eloah of Jehovah’s organization, the “god of forces”, as used in the prophecy, must stand for and be, and is, the counterfeit of The Theocracy, and therefore is the “abomination of desolation”. It is the totalitarian monstrosity, the Corporate State, that rules by force and coercion and violence and by the power of armed might. It is the totalitarian strength, that is to say, the Corporate State; and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is bound to it by concordats, thereby becoming a part of the composite body which constitutes the “abomination of desolation”, because that Devilish creation stands where it ought not to stand, claiming to rule the world instead of God’s Theocratic Government. It is the totalitarian “image of the beast”, which stands in the place where it ought not to stand and thus wrongfully, blasphemously and wickedly occupies the “estate” of Jehovah, The Theocracy. (See Matthew 24:15; Mark 13:14; Revelation 13:14,15; Revelation 14:9,11; 20:4.) This totalitarian monstrosity is the image of the Devil himself, “the god of this world” of wickedness, and displays all the characteristics of the Devil. That image is something which appears in the “latter days”, meaning the present time.
20	“And a god [Yea, to a god (Young); Even to a god (Rotherham)} whom his fathers knew not.”
342
THE WATCHTOWER,
Those who preceded the modern-day “king of the north”, that is to say, “his fathers,” did not know this god, this modern monstrosity, because this “image of the beast”, this totalitarian combine, is the “abomination that maketh desolate”. That monstrosity was foretold by Jehovah’s prophets as due to be set up at the end of Satan’s world of uninterrupted rule, when the invisible Gog, the chief of demons and the official field marshal of Satan, would come to the fore and become active in carrying out Satan’s purposes. (Ezek. 38: 2, 3) It is after this “image of the beast” is set up that it is first worshiped as commanded by the Devil’s representatives; hence it was not known and worshiped by “his fathers” of the modern-day combine, nor was the prophecy relative thereto correctly understood as to the identity of the “image of the beast” until God’s due time, which due time is at the end of the world, where we now are. And how shall “the king of the north” honor this god ?
21	“Shall he honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones.” That “god of forces” receives honor with the material wealth of the earth represented by gold, silver, precious stones and other substances which these things can purchase. Let all sincere persons who have been induced to believe that the pope is a wise man, and not a fool, consider the indisputable facts in the light of the prophetic utterances of Jehovah God. The pope of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, which forms a part of the composite body of “the king of the north”, financed Hitler’s political campaign in 1932, when the deal was made between Hitler and Pius XI, and which deal was consummated by the then pope’s official representative, Eugenio Cardinal Pacelli. That latter named gentleman is now the head of the Hierarchy. Pius XI also financed Mussolini’s Ethiopian campaign, when that country was ruthlessly grabbed and the people robbed. Also the same pope financed and collaborated with and advised and counseled and encouraged the rebellion led by one Franco against the Spanish Republic, and in which that democracy was destroyed. Thus the totalitarian monstrosity was honored with millions of gold and silver, and like things of material value, all of which was collected by means of false pretenses.
22	“The king of the north” has had no regard for the gold and silver of God’s Word, nor for the precious “Corner Stone” of Zion, upon which Jehovah has builded his capital organization. (Isa. 28:16) But in order to keep up and operate the totalitarian monster, that is, the “abomination of desolation”, according to the style or ideas of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, “the king of the north” has consumed great material wealth to provide instruments of destruction rather than to provide food for the starving people. The ruling powers have extracted gold,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
silver, jewelry and other material wealth from the people and laid burdensome taxes upon the defenseless people, and have carried on unrighteous commercial transactions in order to accomplish its ambitious desire to carry forward a campaign to gain world domination. That combine have also seized the material wealth of the countries which have been overrun and made part of the dominion of “the king of the north”. All of this iniquitous abomination has been done and carried on with utter disregard of Almighty God and his Word, and by which course of action “the king” has said: “There is no Almighty God besides us; we are IT.”
22	“And pleasant things [with desirable things (Young)]”-, that is to say, things desirable to eat and for adornment. (Dan. 10: 3; Gen. 27: 15, margin; 2 Chron. 20:25) The material things which are necessary for the wealth and comfort of the people have been wrongfully seized and sacrificed to the idol of the Corporate State. Such is done to gratify the wicked ambition of the monstrosity combine and to impose upon the nations the totalitarian system in order to oppose and stave off the setting up of The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. To be sure, the “pleasant things” seized, such as butter of Denmark, upon which that people depends, and like material things from that and other nations, the totalitarian rulers continue to use for their own pleasure, while the common people, whom they have pillaged and robbed, continue to starve.
24	In addition to the “pleasant things” used by the people in general, “the king of the north” has tried to take away from Jehovah’s witnesses and companions, his faithful servants who love righteousness, all the desirable spiritual food upon which those servants of God depend. In many countries they have destroyed the Bibles and ail Bible helps of these faithful servants of God and prevented them from meeting together to worship God; and this has been done in every country where the Hierarchy is able to exercise its great power. In addition thereto that monstrosity has tried to rip off the “beautiful garments”, the spiritual adornment, of God’s faithful servants by which their identification is made to appear (Isa. 52:1), and have tried to compel Jehovah’s witnesses and companions to let loose their hold upon Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. By the grace of God, however, Jehovah’s servants have been able to stand and that monstrosity has not succeeded. God’s faithful servants are determined to hold fast their integrity, come what may. They trust in Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, whom they serve. Although denied the right to the possession of Bibles and Bible helps to aid them in studying the Word of God, and although denied the right to meet for study, the faithful servants of Jehovah
November 15,1941
WATCHTOWER.
343
have these great truths in their minds, which cannot be taken away from them by the Devil or any of his representatives. The monstrosity has largely succeeded, however, in taking away from the general public the spiritual food convenient for them, and this they have done by the political powers’ yielding to the religious leaders of the monstrosity. This unrighteous combination have confiscated and destroyed the printed message, which includes the Bible, and have herded faithful men and women into concentration camps to keep them away from their spiritual food and have taken the spiritual food away from the common people and destroyed it. All this “the king of the north” has done in order to please and worship the totalitarian god. (Prov. 30:8; Isa. 61:10; Matt. 22:11,12; Rev. 7: 9,13,14) The result is that there is today amongst the common people ‘a famine in the land for the hearing of the Word of the Lord’. (Amos 8:11) This famine for spiritual food, however, does not cause the faithful ones who have long been serving God to starve, because they have these truths fixed firmly in mind.
23	In passing, the opinion is here expressed for the information of those who have hearing ears, that a great famine is certain to afflict the many nations of the earth in the very near future. The United States is also in line for much suffering. At the same time when the food supply of the world is continually growing less the government of the United States walks right into the trap of the Devil by putting in force a law which restricts the wheat supply of America and thus will in the near future make bread hard to get. If this government had not turned a deaf ear to the Bible, and had not forgotten God, the ruling factors thereof would not only have avoided Satan’s trap above mentioned, but would have encouraged and greatly increased acreage and production of wheat, and other food stuffs so much needed by the peoples of earth. Also instead of the ruling factors’ listening to the demands of religionists, particularly the Hierarchy, who form a part of “the king of the north” and who desperately attempt to keep the people in darkness concerning Jehovah’s Word and his government, this nation of the United States should have encouraged the people to give heed to the message which Jehovah has sent and is sending to them by his servants. The United States is faced with world disaster now impending and about to fall, and the only thing that can save the people from that disaster is the truth of Jehovah’s Word. Will the nation entirely forget God and suffer the evil effects of the judgment which God has pronounced against those who forget him, and which judgment long ago was written, and which judgment is now about to be enforced, to wit: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget
God”! (Ps. 9:17) Who, then, is wise! Let him give heed to the Word of God. And who will deny the fact that those who disregard God and his Word are fools!
s« “Thus shall he do in the most strong holds [(Am. Rev. Ver.) And he shall deal with the strongest fortresses; (Young) And he hath dealt in the fortresses of the strongholds] with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory; and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the land for gain.”—Dan. 11: 39.
27	This clearly foretells the action of “the king of the north” in extending the totalitarian idea of idolatry to the other nations of the earth by means of causing revolution, sabotage, “fifth column” activities, and the like, such as the Nazi, Fascist, Hierarchy propaganda and religious campaigns. That action is quickly followed up by invasion, such as was carried on against the Netherlands, Belgium, Norway, and other countries. Devastating propaganda is pushed with great vigor within the realm of the democracies, such as the United States and Canada, where the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have divers and numerous agents and representatives who exercise great influence and power over the public press and cause the truth to be suppressed and the people to be lulled to sleep while the totalitarian spirit continues to permeate the country without interruption. Thus “the fool” is making fools of many others.
28	What are the “strongholds” of a free people! The sanctity of the home devoted to God and Christ; the schools that teach the children obedience to parents in the Lord, who walk in the way of righteousness and bring up their children “in the nurture and admonition of the Lord”; the masses of the people who have had regard for the liberties of all; and the freedom of speech, of assembly and of the press, and of worship. These strongholds “the king of the north”, which composes the devastating monstrosity, has invaded in all of the democracies. That monstrosity now has declared war to the extermination of what it calls “the plutocratic democracies”, and the capitalistic nations with liberal governments. Carrying out their wicked course of action, the composite body, “the king of the north,” has invaded all of these strongholds of education, the home, the channels of publication, the freedom of worship and assembly, and has corrupted the courts, to accomplish their wicked ambition. Can it do any good to give warning now! It appears that it cannot, so far as the government is concerned; therefore, what is here said is said that the people who love righteousness may see and appreciate the physical facts which show the clear fulfillment of the prophecy, and who, seeing and understanding, may give heed to the advice of Jesus Christ to “flee to the mountains”, that
344
THE WATCHTOWER.
is, to The Theocratic Government of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus. Jehovah’s faithful servants must in obedience to his commandment give a clear and unmistakable witness now to The Theocratic Government in order that a witness may be given to Jehovah’s name and that those people of good-will toward God may have opportunity to seek the place of safety and the way to life.
” “With a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge.” This “strange god” is totalitarianism according to the Nazi, Fascist, Hierarchy type. It is with this “strange god” that the monstrosity carries on its work. In 1939 it made an operating agreement and non-aggression pact with the Communist idol god, and at Christmas time in 1940 Hitler persuaded Stalin to grant certain liberties to the Roman Catholic Jesuit operators in the lands recently brought under the Russian control, and those Catholic priests also carried on their operations in Russia to prepare the way for the invasion, which followed by the treachery of Hitler and the Papacy shortly thereafter.
80	The World War was fought with the slogan ringing in the ears of the people against “the king of the north”, to wit, “This war will make the world safe for Democracy." And now this totalitarian monster, the “strange god”, the Devil’s chief instrument, leads the democracies into the Devil’s trap and causes them to howl for “more religion”, while the Devil ties them hand and foot. Such is the operation of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to accomplish its purposes to unite religion, which is falsely called “Christianity”, with the state or totalitarianism. “The king of the south” yields to the seductive influence of the Hierarchy religionists, hoping that maybe the Hierarchy will ultimately join with “the king of the south" in gaining world domination. Thus the blind leads the blind, and the ditch is open. The prophecy continues:
81	“And increase with glory.” He does not honor Jehovah, but multiplies self-glory and glory of the Corporate State, “the abomination that maketh desolate.”
82	“And he shall cause them to rule over many.” This shows a war of conquest in various fields, including activities, service, thought and worship. All of the countries that are conquered and put in subjection to “the king of the north” are put under close supervision, and a mighty bureaucracy is established, and independence and free action are denied to all the people. Subordinate officers of the totalitarian combine are put in control of all the invaded and conquered countries, and the education and the free worship and assembly and speech no longer tolerated. There is a complete regimentation of the people. Free elections are abolished, and the dictator
Brooklyn, N. Y.
causes his agents to “rule over many”, even as the prophecy states.
88	“The king of the north” sees to it that the religious element of the monstrosity, to wit, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, bears “rule over many”. The dictator holds on to the Concordat arrangement with the Hierarchy, and that element, the Roman Catholic organization called “the church”, increases in religious power in all invaded countries. The “Catholic population” of the invaded countries are added to the domain of “the king of the north”, so that by the end of 1941 the population of the “king’s” territory is certainly to be chiefly Roman Catholic. The magazine The Converted Catholic, in its issue of January, 1941, page 28, says, among other things, this: “The Nazi good-will toward Catholicism is implied in dozens of apparently insignificant items that occur from day to day but are wont to escape notice. . . . Nazi officials boasted recently over the radio of ten thousand institutions in Germany conducted by the Catholic church, a number greater than that in existence previous to Hitler. The Vatican, anxious to keep up the pretense of a rift with Germany, was embarrassed by the revelation. Unable to contradict these figures, it attempted to hem and haw in reply —but the facts remain untouched and undenied.”
84	“And shall divide the land for gain [for a price (margin)].” “The king of the north” completely ignores the divine rule set forth at Psalm 24:1: “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.” In passing, let it be noticed also that some who think they are supporters of The Theocracy fall into a like error by claiming the ownership of things on the earth, all of which belong to the Lord Jesus Christ, whom Jehovah God has made heir of all things. The “price” which the king requires for dividing up things according to his own will is complete and absolute obedience to the will of the Hierarchy in matters of religion, and complete obedience to the State, that is, to the Duee and the Fuehrer. It is the Jesuit system put into complete operation, that wicked system that was used prior to 1648. The payment of the “king’s” demanded “price” results in gain to the totalitarian powers; and when the price is not paid many people are put to death. Thus the Roman Catholic Hierarchy blesses the instruments of war of the “Ling” and has fully approved the most wicked war ever carried on, and therefore becomes party to the crime grossly violating the everlasting covenant of Almighty God concerning the sanctity of life. (Gen. 9:5,6) The German bishops of the Papacy at their Fulda Conference in 1940 voted their pledge to Hitler; and the cardinal of Vienna concluded his letter of congratulation with the words, “Heil, Hitler.” For this praise the “king” gives the clergy element flands’, or a de
November 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
345
termining control over the living conditions of the people, to be ruled by them in totalitarian fashion.
v The payment of the “price” also includes what the Papacy has paid from its vast wealth held at Vatican City, concerning which wealth the books of account have never been opened or published, even to the many faithful Catholics who have paid their hard-earned money into the coffers of the Papacy. The Hierarchy induces the public press to frequently ask: “Where do Jehovah’s witnesses get their money! and how much did they receive last year?” Such is done, of course, to divert the minds of the people away from the great collections of the Hierarchy and to keep them from thinking about the fabulous sums held in the vaults of the Vatican. It is well known that the Vatican has financed the dictators of Europe and therefore had much to do with putting in power Hitler, Mussolini and Franco and keeping them in operation as the active instruments of the head of the Vatican to carry out its long-cherished ambition for world domination. The Vatican hopes to there ride on the back of those, all of whom make up the combined “beast”. At the same time the Hierarchy, operating through Vatican City, uses large sums of money to suppress the publication of God’s message of and concerning The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. The same religious element subtly undermines the foundations of democracies in its effort to set up the re-establishment of the “old Holy Roman Empire”. By this practice of “price”-taking and paying, the totalitarian combine, “the abomination that maketh desolate,” is kept occupying the place where it ought not to stand. Jehovah caused Daniel to write down the prophecy foretelling exactly what the Hierarchy, together with the other elements of “the king of the north”, are now doing, and this is published for the people who are wise, that is to say, those who desire to know God’s will and who seek meekness and righteousness. —Zeph. 2: 3.
” The physical facts now clearly to be seen by all who wish to know the truth and to follow righteousness, beyond all doubt show that the political, commercial and religious elements composing “the king of the north” are by the course of action taken plainly saying: “There is no God"; and God’s decree concerning all such is that Tie is a fool’. “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity: there is none that doeth good.”—Ps. 53:1.
” Let all honest and sincere people take notice now of the authoritative Word of Almighty God of and concerning the total depravity of “the king of the north”. That totalitarian monster now arrogantly and blasphemously stands where it ought not to stand, and, in defiance of Almighty God, says: “We will rule the earth or ruin it.” The present is the time to which Jesus Christ refers when, in recounting the events coming to pass at the end of the world, he said: “But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the mountains.” (Mark 13:14) Thus the Lord Jesus shows that the prophecy uttered by Daniel at Jehovah’s dictation is now being fulfilled, and hence his admonition is that those in Judea should flee, if they desire to live. Who are ‘those of Judea’? All persons of good-will toward God and Christ Jesus who sincerely desire to know and to serve Jehovah and his King. The word “Judea” means praise, and therefore embraces all people who give praise to Jehovah, and not to earthly creatures.
’’ What are the “mountains” to which Jesus admonishes sincere ones to flee and find refuge? The word mountain used symbolically in the Scriptures means government or kingdom; and in the text uttered by Christ Jesus the holy “mountains” there mean The Theocracy, that is to say, the Government of Jehovah by Christ Jesus, his duly appointed and anointed King. Only those will survive Armageddon and live who flee to The Theocracy; because the Lord says: ‘This is life eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.’ —John 17:3.
” Why does The Watchtower publish these things now? Not for the purpose of holding up to ridicule any creature or organization; not for the purpose of inflicting punishment upon those who compose “the king of the north”, because all punishment will be inflicted by the Lord; not for the purpose of converting those who are of “the king of the north”, because that is impossible. The purpose of the publication of these truths is to aid all persons of good-will toward God and Christ to learn of and find the only way to life everlasting. Those who do find life everlasting will forever praise Jehovah and Christ His King!
(To be continued)
As for transgressors, they shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked shall be cut off. But the salvation of the righteous is of Jehovah: he is their stronghold in the time of trouble. And Jehovah helpeth them, and rescueth them: he rescueth them from the wicked, and saveth them, because they have taken refuge tn him.—Psalm 37:38-40, A.B.V.
UNITY NOW IN THE WAR
THERE are certain seasons of the year that are given over to the game of football. Teams are trained to engage in the contest. Many contest for the supremacy. Each team has a coach who gives directions as to what should be done. Each player is expected to follow the rules carefully and each one anxiously watches his own part that he may work in exact harmony with his comrades. When the day to engage in the contest approaches each participant is carefully preparing himself to perform his part; and each one has and manifests a burning and sincere desire that his side might win. Uppermost in the mind of each one is the slogan: We must win!
If it is found that there is one in a team who looks back or who refuses to work in harmony or provokes discord, he is retired. The purpose is to have each one recognize that working in exact harmony is absolutely essential to success. They go upon the field of contest, everyone eagerly watching his part and zealously performing it. The command is given and they move on as one man. They know that controversy amongst themselves will spell disaster. They are at peace with one another and maintain that condition until the contest is finished. They do not stop to argue the proposition as to who is in command. They recognize that somebody must be; theirs is to obey orders and to work in exact harmony.
Paul the apostle, at 2 Timothy 2: 5, uses the Olympian games of contest to illustrate the Christian’s course. It is permissible that Christians at this time use modern games of contest to illustrate the course that the Christian should take or does take. Sometimes, as stated at Luke 16: 8, “the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light.” It is possible to draw an example even from one in the world. Hence a comparison may be profitable.
Manifestly the apostle Paul, when he wrote the words of Ephesians 6:10-18, had in mind the great controversy between the forces of darkness and the forces of light at and near the final end of “the time of the end” of demon rule. While it may be true that those Scripture verses have had some application throughout the centuries since Christ, they come with greater force at “the time of the end”. The application thereof could not have been so keenly appreciated by Christians until the Lord Jesus came to the temple of God in A.D. 1918. When the proper setting of these words is gotten, their importance at this time is more keenly appreciated.
At Ephesians 6:10 the apostle says: “Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.” The word “finally" locates the time as at or near the time of the final battle of the Devil or “Dragon” against the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses. The apostle does not say that the Christian is to be strong in himself, but that his strength is in the Lord; and here the Christian should remember that “the joy of the Lord is your strength”. (Neh. 8: 10) One who indulges in vituperative controversy with his Christian brother cannot be very much in the “joy of the Lord”. If your brother is wrong let him alone, but do not fight.
The apostle warns the Christians to prepare for the final conflict and advises us with whom the battle is to be fought. At Ephesians 6:11 he says: “Put on the whole
armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.” This implies a tremendous conflict with the Devil and demonism and that the armor of the Lord is essential to the conflict of the Christian. For a time some were induced to believe that the Devil was already bound, and there was a general belief that all the demons were imprisoned.
The apostle then shows that there is a great host of devils working together with Satan, the chief devil. It is quite manifest that this company of devils, or demons, have been with Satan in heaven all the centuries past, participating in and forming a part of his organization invisible to man; and that since the “war in heaven” beginning in A.D. 1914 they have been cast out and down to the earth. (Rev. 12: 3-12) At Ephesians 6:12 the apostle adds: “Because our struggle is not against blood and flesh, but against the principalities, against the authorities, against the worldholders of this darkness, against the spiritual forces of wickedness in the heavenlies.” (Rotherham’s translation) Here the apostle Paul is giving us a view of the Devil’s organization, and in The Revelation, recorded by the apostle John, a clearer view of it is given. In Revelation twelfth chapter one of the wonders mentioned as appearing in heaven is God’s organization, Zion, giving birth to the new nation, to wit, the Kingdom, or The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus that shall rule the heavens and the earth The other wonder there mentioned is the Devil’s organization, which attempts to run ahead of the Lord and to set up a kingdom in the place and stead of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, and then like a dragon attempts to devour the Lord’s kingdom when the time comes for it to function.
Following the birth of The Nation or Theocratic Kingdom in A.D. 1914 a controversy in heaven followed, resulting in the Devil and his angels being cast to earth. Then comes the warning: “Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.” (Rev. 12:12) Then it is plainly stated that “when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman [Zion, God’s organization] which brought forth the man child [the Kingdom or Theocratic Government]. And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed [Jehovah’s witnesses], which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ”. (Rev. 12:13,17) Now it is seen that Satan and his demons are making a concerted, organized movement against the people of Jehovah God particularly, those who keep his commandments and have the testimony of and concerning the King of The Theocracy, Christ Jesus. If those engaged in a worldly contest see the necessity of standing together, with stronger reasoning should the little handful of Jehovah’s people, the remnant and their companions, now see the necessity of standing shoulder to shoulder battling for the cause of the Government of Righteousness.
At Ephesians 6:13 the apostle proceeds to specifically set forth how the members of the anointed remnant and their companions must be armed and equipped for the war and how they must stand together against the wiles of the Devil: “Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God,
346
November 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
347
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand.” What is here meant by “having done all”? Since A.D. 1922 the Lord has clearly revealed to his people that their fight is not against the weaknesses of the flesh, nor against flesh-and-blood creatures, but that their fight is against Satan and the host of wicked ones, invisible to human eyes, that have overreached men and'used men to set up and operate religious institutions, by and through which they have made war against God’s covenant people. His faithful ones have learned that, in order to withstand the enemy, they cannot rely upon their own ability, but that each one must be fully equipped with the armor of the Lord and rely upon Him. The covenant people of God have learned that the time is here for a complete showdown with the Devil’s crowd and that therefore this is “the evil day”. The time arrived, therefore, for specific instruction as to what course the anointed should take. No time now to ask yourself, What will the people think about me if I go out in the service as a witness for Jehovah? No reason now to say, Shall I be able to demonstrate that I have “developed a beautiful character” and can always be sweet under all conditions? What creatures think of the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses is not material. How God regards them is of all-importance. Mark well the equipment which the Lord has provided and which he instructs them to now put on.
Each one now must be provided with the accouterments of war. At Ephesians 6:14 the apostle continues: “Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness.” To be girt about the waist is a symbol of servitude, therefore meaning that from this time forward no one can stand against the wiles of the enemy unless he employs the faculties with which he is endowed for service in the Lord’s cause as opportunity affords. The breastplate of the warrior fits over the vital organs, particularly the heart, suggesting that the Christian must have a pure heart and must demonstrate that his heart motive is wholly, entirely and without compromise for Jehovah and his kingdom and that he is pursuing a singleness of purpose to serve God and his kingdom. Also he must be unselfish, equally as interested in his brother’s winning the warfare as he is to win.
“And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace.” The feet are shod because the presumption is that each one is moving in action. His feet must not be shod with something that will produce irritation and controversy within the ranks of the Lord’s family, but shod with the message of good tidings of “peace to men of good-will”. Where there is love amongst the brethren, of necessity there must be peace; and where there is the opposite of peace, namely, strife and controversy, selfishness predominates. The feet must be fully equipped to enter upon and go over roads rough and rocky, and made so by the enemy, and at all times and under all circumstances of adversity proclaim the good news of peace to those of good-will toward God The fight is not against your fellow creatures. You are not fighting against some earthly institution or men of earth, but contending at all times for the kingdom under Christ, and your only hope is in God and in Christ, and you are warring against the enemies of God and the enemies of his kingdom.
“Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.” (Eph.
6:16) Faith means to know the Word of God and to confidently rely upon it; and unless we rely upon the Word of the Lord and trust him implicitly we shall go the wrong way. If we trust him and acknowledge him in all our ways he will guide us in the way that we should go. (Prov. 3 ■ 5, 6) “Thou wilt keep him in peace, peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusteth in thee.” (Isa. 26: 3, margin) If one maintains an abiding confidence in the Lord then the darts of the wicked one will strike his shield and fall harmless at his feet. One who is in the joy of the Lord and singing his praises and is at peace must have faith.
“And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.” (Eph. 6: 17) The helmet fitted over the head, and therefore is a symbol of intellectual appreciation of the truth as it is revealed, and also an intellectual appreciation of the proper relationship between the creature and Jehovah God and his kingdom, with reliance upon God’s Word, knowing that salvation belongeth to Jehovah and that there is no other means of salvation and victory. The truth is the Lord’s, and he will give it to his people in his own good time and in his own good way. The Christian must keep his mind alert and see to it that he does not become a dreamer, but that his vision is clear; and this will enable his heart to rejoice. Then having the Word of God, the sword of the spirit, and wielding it according to God’s will he has both an offensive and a defensive weapon.
That “sword of the spirit” with which Jehovah’s witnesses are armed, by the grace of the Lord, is the message from Almighty God through Christ Jesus of and concerning The Theocratic Government. The oppressed people must learn that the “Higher Powers” are Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and that religion is of Satan, which he uses to entrap and enslave the people and turn them away from God. That instrument of warfare punctures and cuts in all directions. The message of the truth penetrates the very vitals of the religious organizations and their leaders, who hold to and teach traditions.
Thus the Christian is fully equipped to enter upon the field of contest. Now suppose everyone enters into a controversy with everyone else. How long would the company of God’s covenant people stand before the adversary? He would get them all. If each one has keenly at heart the interests of every other one he will watch for the interest of that one; and while he is watching he will have an anxious, burning desire that his brother, as well as himself, might win in this fight. If he loves him he can take no other course.
The apostle under inspiration emphasizes now the importance of standing shoulder to shoulder in the controversy. At Ephesians 6:18 he says: “Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints.” Supplication means to entreat, to seek earnestly, to beseech It means to humbly implore and petition with great solicitude. Perseverance means to continue, to persist in the prosecution of any enterprise begun. It means steadfastness, constancy, persistency in prosecuting the work at hand. It means to continue regardless of opposition or discouragement, never giving over and never abandoning what is undertaken. This is what the apostle says each one must do for
348
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
each other one of the Lord’s little ones. This prayer and supplication must be in the spirit of the Lord, which is love, unselfishly looking after the interests of one’s brother; and while praying one is commanded to be “watching thereunto with all perseverance”. Be it noted that this prayer and watchfulness is not merely one for one other, but it is each one for all the saints. Otherwise stated, each one in the company of the Lord recognizes every other one in that company as a servant of the Lord and that the interests of all are mutual, and that all must stand together. It is manifest that if brethren are following this instruction of the apostle not only are they dwelling in peace but they will be avoiding everything that tends to controversy.
Those who engage in controversy amongst themselves could hardly be worthy of the name “Christian”. “Christians” means those who follow the anointed One, the “Prince of Peace”. The apostle stresses the matter of “fighting shoulder to shoulder”. (Phil. 1:27,28, Weymouth) Nowhere in the Scriptures are Christians warranted in fighting one another. When Nehemiah was building the wall around Jerusalem he said to the men under his command: “Fight for your brethren.” (Neh. 4:14) He there pictured the people of God inside of the organization of Zion at the time of the final assault by the enemy. Let each one, then, who is of Jehovah’s organization or under it for safety remember his duty and obligation to fight, not against his brother, but for his brother and against demonism. The fear
lessness of the Lord’s people in the proclamation of the message of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and their doing this in harmony, will be to each one a token of salvation, as stated at Philippians 1: 28. It will bring joy to the heart; and “the joy of the Lord is your strength”, said Nehemiah.
The enemy is not limited to one method of making war against the remnant and their companions. He will employ many methods. One method is to stir up strife among the brethren, plant in the hearts of some the root of bitterness, nourish and cause it to grow until such take themselves out from under the protection of the Lord. Let no one be deceived into believing that merely because he is under the Lord’s righteous arrangement he is beyond all danger. All danger will be past when he has maintained his integrity unto the end. It is true that he is absolutely safe as long as he abides close to the Lord; but the permission of selfishness, leading to controversy, will take him away from the Lord and his protection. This opens the door for the adversary to get in.
Therefore, in following the admonition of the apostle, the Christian must earnestly and with supplication present his petition to Jehovah God, asking for unity amongst the brethren, for strength, for peace; and while doing this he must watch with perseverance, refusing to give over to the enemy under any circumstances.
MODERN VISITS OF JEHOVAH
AMAN is struck by lightning and dies. The coroner and jury hear the facts and render a verdict that the man died by reason of a “visitation from God”. A corporation which is a common carrier undertakes to transport personal property, and in so doing is legally liable for any negligence in transportation or delivery. If in course of transportation the property is destroyed by a storm and the carrier corporation is sued, the defense is made by the corporation that it is not liable because the destruction was the result of an act or “visitation” of God. A great property loss and loss of lives have recently been caused by the flooding of the Mississippi river. This has been charged up to Jehovah God, but as a matter of fact it resulted from the disturbed elements. There is no Scriptural reason to believe that Jehovah directed the flood.
The Sacred Record shows that at stated times Jehovah has visited his covenant people and also his enemies, and that he will visit them. He visits his people for the purposes of inspection, chastisements, deliverance and blessing. He visits his enemies for the purpose of chastisement and destruction. Those whom God visits are brought into a condition of greater responsibility by reason of his visit. This responsibility is in proportion to the knowledge possessed.
Long ago Joseph, the favorite son of Jacob, was sold by his envious half-brothers into Egypt. There he faithfully served Jehovah God as a true witness. Ere he died he had seen his aged father and his brethren brought into that land, and he had cared for them. He had witnessed the death of his father. For many years thereafter Joseph ministered
to and comforted his brethren. The time of his departure into the land of death came, and Joseph said by faith: “I die: and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.” (Gen. 50: 24) That was a prophecy uttered by Joseph, foretelling that God would visit his people, the Israelites, in due time.
Later an evil ruler of Egypt greatly oppressed the Israelites. God called Moses to go unto that people and bear them a message: “Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, hath appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt: and I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt.” (Ex. 3:16, 17, Am. Rev. Ver.) That was a visitation of inspection. God had heard the cries of the oppressed and visited his people for inspection ; and now he would visit them and deliver them, and he would use Moses in so doing. When the Israelites were hard pressed by their enemies God put his hand over them and delivered them into safety. This was a visitation of Jehovah.
Then Jehovah established Israel in the Land of Promise. In due time he placed his faithful witness David upon the throne. He made a covenant with David, which covenant concerning the Kingdom he made known unto him through Nathan the prophet. (2 Samuel 7th chapter) Concerning that covenant God caused one of his prophets in Israel to write: “My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and
Novembek 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
349
my covenant shall stand fast with him. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.”—Ps. 89: 28-32.
The Israelites did forsake that covenant and failed to walk in the way of righteousness. In due time God visited them and administered to them a terrible chastisement. The iniquities and transgressions of that people became so flagrant that God visited them and entered his decree against them and enforced that decree by permitting the Israelites, and especially their unfaithful king, to be captured and carried away to Babylon.—Ezek. 21:24-27; Jer. 52:1-12.
Never again did Israel have a king. Affliction had been for a long time upon Israel when the time came for the birth of John the Baptist, the forerunner of Jesus, the Savior of believing humankind. Then it was that John’s father, Zacharias, prophesied and said: “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and redeemed his people.” (Luke 1:68) That was a visit of blessing from Jehovah.
Then came Jesus of Nazareth, the One anointed of God to be King in The Theocratic Government. Of and concerning him the prophets had written. The devout ones of Israel had looked for his coming. Jesus was preaching concerning the kingdom of heaven. On an occasion he was at Capernaum. A widow had lost her only son to the enemy death. As they carried the dead man out, Jesus saw him and observed his mother weeping. He had compassion upon her and raised the young man out of death. Luke 7:16 records: “And there came a fear on all; and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited his people.”
The holy prophets had written concerning the coming of the Messiah, or Anointed One, who was foreshadowed by the prophat Moses. Jehovah had provided at the hand of Moses the law covenant with Israel and had decreed that the law covenant should be a “schoolmaster” to lead the Israelites in the right way unto the coming of the Messiah. This favor brought responsibility upon the Jews. The nation failed to keep the law covenant, and many turned away therefrom to religion. Then came John the Baptist, warning the Jews to repent and be baptized and return unto harmony with God. The responsibility of the Jews increased when they heard this warning. John was the forerunner of the Messiah; and when Jesus began his ministry John pointed him out and said to those within his hearing: “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me: for he was before me. And I knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water.”—John 1:29-31.
The coming of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was a visitation from Jehovah God for good unto Israel. Many of the common people heard him gladly, and doubtless the entire nation would have turned to him and accepted him as the Messiah except for the wrongful influence of the religious clergy of that time. The clergy were familiar with the text of the Scriptures concerning the coming of the Messiah.
They were properly informed that Jesus was the Messiah. He told them that he was sent from Jehovah. Their knowledge brought upon them greater responsibility, and also responsibility rested upon all the people in proportion to the knowledge that they had received concerning Jesus as God’s Anointed One.
Because the people were misled by the religious clergy they did not appreciate the time of their visitation. Jesus had come to them to bring them blessing and happiness, but their leaders in religion would not have it so. Only a few of the Israelites accepted Jesus, and to them he gave the power to become the sons of God, as declared at John 1:12,13. For three and one-half years he taught the people. Then he rode on an ass into Jerusalem and offered himself to them as their King. He was rejected.
Jesus wept because the people did not appreciate the favor that had come to them by the visit of God by means of his visible representative. “And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.” (Luke 19:41-44) On that occasion Jesus prophesied the visitation of God upon Jerusalem and its complete destruction. Only a few years elapsed until that prophecy was fulfilled, to wit, in A.D. 70. God by his chosen executioner laid the city in waste.
For three and one-half years after the violent death of Christ Jesus the opportunity to become members of God’s royal family of heaven was confined to the Jews after the flesh. By their own efforts the non-Jews or Gentiles never could have come to God and found him and been partakers of the great salvation to life in the spirit in heaven But few Jews appreciated God’s visit to them, and now he would turn his hand to the Gentiles. In the exercise of his loving-kindness God made himself known unto the Gentiles and made it possible for Gentiles to be partakers of the great salvation through Christ Jesus.
This incident is beautifully described in the Scriptures, in chapter ten of the Acts of the Apostles. There was a little band of Italians (Romans) at Caesarea, on the eastern coast of the Mediterranean sea. A Gentile by the name of Cornelius was captain of that band, or company of soldiers Of course, the military of Rome was a part of Satan’s organization. Cornelius, although an officer of that military, was a devout man. He feared God and prayed often to Jehovah. He was not harsh, but kind and generous, and gave much to aid the poor. He did not use his office for oppressive purposes, but did good in spite of his official position. He was doubtless a kind and sympathetic man.
Cornelius did not know Jehovah God, because the way for a Gentile to come to God had not been opened. He did not understand God’s purpose as to his Theocratic Government and the redemption and salvation of believing men, but he believed in the existence of God and that God had a way whereby he would bless him and others who loved righteousness; and therefore he prayed. While he thus
350
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
prayed God sent to him an angel. Cornelius was afraid when he beheld an angel, and cried out: “What is it, Lord?” The angel said: “Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.”
That was a visit from God to a Gentile. At the direction of God’s messenger Cornelius sent to Joppa, farther down the coast, for the apostle Peter. At the same time God gave Peter a vision directing him to go to Cornelius. When the two had met, Peter said: “Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons.” (Acts 10:34) Peter then recounted to Cornelius God’s great purpose concerning his Kingdom and the redemption of humankind through the blood of Christ Jesus. This visit of God to Cornelius brought him a wonderful blessing. He heeded the message and was then and there anointed by the spirit of Jehovah, and thus commissioned as a witness for Jehovah.
Peter went up to Jerusalem and related the circumstances of God’s visit to Cornelius. There were amongst the Jews those who opposed the act of Peter in going to a Gentile. But when they had heard the circumstances of Peter’s going to Cornelius the Jews said: “Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.” On a later occasion, when some Christians were gathered together and some were teaching that only circumcised persons could be saved and there was much talk between them, two witnesses. Barnabas and Paul, told what God had done by them amongst the Gentiles. Then the apostle James, gaining the attention of the audience, said: “Simeon [Peter] hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.”—Acts 15:14.
From that time forward the Gentiles were brought nigh unto God and within his favor, by reason of God’s visit to them. Thereafter God made no distinction between Jews and Gentiles, bond or free; but all who came to him, confessing Christ Jesus and consecrating themselves to do God’s will as Jesus does it, were received regardless of nationality. The good effect of that visit to the Gentiles must continue “until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in”. (Rom. 11:25) That time marks the completion of the class anointed with God’s spirit for the kingdom of heaven.
The period of time elapsing from the beginning of the ministry of Jesus Christ on earth until the completion of the number of his anointed followers, or “body of Christ”, is the antitypical “day of atonement”, foreshadowed by the Jewish day of atonement. (See Leviticus chapter sixteen.) In that period of time very few Jews have accepted Christ as the Savior, or even pretended so to do. From among the Gentiles there has come a vast multitude professing the name of Christ with their lips. Organized systems of religion have arisen which call themselves by the name of Christ, and with their mouths they profess to be followers of God’s Anointed One. Consider the facts now: Who are the ones in the earth that ill-treat, persecute and cause to be arrested and imprisoned the faithful witnesses of Jehovah God, who go about from house to house visiting and revisiting the people to exhibit to them “this gospel of the kingdom” and to tell them about that Theocratic Government? There is but one answer. It is the religionists, the leaders in the religious organizations, that cruelly persecute the faithful followers of Christ, and the ones that take the lead in that cruel persecution are those of the Roman
Catholic Hierarchy ruled from Vatican City. They are the ones who urge the people to destroy the books which explain the Kingdom or Kingdom message. It is those religionists, who are children and agents of the Devil and therefore enemies of the Lord, that are desperately trying to keep the people in ignorance of what is written in the Bible. The day of accounting must come, in which every one of the religious systems must give an account for their course of action, and this in proportion to their knowledge. Also each Christian individually must give an account.
When will that time of accounting take place? The direct evidence of the Bible and the circumstantial evidence in the events of modern times prove that in A.D. 1914 Christ Jesus, at the right hand of Jehovah God, took his power and began his reign, and in 1918 he came to the spiritual temple of God, as foretold at Malachi 3:1-3 and as further foreshadowed by Jesus’ visit to the temple at Jerusalem and casting the money-changers and commercialists therefrom. There God began to visit those who professed to be his people. Since 1 Corinthians 8:6 states that all things are from the Father and all things are by the Son, these visits may be spoken of as God’s visitation, even though Jesus is His active agency.
The visit of Jehovah God when Christ Jesus came to his temple is for the purpose of inspection, judgment and blessing. About A.D. 1918, in the throes of the first World War, there came upon Jehovah’s people many very trying circumstances. The experiences following were exceeding sore. As it was in the days of the rebuilding of the walls of the city of Jerusalem by the governor Nehemiah and his brethren in the face of violent opposition by religious enemies, when Nehemiah’s prayer was made, “Remember me, 0 Lord, for good,” even so the Lord’s faithful servants on earth during the time of stress in 1918 prayed. The prophet of God had written of and concerning Jehovah’s people this prayer: “Remember me, 0 Lord, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people: 0 visit me with thy salvation.” (Ps. 106:4) The prophet Jeremiah foreshadowed Jehovah’s witnesses of today, and he uttered a prayer which applies in behalf of these present-day witnesses from and after 1918: “0 Lord, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuffering: know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke.”—Jer. 15:15.
Jehovah God visited his people at that time, and the approved ones he made his commissioned witnesses to his name and his Theocratic Government. They entered into the joy of the Lord and realized that the joy of the Lord is their strength, as stated at Nehemiah 8:10. The period of inspection and blessing of the temple class continued, and will continue until all have been made meet for a part in The Theocratic Government. This judgment, which there began at the house of God, was next to extend to those who named the name of the Lord not in truth and sincerity. —1 Pet. 4:17,18.
The visits of Jehovah do not mean that he must leave his throne in heaven and come to earth, but they do mean the exercise of his power toward things of earth and the exercise of it through his duly constituted agency. That the period of God’s visitation began with the coming of the Lord to his temple for judgment of the house of God and
November 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
331
then of the nations, separating them as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats, is further shown by Isaiah’s prophecy, chapter six, concerning his vision of the Lord’s presence at the temple. Isaiah, as a witness of Jehovah, pictures the anointed witnesses of Jehovah of today. Jehovah there showed through his prophet that the anointed class are entirely devoted to him and that their heart’s desire is expressed in the words voiced by the prophet: “Here am I; send me.” When the prophet asked of the Lord how long this strenuous witness must be given, the answer was: “Until the cities [organized systems, particularly ‘Christendom’] be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, and the Lord have removed men [the religionists] far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land.” (Isa. 6:11,12) God’s visitation upon the nations will reach a climax in the great time of trouble, Armageddon, now near.
In the time of the prophet Jeremiah there were false priests and religious teachers who misrepresented God and misled the people. The words of the prophet directed to them find an ever stronger application to the false pastors and religious teachers of the present time, to wit: “As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked; they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper: and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this [‘Christendom’] ? A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my [professed] people love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof ?”-Jer. 5:27-31.
This is a forceful description of the unrighteous systems that parade under the name of Christ. That the great day of God’s visitation upon the nations, including “organized Christianity”, so called, is just ahead is clearly marked out by the words of the prophet, and it will be a time of trouble such as was never before known. (See Jeremiah 5:9-29; 6:15; 9:9; 23:2,20-22.) The leaders in these religious systems have prospered, grown fat and sleek, are proud and haughty; and God will visit them for the purpose of bringing their haughtiness low. Babylon, Satan’s organization, shall fall.
At Jeremiah 50:31,32 it is written: “Behold, I am against thee, 0 thou most proud, saith the Lord God of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I will visit thee. And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up; and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all round about him.” The Lord God through his prophet further describes these unholy systems and expresses his determination to visit them: “Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me, a destroying wind. Every man is brutish by his knowledge: every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them. They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.”—Jer. 51:1,17,18.
And now the Lord God Jehovah has made it clear what is the primary issue, world domination. Who is for Jeho
vah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and who is not ? Before the final overthrow of the systems, during the time of God’s visitation at Armageddon, he will have a witness given in the earth concerning his purposes, and it still continues. To his anointed and commissioned ones on earth he has said: “Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, that I am God.” That means, then, that every one who is anointed by Jehovah’s spirit is commissioned to perform this duty; and this he must do in proportion to his opportunities, in order to be acceptable and blessed of the Lord And to the people of good-will toward God who now hear the message of and concerning The Theocratic Government he says: “Let him that heareth say, Come.” Come where? Come and take your stand firmly on the side of The Theocratic Government, if you would live!—Rev. 22:17.
To the anointed witnesses it is written (1 Peter 2:12): “Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.” Having in mind that the day of God’s visitation upon “Christendom” began shortly after 1918 and reaches its climax at the battle of Armageddon, thus continuing with increased severity until all the worldly systems are overthrown, who, then, shall glorify God in this day of his visitation? Not every one, of course. The Scriptures indicate that there will be a “great multitude”, however, who will glorify him. (See Revelation 7: 9-15 ) In the denominational religious systems are many “prisoners” held in restraint by the clergy. The zealous anointed remnant and their companions, in obedience to Jehovah’s command, at Isaiah 42:7 and 49: 9, are bidding these prisoners to show themselves and to go forth. Many of these are hearing the message and are increasing in courage. Many return visits are being made on those displaying good-will. Many of these have in times past spoken evil against Jehovah’s witnesses. These zealous ones will continue to pursue a course of honesty as God’s witnesses, and multitudes of persons of good-will toward Jehovah and his Theocratic Government will glorify God in this day of his visitation because the faithful witness has been given by his devoted ones.
The commandment that is paramount at this time is to be a faithful witness to Jehovah God and His King Christ Jesus and to proclaim the message of his kingdom as a witness to the nations before God’s great visitation upon them. (Isa. 43:10; Matt. 24:14) Will anyone who is consecrated and devoted to the Lord be willing to remain idle and inactive in the Lord’s service and take his chances of being finally approved? God has provided the means to give the witness now and to give it in no uncertain terms, and this is just before his great visitation to the nations.
Those who receive the Lord’s approval will be the ones who not only are willing but are anxious to tell the peoples of earth that Jehovah is God, that Christ Jesus is King, that God has set his King upon the throne, and that the kingdom of heaven, The Theocratic Government, is at hand. The zeal of such will result to the glory of God, when the institutions of Satan are crumbling in the dust and the obedient people are delivered. The Christian’s chief duty is to glorify Jehovah.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
THIS DOG COULD BARK (SCOTLAND)
“Two years ago Christians were shocked at the rough handling of Jehovah’s witnesses by Catholic mobs in a well-known Clydeside area. A number of assaults were carried out at the instigation of the priests, but despite these assaults Jehovah’s servants persisted in their God-given commission to visit this area to issue warning to the opposers of Jehovah’s judgments and also to comfort the people of good-will, and in the course of one year made five visits, all of which resulted in severe persecution. During the recent savage air raids made by the Nazis on the Clydeside area which stretches for several miles, this particular place suffered the heaviest, and the streets where the severe persecutions took place received the worst of the blitz. Just recently the publishers again visited this section, and one publisher making his way through the debris of destruction realized the tenements were uninhabitable. Coming away from one tenement after investigation the publisher decided there was no one about, but, once out in the street, he heard the barking of a dog and, looking up, saw a lady’s face at the window. To the publisher it looked like the last outpost of civilization. He at once went to the lady’s door, who, by this time, was joined by her husband. They both listened to the lecture ‘Message of Hope’ and took the book Salvation and Theocracy, and a back-call was arranged. Thirty publishers that morning placed more than sixty books in this area, and a few hundred booklets.”
KINDRED-MINDED COPPERS
Portage, Pennsylvania: “As I was witnessing on Fifth street a lady called an officer and told him I was making trouble for the neighborhood. The officer said: ‘I’ll see!’ Then he walked along the sidewalk and waited till I played my phonograph in fifteen or twenty homes. (He listened each time.) When I finished working that street I asked if he would like to hear the record personally. He only smiled and said he wanted to ‘buy’ a green book [Religion]. He gave me 50c and told me to keep the change ‘for courage’. I then also offered him the book Salvation. At first he refused it, saying he liked green better. I told him red is as njce as green, so he smiled and said: ‘Oh, I’ll take them both.’ ”
Glasgow, Scotland: “A street corner—four pioneers, complete with magazine bags, met to work the territory. Two policemen came in sight and as they drew alongside one stopped his companion and read: 'The "Watchtower explains the Theocratic Government, 3d. per copy.’ ‘I’ll have threepence worth,’ he said. Having no magazines to offer, one pioneer said: ‘Here are three booklets which show the establishment of God’s kingdom.’ The policeman replied that he had the booklets, and so was advised by the pioneer to take Religion. The man in blue smiled, handing over his shilling, and away he went, Religion in his hand, telling his companion what a bargain he had got.”
WHO WERE DESECRATORS OF THE FLAGT
“My two brothers and I, pioneering in northeastern Missouri, started street-corner witnessing in a small town called Gorin. There was one other publisher from the local company. I took the corner in front of the postoffice, my two brothers on the street crossing it. After standing a few moments I noticed a group of men talking, apparently of
352
us. The people were quite rude when asked to read the magazines. Then an American Legionnaire, Bernie Haynes, approached my brother and asked: ‘Are you one of those who don’t salute the flag!’ My brother told him: ‘Yes, I am.’ Haynes went into a saloon close by and soon returned, carrying a large flag. By this time there was a group of men around my brother, men who spend their time loafing on street corners. Haynes shouted: ‘You’ll either salute or kiss this flag, or get out of town!’ Reasoning with him was impossible, so my brother said he would neither salute nor kiss it. The men were all looking for a fight by this time, and Haynes, walking in back of my brother, as if to go into the saloon again, hit him twice in the back of the head. Then the men, led by Haynes, escorted my brother to the car. Then we were called and told to get in. Resistance against such a demonized mob would have been useless, as they were threatening to overturn the car. Haynes was shouting: ‘We don’t want any of you Hitlers over here!’ The flag, loved and respected by every true American, was dropped flat in the dust by these maniacal bums. There it lay, in the dusty street, and not one of the people gathered there had the decency to pick it up. We are planning now to go back into the town, with many more witnesses, and show that God’s witnesses cannot be run out of town.”
COURAGEOUS ACTION AT RUSHVILLE, IND.
“This town is seventeen miles from Connersville. I worked business alone. First day I worked all day, placed two books and eight or ten booklets and was threatened several times, and one young man begged me to leave town, as he was afraid they would hurt me: ‘they hate you people here, and I can’t see why.’ I went on. Around 2: 30 I called on a lawyer; I was completely exhausted then, after fighting demons all day. I answered all his questions. Then he turned and said: ‘I want nothing to do with Jehovah’s witnesses.’ By this time I felt, Well, I’m not coming back here tomorrow; this town is hopeless. I really did not intend going in there the next day alone, as I was followed and watched like a hawk. But I glanced in another office next to this lawyer’s. A young man about thirty-five sat there, watching me. He smiled. I said: ‘You no doubt heard me talking, but Fil talk to you a few minutes if you aren’t too busy.’ He said: ‘Well, please sit down and explain this to me.’ It got me, after eight hours there, to find someone with just a little kindness. The Lord came to my rescue, and that was the blessing for the day. He took the set of books I had and said: ‘This is what I have wanted all my life.’ I got out of that town at 9 p.m. I went back, finished the town and made back-calls on this young man. He scouted for me the balance of the time I was there. I enclose part of a letter he wrote me: ‘To date I have only had three discussions on what real Americanism stands for. I was in the candy shop today, and a young man who happened to be in there made the remark that he had heard there was one of Jehovah’s witnesses in town trying to educate the people to not salute the flag, and, of course, I couldn’t take that! In the best way I could I informed the young man that he had been misguided and that through knowing the truth Jehovah’s witnesses were really better Americans than those who were persecuting them. Before I had said three words I had an audience, for which I was glad. I was also warned at another place to be careful? ”
- ri*
Vol. LXII
DECEMBER 1, 1941
- Ezekiel 35 15
Semimonthly
No. 23
> y '■ , * ■ ■

^5



They shall know that I am Jehovah,
CONTENTS
Demon Rule Ending (Part 6) Treachery and Hypocrisy .... ‘The Abominable Thing’ ......
All Totalitarian ..........
“Great Multitude”
Survives Armageddon
Conspirators Against Theocracy
Field Experiences



...355
.. . 357
. . 358
...360
362
365
368
“Great Multitude” Testimony Period .. 354
“Watchtower” Studies
354
“Report of the
Jehovah’s witnesses Assembly” .... 354

THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEP and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal la published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents In the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United Statzs, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian T Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cepe Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear fa several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The 'Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting IL We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year la required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1ST}.
“GREAT MULTITUDE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Regardless of the incoming of winter then, December marks another month-long season of special united activity known as “Great Multitude” Testimony Period. Those persons of good-will who shall form part of the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors are now quickly coming forth ere the wintertime of Armageddon sets in on the world, and they will, in increasing numbers, take part with the remnant members in this united Testimony. All such are cordially invited to join in putting in as many homes as possible the excellent combination offer of the new book Children and the new booklet Comfort All That Mourn, on a contribution of 25c. We shall be glad to give references to any wanting to get in touch with and to co-operate with the nearest organized company of publishers of The Theocracy. At the close of December the usual report on the full month’s activities and results should be submitted.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 4: “Demon Bule Ending” (Part 6), fl 1-16 inclusive, The Watchtower December 1, 1941.
Week of January 11: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 6), fl 17-34 inclusive, The Watchtower December 1, 1941.
"REPORT OF THE JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES ASSEMBLY”
As previously advised in The Watchtower, the work has been going on for the compiling of a comprehensive survey of the recent Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses at St. Louis, Mo., for the five days, August 6-10. Now we are pleased to announce the publication of the full report. Like the Assembly itself, it is the best convention report yet produced. Its 80 pages set forth the important events and brilliant high lights of the Assembly, including speeches of Judge Rutherford to the mighty throng there which have not till now been published anywhere, and all visualized to you by page on page of a photographic review of the noteworthy events and scenes. To this there has been added a full, illustrated report of an identical five-day Assembly, with features like those at St. Louis, held by Jehovah’s witnesses at Leicester, England, September 3-7, in spite of the war. This Report of the Jehovah’s witnesses Assembly is a forceful witness to the actuality of Jehovah’s Theocratic organization, and should serve as a potent instrument in your field activities i> behalf of the many persons of good-wilL Send for your copy now, remitting 5c therefor. After yon see and read it you will want others to have it too.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	December 1, 1941	No. 23
DEMON RULE ENDING
PART 6
“And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.”—Matt. 24:14.
JEHOVAH long ago fixed the date for the complete ending of demon rule, and he commanded Daniel concerning the same to write: “The end shall be at the time appointed.” (Dan. 11:27) Jehovah has revealed to his people that the “time of the end” began in 1914, when he sent forth his King to rule while the enemy still held sway. The final end is not yet made known to the creatures on earth, but it is revealed that the final end shall be marked by the “battle of that great day of God Almighty” called Armageddon.
! Exactly on time the “war in heaven” began, and also the World War on earth began in 1914, and these two things mark the beginning of “the time of the end”. (Rev. 11:18; 12:1-12) The demons were ousted from heaven and cast down to the earth, and the Lord “shortened” the war or trouble on earth by stopping it, in 1918, in order that the prophecy uttered by Christ Jesus might be fulfilled, to wit: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24:14) This commandment must be obeyed and the work performed by the Lord’s anointed servants. That same year, 1918, the Lord came to his temple and approved some and sent them forth to bear witness and to execute his command in righteousness, to wit, ‘To proclaim the good news of the kingdom.’ Since then, in obedience to that command, they have been making known that The Theocratic Government is come, that which honest men have looked for and hoped for for many centuries past. That witness work has been done by the widespread proclamation of hundreds of millions of copies of books and other literature telling of The Theocracy. When that work is completed, says the Lord, “then shall the end come”; meaning the final end, which Jehovah long ago appointed and which the Lord says shall be marked by the greatest of all tribulations, and which is called “the battle of Armageddon”. Now the Lord reveals to his people the meaning of Daniel’s prophecy concerning “the time of the end”, and Daniel must soon
appear and ‘stand in his lot’ as one of the earthly governors under The Theocratic Government. (Dan. 12:13) The Lord has revealed to his people the identity of the two “kings” that are now contending for world domination and that are carrying out the Devil’s determination to rule the world or ruin it. The physical facts relative to the prophecy show that “the end of the days” appointed is very near. These truths are compelling and bring joy to those who appreciate them, and comfort their hearts, and increase their hope. The Lord now makes known what the two “kings” will be doing as the final end approaches. Return now to the consideration of Daniel’s prophecy.
8 “And at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over.” (Dan. 11:40) At this point of the prophecy of Daniel it appears that the fulfillment thereof relates particularly to the time beginning in the summer of 1939 and continues thereafter. At that time “the king of the south” took the initiative and “the king of the north” was warned by “the king of the south” that the invasion of Poland meant war. To counteract this warning Germany signed with Communist Russia, as of August 24, 1939, a “non-aggres-sion pact”, which, to be sure, Germany did not expect to keep and fulfill. On the same day the pope, the head of the religious element of the totalitarian combine, broadcast to the nations of both of the “kings” an appeal for peace, and in which speech he referred to himself as ‘the spiritual authority, armed by the word of truth’. That speech was made for the very purpose of inducing “the king of the south” to refrain from interfering with the pope’s “king of the north” combine, so that the scheme of the “Axis powers” for world dominion might be carried out with the least possible interference and interruption. That is exactly in keeping with the practice of the chief of demons to keep the people in the dark while he car-
355
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
356
ries forward his nefarious schemes. Mark the words of the pope, uttered in that feigned “plea for peace”. Claiming to speak in the name of God (but without saying which god), the pope said: “May you hear through our voice the voice of that Christ [anointed One] from whom the world received the great school of life.” Mark the subtlety of those words. Satan is an anointed one from whom the world has received the teaching or school concerning life (Ezek. 28:14), and in that connection he promulgates his first lie, that there is no death; and in which “school” the doctrine of eternal existence in purgatory or hell is promulgated by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Satan, the chief of demons, therefore, is the one properly identified by the words used by the pope: “From whom the world received the great school of life.” Jehovah God anointed him as Lucifer, but, when degrading him, did not take away his authority, and Satan has the power of death, to take away life. (Heb. 2:14) Note in the words of the pope the following, to wit: “With us is the sound of this old Europe, which grew up in the Christian [Roman Catholic] faith and genius”; and by which words, of course, he means the old “Holy Roman Empire”, which the Nazis now declare shall be again set up and which the pope has always desired. Hitler and the pope are playing the same game.
4 Four days later, to wit, August 28, 1939, a mass meeting, held at Chicago, of persons devoted to the Catholic faith, whose announced purpose is “For defense of Democracy”, issued an appeal and cabled it to the pope, at Vatican City, and which message contained these words: That the baptized Catholic Hitler be excommunicated to “help the cause of freedom, Christianity, humanity and civilization”. To that cable the pope turned a deaf ear. And whyf Hitler was suiting his purposes, and is still doing the same thing. That same month, to wit, August 31, 1939, the Parliament of Communist Russia ratified the non-aggression Pact with Hitler. Although the pope bitterly continued to denounce Communistic Russia and Communism in general, no heed is given to the appeal to excommunicate Hitler. On the very next day Hitler, well knowing that the pope was backing him up, suddenly ‘awoke to the fact’ that.‘Poland had done something against Germany1 and that ‘Germany therefore was in danger’, and so Hitler issued a proclamation stating that from now on force will be met by force; and within one half hour after issuing that proclamation the invasion of Poland was begun by Germany, and that invasion was, no doubt, with the full approval of the pope. Poland under control would make it easier for the Germans to attack Russia when the time appeared to be right; and that is exactly what came to pass. It was time
now for “the king of the south” to act, and concerning which the prophecy says:
* “Shall the king of the south push at him [contend with him {Rev. Ver.)].” Great Britain, the chief factor of “the king of the south”, takes the lead in the organization thereof and the fulfillment of that part of the prophecy begins, and Great Britain, on the day Poland was invaded, delivered an ultimatum to Hitler that the invasion meant war. On the same date, to wit, September 1, 1939, Egypt proclaimed emergency measures throughout the land of the Nile, and on the next day German Nationalists (that is, Nazis) were asked to immediately leave Egypt. The Suez Canal, controlled by Great Britain, was closed to German shipping, requiring German ships to go around Africa. And so the push began, as one animal pushes or gores another with his horns.—Ezek. 34:21; Dan. 8:4.
4 On September 3, 1939, Great Britain declared herself at war with Germany, and the push got in full progress. Other nations of the British Commonwealth of Nations immediately broke off diplomatic relations with Germany and declared war on Germany. September 5,1939, the president of the United States, which is really a part of “the king of the south”, issued a Neutrality proclamation for the United States; and shortly thereafter the president, at a “fireside chat” broadcast throughout the land, called for ‘all-out aid to Great Britain short of war’. Since then the United States claims to be and has become the arsenal for “the king of the south". And the push goes on 1
T “And the king of the north shall come against him.” The facts clearly fulfill this part of the prophecy. “The king of the north,” “by the grace of the pope,” had been arming Germany and Italy with a great amount of war material (produced and delivered, no doubt, for commercial purposes) to start off the war, which was supplied to Italy and Germany and Japan by Britain and the United States. The commercial men saw to this, for commercial gain. Early in 1940 the push increased, and in the light of the prophecy the following facts briefly stated are of great interest because they show fulfillment of the prophecy, to wit:
The Brenner Pass, in the Alps mountains, was the place where a conference was held March 18, 1940, by the two dictators Hitler and Mussolini. Shortly thereafter, on April 9, Germany, with the aid of her “fifth column” spies, invaded and seized Denmark and Norway. Britain occupied Iceland May 10, 1940, and on the same day “the king of the north” invaded Luxemburg, the Netherlands, and Belgium. On May 17, 1940, the German army smashed through the French Maginot Line of forts, and the fall of France quickly followed the treachery
December 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
357
and connivance of the Hierarchy’s agents in France.
8	Another act of treachery performed under the Roman Catholic Hierarchy influence took place May 28, 1940, when Leopold, the king, betrayed his country and turned over Belgium to the Germans. It is of interest here to note that King Leopold’s sister is married to a member of the royal family of Italy and both he and his sister are under the influence and spiritual control of the Hierarchy.
TREACHERY AND HYPOCRISY
’ Two things the Devil often uses together, namely, hypocrisy and treachery. His earthly agents, whom Jesus calls his “children”, follow the lead of the chief demon, their father. June 10, 1940, was a mile-stone in demon action and fully shows the further fulfillment of the prophecy at this point. On that day Mussolini, of the “king of the north” combine, ‘stabbed France in the bacld and declared war on Britain, which Mussolini called a war against the “plutocratic and reactionary democracies of the west”. Some commander of the French troops in the southwest was a party to that deed of treachery, since those troops of France to the southwest failed to make contact with the British army to stop the spearhead of the German invasion of France and as a result the British troops were caught in a trap. The disaster at Dunkirk was the result. Shortly thereafter Paris fell to “the king of the north”, and the Roman Catholic French dictator, who had come into power, signed an Armistice with the Nazis and Fascists. Of course, that dictator had not received any suggestions from Vatican City. Immediately Hitler ordered the church bells to ring throughout Germany in celebration of the victory, and the Catholic church bell ringers obeyed. Now mark the hypocrisy of the religious element of the combine of “the king of the north”.
10	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy at Vatican City, that falsely claims to be neutral in this war, fools many persons with the subterfuge employed. In this connection the following facts are germane to the question under consideration: June 25,1940, the very next day after the French had fully capitulated to “the king of the north”, the official radio station of Vatican City, in a world-wide broadcast of the Hierarchy’s message, declared that henceforth Sunday masses would be recited in the Vatican grottoes and would be broadcast, to give the world, through Catholic prayers, “a New Order following the present war, an Order inspired by principles of [Catholic] truth, justice and charity.” Any sane person should readily see that the pope was fully, approving and encouraging the war being carried on by Hitler and Mussolini.
11	At the same time that the above hypocrisy and treachery began by Mussolini and Hitler, the agents
and directors of the Hierarchy began a vicious assault upon Jehovah’s witnesses in Texas and many other places of the United States. In those assaults upon God’s faithful servants, particularly in Texas, Catholic priests organized, advised and co-operated with mobs of demonized men, and then maliciously and wickedly charged that Jehovah’s witnesses are fifth columnists, working in the interest of the Nazis, well knowing that Jehovah’s witnesses have exposed the/duplicity of the Nazis more than any other persons on earth. Then quickly followed the vicious persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses in many parts of the territory dominated by “the king of the north”, and also by Catholic agents in the territory dominated by “the king of the south”. At the instance of the Vatican and Hitler the Swiss government, being put in fear of “the king of the north” and the Catholic power and influence in Switzerland, and to appease that combine of “the king of the north”, seized the literature of the Watchtower Bible & Tract Society, and put the ban on the witness work of the Lord’s people in that country.
12	At the instance of the Hierarchy Canada acted by its Roman Catholic minister and dictator at Ottawa. That nation issued a decree declaring ‘Jehovah’s witnesses to be an illegal organization’, and seized the Society’s property throughout Canada. One day thereafter, to wit, July 5, France forsakes her ally, the British, and becomes a supporter and a part of “the king of the north”. That action was taken by the Catholic dictator of France, Marshal Petain; and that dyed-in-the-wool Catholic the pope designates as “good Marshal Petain”. The Jesuits had completely carried out the Vatican’s orders of hypocrisy and treachery in France, and at the same time the Vatican’s agents were working behind the scenes in England. On July 13 of the same year the Vatican newspaper published the pope’s letter to the general of the Society of Jesuits, in which letter the pope warmly praised the work of the Jesuits, which is the most hypocritical and treacherous organization on earth. And Satan’s forces now move on!
18	Mark now, in the line of the prophecy long ago written, that which declares that “the king of the north” assaults “the king of the south” and tells how it is going to be carried on, to wit:
“Shall come against him [‘the king of the south’] like a whirlwind.” Hitler claims his war a blitzkrieg, which means “lightning-war”. In the Hebrew text the entire phrase, to wit, “he shall come . . . like a whirlwind,” is just one single word, sah-gnar. That word expresses the matter, and means the causing of convulsive motion and the shrinking of the skin in sudden terror. It is used as meaning a tempest; and Leeser translates the word, “will come . . . like a storm-wind,” which is a tempest. The word well fits
358
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the demonized rule of the Nazi manner of attack, that is, a blitzkrieg. Hitler threatened to smite Britain with wild confusion and hysterical dismay, death and desolation. This was the kind of ‘lightningwar” staged by the Nazis against Poland, Holland and other countries. The attack was made, obviously, under demon timing and direction. All the attacks of “the king of the north” strongly indicate that Gog, the demon field marshal of Satan, is directing the blitzkrieg, or lightning-war. To be sure, Jehovah foreknew and caused his prophet to foretell these very things, and these facts should strengthen the hope of the people of good-will toward God at this time. The prophecy continues.
“ “With chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships.” That prophetic description well fits the motorized armies of the Nazi-Fascist-Hierarchy combine. The historical Trojan horse is described by the public press as the “fifth column" of the Nazis. That part of the prophecy concerning the “ships” clearly finds fulfillment in the many sea raiders, submarines and numerous airships employed by Germany. More than a thousand of such airships assaulted Britain in one day. The Nazis claim to be building and launching 3,500 airships or planes each month, many of which are equipped with cannon and rapidfiring machine guns.
15 “And he [‘the king of the north’] shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over”; that is, such “countries” as are the offspring of the despised Versailles Treaty of 1919, and also the Constitutionally governed countries. “Overflow” denotes surprise and suddenness, with overpowering destruction and ruin. This is exactly what has taken place with reference to the countries invaded, and such overrun countries are being brought under the control of the so-called “new League of Nations”, which the pope so highly praises and for which he utters prayers to his god. The overrunning and overflowing continues, and many countries fall to the Nazi-Fascist-Hierarchy combine.
THE ABOMINABLE THING’
“ “He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown; but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.” (Dan. 11:41) The “abomination that maketh desolate” enters where he has no right, that is, into the “goodly land”. (Marginal reading) This refers to the antitypical Land of Promise, meaning the condition into which Jehovah God by Christ Jesus has brought his covenant people, as he foretold by his prophet Ezekiel. “In the day that I lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of Egypt into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and
honey, which is the glory of all lands.” (Ezek. 20:6,15) (See also Isaiah 4:2,3; Isaiah 28:5,6; Ezekiel 26: 20.) In every land invaded by “the king of the north” Jehovah’s faithful servants have been trampled upon and their publications concerning The Theocratic Government have been suppressed and destroyed. The French offices of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society have been closed, and likewise in many other countries; and Jehovah’s witnesses have been imprisoned or otherwise restrained of their liberties. In the nefarious work of the combine that goes to make up “the king of the north” that product of the demons has tried to occupy the place which Jehovah God has assigned to His anointed. The ‘abominable thing’ assumes the right to enter and to rule over the entire world contrary to the expressed will of Almighty God. Thus “the king of the north” causes the ‘desolating abomination to stand in the holy place, where it ought not to stand’. (Mark 13:14) And that is not all. In the countries yet under “the king of the south” “the king of the north” skillfully uses the “fifth column” scarecrow to destroy the liberties of the people. “Catholic Action” everywhere is a movement in the interest of “the king of the north” in its effort to accomplish world domination. The Vatican, with its various sub-organizations such as the so-called “Christian Front”, falsely charges Jehovah’s witnesses with being fifth columnists, and such is a hypocritical and deceptive method of turning the attention of the people away from the crooked actions of “the king of the north”, and particularly its religious element. For many years the Vatican Hierarchy leaders have had a covetous eye on the United States of America. This is the land most desired by the Hierarchy in order that the people thereof may be regimented and compelled to become Catholics, even as this has been done in Europe and particularly in the land where the Inquisition was the worst. The Vatican knows that it must destroy American freedom before it can control this fair land. Doctor Barrett, ex-Catholic priest, in his book entitled “Rome Stoops to Conquer”, has this to pay about the ambition of the Papacy, to wit: “The conquest of America is the supreme objective at which he aims. [He] is well aware that the Catholic church can never hope again to dominate the civilized world until America kneels, beaten and penitent, at her feet.”
1T The British Isles and the United States are now practically the only countries on earth where the “strange work” of Almighty God, that is, the preaching of the Theocratic message, is continued. In these countries, which are the last of the claimed “democracies”, the opposition to The Theocracy daily grows stronger. Evidently the Lord’s “strange work”, in which Jehovah’s witnesses and companions are
W WATCHTOWER.
December 1,1941
engaged, will be suppressed in America before is heard the cry, “Peace and safety,” which cry will be sounded by the forces that are against The Theocracy ; and then ‘sudden destruction shall come upon them’.—1 Thess. 5: 3.
18 The “king of the north” combine, at the instance of the religious element thereof, has already ‘overthrown many countries’, together with all popular organizations and institutions of such countries, such as the Freemasons, Jewish organizations, and other organizations that protest against the regimentation of the people. Not even the courts and the lawyers are free from “Catholic Action”. In all countries where the people have heretofore enjoyed the freedom of thought and action these liberties have been destroyed, with a few exceptions above stated, even as the prophecy foretold. It now appears from the prophecy at this point that some escape.
18 “But these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.” Here the word “Edom” refers to the symbolic “land”, that is to say, organized religion, including the so-called “Christian religion”, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy religious organization. That modern religious demon organization claims now the spiritual, heavenly birthright, just as Esau (who was “Edom”) claimed that right from Jacob, the latter symbolically standing for Jehovah’s faithful covenant people. (See Genesis 25: 24-34; Obadiah 1-21.) This modern-day Edom, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, by its political deals and financing of “the king of the north” and by the making of secret agreements or concordats, has thus far escaped the guillotine. But the end is not yet. Just now the Catholic Hierarchy organization receives the greatest consideration from “the king of the north”. When Jehovah’s witnesses are persecuted in the domain of “the king of the north” this modern-day Edom takes an active part therein and with glee encourages such persecution.—Obadiah 10-16.
20	“And Moab.” The countries of Edom, Moab and Ammon no longer exist as independent nations, but are incorporated in Trans-Jordan under the British mandate. Whether that territory is invaded by “the king of the north” is not material; for the reason, the names Edom, Moab and Ammon are here used in the prophecy symbolically. “Moab” symbolizes the commercial or business element of “Christendom”. While the Nazi combine rages against commercialism or capitalism, it does so hypocritically, and the Papacy is the greatest capitalistic enterprise on earth. The Corporate State of Italy gives special attention and protection to commerce. The Chamber of Fasces and Corporations is composed of members of the National Council of Corporations (the pope’s guild system), the Grand Council of Fascism, and
359
the National Council of the Fascist party. In Germany capitalistic enterprises still operate under such regulations. It is clear, and according to the prophecy and the facts, that these religionists, picturing the Hierarchy element and the commerce of Big Business, have escaped and are being retained and operated by “the king of the north” as a part of their own.
21	“And the chief of the children of Ammon.” These also escape. “Ammon” symbolizes the political elements, who worship the modern idol of “Milcom”, meaning “the king”, that is, the State; placing the State above God. (1 Ki. 11:5, 7) After the Flood the chief of the political system was a totalitarian State under Nimrod (Gen. 10:8-10); hence in the language of the prophecy “the chief of the children of Ammon” would represent the dictatorial or kingly ruling elements, which form “the king of the north”, and which organization is against all democratic or non-Cath-olic nations, and all of which are extreme religionists.
22	It was ancient Moab, Ammon, and Edom (Edom being “mount Seir”) that attempted to destroy Jehovah’s covenant people under the reign of Jehoshaphat, king of Israel. (2 Chronicles 20) The modern antitype thereof attacks Jehovah’s covenant people today, to wit, Jehovah’s witnesses and companions, and attempts to destroy these servants of the Most High. It is therefore to be expected that “the king of the north” would spare modern-day Edom, Moab and Ammon, as the prophecy foretells; and thus these “escape” from the destructive hand of the combine while it is in operation.
28 Jehovah will not spare these three elements, however, because they form the wicked and abominable system, the ‘desolating abomination’. At Armageddon he will wipe out all of such as he did their prototype before ancient Jerusalem. Preliminary to Armageddon Jehovah sends his witnesses amongst the nations with the “cup” of his message of wrath to serve notice upon modern Edom and Moab and Ammon and to advise them of His purpose to make them drink of his wrath; and concerning such Jehovah says: “For thus saith the Lord God of Israel unto me, Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations to whom I send thee to drink it. . . . Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon.”—Jer. 25:15-21.
24 “He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries; and the land of Egypt shall not escape.” (Dan. 11: 42) Those words of the prophecy, “stretch forth his hand,” mean that “the king of the north” will send forth his “hand”, or power or violent aggression, against other countries. This he has done by means of radio and other means of propaganda, such as printed matter, and the “fifth column” agents planted in many of the countries of “the king of the south”, also by his tremendous fleet of airplanes.
360
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
The equipment of “the king of the north” is sent forth or brought to bear upon all other institutions, countries and nations. The facts show that the military organization known as “The American Legion” is largely under the influence of the religious element of “the king of the north”. Together with other parts of “Catholic Action” the agents thereof raised the false cry amongst the people, “Communism!” and they charge that every anti-Hierarchy person is a Communist, and then indulge in the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, who expose the totalitarian rule, including the Nazis and Communists.
ALL TOTALITARIAN
” And “the land of Egypt” feels the hand of “the king of the north”. The land of Egypt was originally the place or domain of “the king of the south”. At this point in Daniel’s prophecy “the king of the south” seems to disappear, since there is no more mention made of that “king” in the prophecy, nor does the name “Egypt” appear to be used as equivalent to or in the place of “the king of the south”. This cannot be taken to mean that the British Commonwealth of Nations or the United States of America, and the other Americas, will be wiped out by “the king of the north”. In fact, the prophecy does not disclose which one of these. ‘Tangs” shall be victorious in the present war, but the opinion is here expressed that neither one will have a complete victory. The end of the war will come about in a manner somewhat different from what worldly prognosticators say. What this part of the prophecy does appear to mean is that, before the “end”, within the meaning of the prophecy, all the nations, including those forming “the king of the south”, will take on or become dictatorial governments, which these nations will believe is necessary in order to fight the peril of the totalitarian ‘Tang of the north”.
16 And now, in the closing days of 1941, what are the facts relating to this part of the prophecy! The British Commonwealth of Nations, and the United States, and other countries forming “the king of the south” have ceased to be democracies, that is, governments of the people, by the people, and for the people. In each one of these nations all power is placed in the hands of a few, and the prime minister and the president are for all intents and purposes dictators even at the present time. Under the claim of necessity for national defense the president controls practically all production in the United States. Even the government tells the tillers just how much wheat they may sow upon their land, and what they may do with it, even though every thoughtful person knows that famine and shortage of bread stare the whole world in the face. A national socialism has seized hold of all the nations of the earth, and there
fore demon rule has blinded the ruling powers of all the nations, and all nations are doing the bidding of the chief demon.
" The Watchtower is not complaining nor murmuring at what the governments have become or what they are doing, but the Watchtower is pointing out these facts showing that the prophecy of Almighty God concerning the nations and their course of action is now being fulfilled, and which sounds'the warning to all people of good-will toward God to flee immediately to Jehovah and Christ Jesus, the great Theocracy. Seven years ago The Watchtower pointed out that according to the prophecies the United States would become a dictatorial government; and now the admitted and indisputable facts fully support that conclusion, which conclusion was and is based entirely upon the Word of God. All sober-minded persons, therefore, see that what is now coming to pass was foreknown and foretold by Jehovah, and this should cause all who desire to know what is right to immediately give prayerful consideration to what is written in the Scriptures. There is but one sure guide at this time, and at all times, and that guide is the word of Almighty God set down in the Bible. Jehovah’s servants or witnesses for some years have been diligently and earnestly endeavoring to inform the people of what the Bible reveals, disclosing God’s purpose, and this they have done and are doing in obedience to the Lord’s commandment. The Watchtower takes no part in the controversy between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”. The Watchtower is entirely neutral because it is for The Theocracy. It stands aloof from all worldly disputes and controversies and in obedience to the Lord’s commandment points the people to the infallible word of Jehovah’s prophecies and to the physical facts that have come to pass in fulfillment thereof, and this is done to the end that those who desire to learn the way to righteousness and safety may find the same. As to the final result, Jehovah has made that plainly to appear, and the Watchtower understands and is diligently endeavoring to obey the commandment of the Most High and to make these truths known.
” In this prophecy of Daniel 11:42 the words ‘land of Egypt” do not mean the literal country in North Africa, but do mean the world of religion, politics, commerce and militarism, over which the demons now rule. Because religion, politics and commerce do not resist the totalitarian rule of “the king of the north” these elements escape the violent assaults of that “king”. “Egypt,” as used in the prophecy, means and pictures the great rival nations also made up of politics, commerce and religion, and military, and which are in opposition to “the king of the north”. Both are bent on world domination.
December 1,1041
THE WATCHTOWER
361
Therefore the prophecy says: “The land of Egypt shall not escape.” The commerce of “the king of the south”, particularly Britain, has not escaped the destructive work of “the king of the north”. Nor has the commercial business of the United States of America escaped, but has suffered under the burden carried to offset the results of the “king of the north” blitzkrieg. The business or commercial interests of America must now yield to the “priority” requirements, and the people are compelled to bear that burden. Conditions in the United States are necessarily becoming worse and will continue to grow worse. Private business will be practically paralyzed. The food supply will be greatly reduced, and the people will be compelled to suffer many inconveniences. The conditions disagreeable will continue and will grow worse and worse until this land, like others throughout the earth, puts the clamps on the message of Jehovah God, and then the exulting cry of the religious element of “the king of the north” will ring out: “We are at peace and safety.” That is the sign! The next step to immediately follow, the Lord makes plain. The prophecy continues to tell of the activities of “the king of the north”, to wit:
28 “But he shall have power [rule] over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt; and the Libyahs and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.” (Dan. 11:43) These “treasures”, or “hidden things”, appear to mean that “the king of the north” lays hold upon all private wealth in the land controlled by that “king” and also controls all the gold, silver and precious things of the nations and people under that “king” by using the same to carry on his military purposes. Will the Vatican and its hoarded wealth escape finally! The picture or drama appearing in the prophecy of God’s Word (2 Chronicles 20) seems clearly to indicate that the Vatican will not escape the ruthless hand of her present-day ally. In the light of prophecy it will be well to watch the developments. Even at this time in some areas Catholic church organizations have been asked to contribute half of their gold, silver and art treasures to support the Axis powers. A like procedure is almost certain to follow in many other places. The totalitarian rulers will be able to exercise control over the material wealth of the nations of the earth; which is even now being done to a large degree.
’"“The king of the north” also tries to exercise power over the “hidden treasures” of the Bible, which are the most precious treasures. (Pss. 19:7-10; 12:6) The publication of these precious truths is forbidden in all countries controlled by “the king of the north”, and in many countries controlled by “the king of the south”. The modern-day Belshazzar has brought out the precious vessels of Jehovah’s earthly organiza
tion, and out of them the demon-controlled ones attempt to drink. “The king of the north” treats the living vessels of Jehovah’s message with contempt and exercises power over their physical bodies, to break their integrity toward The Theocracy, but without success.—Dan. 5:1-4; see The Watchtower November 1, 1934.
21 “And over all the precious things [(Fount's) desirable things] of Egypt.” This does not mean the military defeat of “the king of the south”, but rather shows that the totalitarian, arbitrary rule will extend over all the nations of the earth. The “desirable things” of Egypt are not things of Jehovah’s organization, but are the things of this wicked world organization under the control of the demons, and which organization “spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified”. (Rev. 11:8) The ‘king” has identified himself as the organization which Satan controls. A like condition of seizing the desirable things will continue in all nations up to the time of the final end.
82 “And the Libyans,” says the prophecy. The name “Libya” means thirsty, that is, dry. Being neighbors of Egypt, they picture those who are “good neighbors” to the other nations about, for what they can get out of it in return. They are willing to submit to the arbitrary rule if that means commercial profit to them. They do not enjoy the waters of truth of God’s Word, but they express a dry condition and among them there is a famine for the hearing of the Word of God, and that is because of demon influence.— Amos 8:11.
“ “And the Ethiopians”; meaning the dark-skinned, or the organizations that are friends and allies of commerce. (See Isaiah 20: 3-5; Isaiah 37: 9.) ‘Darkskins’ pictured those who today are in the dark as to Jehovah’s purpose. (Jer. 13:23) They attack Jehovah’s servants at the command of the leading religionists, even as their prototype attacked Jerusalem and Judah. (2 Ki. 19:9; 2 Chron. 14:9-13) All of these obey “the king of the north”, or arbitrary rule, and “shall be at his steps”, so says the prophecy. This describes the hangers-on to the commercial or Big Business world, the organization for self-gain, and who are willing to forsake “the king of the south” and democracies and submit themselves to “the king of the north” and to arbitrary rule just so they get something out of it. Such find a striking modern-day example in some of the businessmen in the nation, who are willing to forsake Democracy and go over to the Corporate State, and who submit to the regimentation of the people in order that they might enjoy some individual pecuniary gain. These are also known as “appeasers”, and always with an eye to business. They will be heard today saying: “It is all
362
^Ee WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
right for the Hierarchy and the Nazis to rule America, if we get ours.”
s‘ Mark this in light of the infallible divine prophecy: that the totalitarian, arbitrary rule will overrun all the nations of the earth in the very near future. Some makeshift of peace will be made, and the
chief credit for such patched-up peace will be given to the religious element, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The totalitarian rule will be fully in control, and then will appear the sign. The prophecy of Daniel indicates what shall follow.
(To be continued)
’’GREAT MULTITUDE” SURVIVES ARMAGEDDON
LONG ago the great Creator provided that under the coming Theocratic Government of Righteousness and its King there should be those who would receive life as human creatures and continue to live for ever on the earth and who shall multiply and fill the cleansed earth with a righteous race.
The number of those who are chosen and to whom the divine promise is given that they shall be of the kingdom of heaven, or Theocratic Government, and that they shall reign with Christ Jesus in the spirit, is small when compared with the number of those who may ultimately receive life as perfect human creatures. To those who from the time of Christ’s apostles till the second coming of the Lord Jesus have chosen to follow and obey Christ Jesus and who have continued and do continue faithful unto death, Christ Jesus the King of The Theocratic Government gives these precious promises: “But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be added unto you. Fear not, little flock ; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” “Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer; behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days [symbolizing the completeness of the time of your earthly existence] ; be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.”—Luke 12: 31, 32 and Revelation 2:10.
The ‘Tittle flock” being gathered first, Christ Jesus “the Good Shepherd” then says: “And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.” (John 10:16) Those whom the Lord here calls his “other sheep” are the ones who shall compose the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors that has no limit as to number but is made up of all those who during the present judgment of the nations by Christ Jesus are placed on “his right hand”, or place of favor, and are designated “his sheep”, and who receive on earth the blessings of the Kingdom. (See Matthew 25: 34.) On the other hand, in Revelation 7:4-8 it is stated that this “little flock” consists of 144,000 followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, who are made members of “his body”.—1 Cor. 12:12,18, 27 ; Col. 1:18.
Immediately following the description of the body members of Christ who are designated his “little flock”, Revelation 7:9-17 makes this statement: “After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the angels stood round about
the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts [ living ones], and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes 1 and whence came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.”
It therefore clearly appears that the spirit class, the “body of Christ”, are a fixed number, because these are a part of the Kingdom. Those of the “great multitude” are not a limited number, but rather the Lord opens the way for as many to come as may desire to serve him. He puts no limitation on the number. These come from all nations. They stand “before the throne”, which shows that they are not in the throne and are not a part of the Kingdom or Theocratic Government. In order to be “before the throne” they do not have to be in heaven for judgment, but, on the contrary, their judgment takes place on earth; and this is shown by the words of Jesus at Matthew 25-31, 32. They stand before the “Lamb”, that is, before Christ Jesus, the great Judge and King. They have a standing and thus are received by the Lord.
Those who shall form the “great multitude”, that is, the “other sheep” of the Lord, must identify themselves before all other creation as having faith in and being on the side of the great Theocrat and his King, and this they must do before the “battle of that great day of God Almighty” begins. In the Scriptures the garment or mantle a man wears is a means of identification denoting where he stands and whom he supports. The “white robes” with which the “great multitude” are clothed symbolically testify that the persons wearing the same are on the side of righteousness. The Theocracy is on the side of righteousness.
‘Palm branches in their hands’ symbolically testifies for them: “We are supporters of the King of The Theocracy, Christ Jesus; therefore we are for God and for the Lamb, Christ Jesus.” All these refuse to hail, honor, praise and worship men or things and thereby ascribe salvation to men or things or man-made organizations and thereby also vio
December 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
363
late the commandment stated at Exodus 20: 3-5. All of those of the “great multitude” ascribe salvation to God and to his Lamb, Christ Jesus, the King. All of these make known that they are for The Theocracy. They are diligent to do so.
Christ Jesus is the Chief Corner Stone of God’s building. (Isa. 28:16; Ps. 118:22; Matt. 21:42-44) Nineteen hundred years ago, when the Lord Jesus rode into Jerusalem upon the ass and presented himself to the Jews as King, this was the laying of the Corner Stone in a miniature way, but it foreshadowed the laying of the Corner Stone in completeness when the Kingdom is set up and Christ Jesus thereafter, in A.D. 1918, appears at the temple as King of The Theocratic Government. When the Lord Jesus, “which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh,” rode into Jerusalem he was there hailed by the multitude as King; as it is written: “And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way. And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the son of David! Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest 1”—Matt. 21: 8, 9.
The apostle John wrote The Revelation, and in his recording of the account of the miniature laying of the Corner Stone John wrote: “On the morrow a great multitude that had come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, took the branches of the palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried out, Hosanna: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, even the King of Israel.” (John 12:12,13, Am. Rev. Ver.) In this account and in The Revelation, chapter seven, John makes mention of the palm branches, and that in connection with the “great multitude”. Thus what took place at the miniature laying of the Corner Stone at Jerusalem foreshadowed that which John saw in vision of the laying of the Corner Stone in completeness in A.D. 1918.
When Jesus entered Jerusalem the great multitude that spread down their garments and waved their palm branches were not then the disciples of Jesus Christ, as the facts subsequently showed. Only a short time before that triumphant entry of Jesus into Jerusalem he had addressed his disciples, speaking to them as a “little flock”. It was afterwards and when Jesus was riding upon an ass as King that the great multitude appeared and shouted: ‘Hosanna to the son of David; blessed is he that cometh in the name of Jehovah!’ Likewise when Jesus Christ is enthroned in heaven, in A.D. 1914, the “great multitude” as pictured in Revelation chapter seven are not recognized, discerned and understood, and are not members of the “little flock” or members of “the body of Christ”. It is after he is presented at the temple as King, in A.D. 1918, and seated upon his throne of judgment, that the “great multitude” are discerned with “palms in their hands”. This would prove that the “great multitude” began to come into existence after the Lord Jesus Christ appeared at the temple for judgment. The facts and the evidence that have come to pass during the past ten years conclusively prove that the “great multitude” will be made up of human creatures who hear and accept and rejoice in the Kingdom of God under Christ. The palms in their hands in effect say: “We hail our King and Savior; our allegiance and our devotion are to him. Our salvation comes from the great King Eternal, who is Jehovah, and
through Christ Jesus, his anointed Ruler of the new world.” They openly confess that they are on the Lord’s side.
Revelation 7:11,12 describes the heavenly creatures joining in the praise of Jehovah because the time has come for the gathering of the Lord’s “other sheep”. Then it was that the question was put forth concerning the “great multitude” : “What are these which are arrayed in white robes ? and whence came they?” The answer is given: “These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.” (Verses 13, 14) That means that they have been gathered unto the Lord in troublesome times.
Those of God’s royal house, or Kingdom, that is, the 144,000, have great tribulation on earth, and such tribulation has extended over the entire Christian era so far as this is concerned; but the greatest of all tribulations mentioned in the Scriptures must come after the “great multitude” appears and must be that which is mentioned by Christ Jesus, at Matthew 24:21, as “tribulation such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time”. That tribulation period began with the “day of Jehovah”, to wit, in 1914, when the “war in heaven” started against Satan’s organization and Satan was thereafter cast out and down to the earth. (Rev. 12:7-10) The tribulation reaches the great climax at the time of the battle of Armageddon, the great day of God Almighty. In harmony with this, Revelation 7:14 calls it “the great tribulation” (Am. Rev. Ver ).
Clearly it follows that this tribulation does not come for the purpose of developing or completing the “great multitude”, but it is the tribulation that comes upon Satan’s organization, both visible and invisible, and which will completely wreck that entire organization. As we have observed, “the day of Jehovah” began in 1914, at the birth of The Kingdom. (See Revelation 11:15-18.) Had that tribulation, then begun, continued to its finality without interruption, all flesh would have been destroyed. The tribulation was shortened by the Lord when the World War ended (Matt. 24:22; Mark 13:20), and thus was afforded an opportunity for Jehovah’s witnesses under his commandment to go forth and bear testimony to his name and his kingdom as a witness to the world. It is during this period of giving testimony, that is, the ‘preaching of this gospel of the kingdom’, that the Lord’s “other sheep” who shall form the “great multitude” come out.
To “come out of the great tribulation” not alone means to survive that trouble as ‘flesh that shall be saved’ (Matt. 24:22), but primarily means that they come out from Satan’s organization and take their stand on the side erf Jehovah during the period of time that elapses from the stopping of the World War in 1918 until the day of Armageddon, that is to say, during the time that Jesus said the “days should be shortened” and during which same time period “this gospel of the kingdom” is preached in all the world.
What is the purpose of shortening those days of tribulation? The Lord Jesus answers: “For the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.” (Matt. 24: 22) During that period of time the elect’s remnant on earth have a work to do as witnesses for Jehovah and under his commandment, and at least a part of that work is the marking of those “other sheep” who shall form the “great multitude” in their foreheads, as commanded by the Lord at Ezekiel 9:4. That
364
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
means that Jehovah’s witnesses must proclaim the message of the truth and thus give an intellectual understanding of the truth to the “other sheep”, which class “flee into the mountains”, symbolizing The Theocratic Government. This is “immediately after the tribulation of those days”, as stated at Matthew 24:29; that is to say, after the first part of the tribulation, from 1914 to 1918. Those who will compose the “great multitude” will also survive Armageddon, because God’s promise to those who seek meekness and righteousness is that they may be hid in that time. (See Zephaniah 2:3.) All of these scriptures negative the thought that the tribulation is for the purpose of developing or perfecting this class of people. The great tribulation is the execution of Jehovah’s judgments against Satan’s organization, and is not for the purpose of developing any.
According to the language of Revelation 7:14 the Lord’s “other sheep” do their own washing of their robes; that is, by reason of the course of action they take they break away from the unclean organization of Satan and openly show themselves on the side of Jehovah, and this they do by openly confessing their devotion to God. “With the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” (Rom. 10:10) Coming to a knowledge of the fact that Jehovah’s name must be vindicated by his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus, and that that is the important question, they not only confess themselves on the side of Jehovah but give assistance to the remnant of the “elect” in bearing witness to the honor and name of Jehovah God.
How do they make their robes “white in the blood of the Lamb”! The shed blood of Christ Jesus is the basis for the forgiveness of sins and the basis for God to forgive uncleanness. By believing on Christ Jesus’ shed blood as the redemptive price for believing and obedient mankind, and, based upon such belief, by consecrating themselves to do the will of God, and by serving, worshiping and obeying the Lord, and not men, these take their stand on the side of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government and participate in the service of witnessing, and that is the only course that would give them a white and clean appearance in the sight of God. No man can take his stand on the side of Jehovah without believing in the shed blood of Christ Jesus as the means of salvation. Every human creature that obtains life must obtain it as a gift of God through Christ Jesus, and this is the only way; and all such must have their sins washed away by exercising faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus. In taking the step of consecrating themselves to God by faith in the blood of Christ Jesus those who form the “great multitude” stand approved before the judgment seat of Christy and this approval of them is symbolized by the white robes which John observed that they wore. These keep their robes clean by continuing in faith and devotion to God and Christ Jesus, his anointed King, and thereby maintaining their integrity toward Jehovah God. The Lord’s “other sheep” who shall constitute the “great multitude” could therefore not come into existence until the Lord Jesus Christ appeared at the temple and began his judgment, and therefore they could not appear prior to 1918.
They must wash up before Armageddon comes. It would be too late to wash at the time of Armageddon. They “flee into the Mountains” on seeing the totalitarian “abomination of desolation” standing in the holy place or stead of
God’s kingdom, and this they do before the “winter” time, that is, the great climax of tribulation at Armageddon. (Matt. 24:16, 20) They have come out and still they come, and now together with the remnant they are singing, “Salvation to our God . . . and unto the Lamb.” They honor Jehovah God and his King, and they refuse to give any glory to any part of Satan’s organization. Those honest-hearted ones who have left Satan’s organization are now on the Lord’s side, and they want that fact to be known and they make it known, and they worship the only true God, Jehovah, and his King. “Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.” —Rev. 7 :15.
Mark to what extent the “great multitude” serve Jehovah: “They . . . serve him day and night.” Daytime and nighttime means all the time, and this description shows that they serve Jehovah all the time, regardless of the hours. They are not satisfied to work eight hours a day and quit on the strike of the clock and refuse to do what some call “overtime”, but are ready and respond to the call for the Lord’s active service at any time day or night. Service reports from the field in recent years fully corroborate this conclusion. Many of those who are now the Lord’s “other sheep” hear the truth one day, give themselves wholly to the Lord God, and immediately join in the field service with the remnant and are rejoicing and are anxious to do whatsoever they can. Also, these are studying with diligence the Word of God, and thus they seek meekness and righteousness, striving to obey Jehovah’s commandments.
Christ Jesus at the temple as head of Jehovah’s capital organization or Theocratic Government now leads and feeds those who honestly put themselves under his leadership. In 1914 Christ Jesus was enthroned as King and then came to his temple in 1918, and from that time onward woe and tribulation upon the earth has continuously increased, and in that time the Devil has done all within his power to turn the people away from God and his kingdom. (See Revelation 12:12,17.) During this time of tribulation upon the earth the Lord gathers to himself those of good-will, and these, taking their stand on the side of God and his kingdom, find peace of mind and joy of heart, and these go to make up the “great multitude”. No more do they need to hunger for the truth, because the Lord feeds them from his own storehouse of truth. Multitudes of people in the earth have hungered and others do hunger for the truth. They want something different from the husks which they have been receiving from religious institutions. Learning the truth, therefore, from God’s Word, they flee to the Lord. It has been’the privilege and it is the privilege of Jehovah’s witnesses to carry this spiritual food to the hungry ones, and when such hungry ones are fed upon the truth concerning the Kingdom their joy is great and they quickly join themselves with “the remnant” to carry that message of good news to others, and thus the number of the Lord’s “other sheep” continuously increases.
Such “other sheep” must be led by Christ Jesus and fed by him before Armageddon, and must be under his protection and be taken through Armageddon. “They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead
December 1,1941
WATCHTOWER-
365
them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.” (Rev. 7:16,17) These “other sheep” follow after and with Jehovah’s anointed remnant and are led “unto fountains of waters of life” (according to the Revised Version). For this reason all who are thus led shall thirst no more. No longer do they go to the dried-up waterholes of the cruel devilish system of religion, but,, by the grace of Jehovah and by the hand of the Lord Jesus Christ, they are led to ‘the fountains of living waters. Upon receiving the message of truth and learning that Satan has ever reproached Jehovah’s name and that all of Satan’s servants have by fraud, deceit and false pretenses brought reproach upon God’s holy name, and that
soon Jehovah will vindicate his name by and through his kingdom under Christ, the tears of these honest ones have ceased to flow, and in the place thereof joy has filled their hearts, and their faces have been made to appear glad and they have fully turned to the Lord God Jehovah. All honest creatures who see and appreciate the purpose of Jehovah by his Theocratic Government rejoice. They know that all good things and all blessings proceed from Jehovah, and thus he wipes away all their tears. The “holy city”, which is Jehovah’s capital organization or Theocracy, comes down from heaven, and now righteousness shall be established for ever, and then there shall be no more tears to those who remain in harmony with God.—Rev. 21:1-4.
CONSPIRATORS AGAINST THEOCRACY
LONG ago foreshadowing modern-day events, the ancient people of Moab, Ammon and Mount Seir (Edom) formed a conspiracy to destroy the typical Theocracy of Jehovah’s covenant people, the Israelites. In their effort to carry out that conspiracy, the three allies marched on the city of Jerusalem. King Jehoshaphat, in command of God’s covenant people, was warned and was instructed by Jehovah God what he must do. The combined enemy far outnumbered the Israelites and were fully equipped for war. God assured King Jehoshaphat and the Israelites and friendly companions with them thaj they had no occasion to fear the enemy, for the reason that the battle is God’s; and that the duty of the Israelites was to boldly march out of the city and meet the enemy, singing, as they went, the praises of Jehovah. This they did. Then the great Theocrat, Jehovah, fought their battle and the enemy was completely destroyed; and that was an example of God’s unlimited power exercised in behalf of those who love and obey him. Thus by his act Jehovah foretold what will come to pass at the battle of Armageddon in behalf of his people.—See 2 Chronicles 20:1-29.
“Now these things were our examples, ... all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.” (1 Cor. 10: 6,11) Ancient Moab pictured the commercial wing of Satan’s visible organization on earth. Ammon pictured the political wing of that wicked organization. Both the commercial and political parts of the organization of Satan are supported by the military and so-called “strong-arm squad”. All of these have joined with the religionists for the purpose of doing violence to Jehovah’s servants. Their action shall not be passed over unnoticed by the great Theocrat, Jehovah. The Moabites and Ammonites were descendants of Abraham’s nephew, Lot, by his own two daughters. Therefore those people were half brothers. In the prophetic picture Moab represents the commercial big business and military elements of “Christendom”. There is never a war without the commercial element’s being at the fore and deeply interested therein; and therefore the Moabites here pictured that element that prosecutes war for revenge, for conquest, and for commercial gain, and which is one of the elements of the Devil’s organization.
Concerning Moab Jehovah mentions the reproaches
that the enemies of his Theocratic Government have put upon him and his faithful servants: “I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border.” (Zeph. 2:8) Moab of ancient times reproached Jehovah and his typical people, the Israelites. The modern-day Moabites, the commercial traffickers in the wealth of the earth, and in human blood, have heaped great reproach upon the name of Jehovah, and those reproaches have fallen upon the ones who love and faithfully serve the Most High and the King of his Theocracy.—See Psalm 69: 9 aqd Romans 15: 3.
As the facts fully disclose, the modern-day Moabites, that is to say, the commercial element of Satan’s visible organization, have yielded to the laws and dictates of that most powerful religious organization, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. That wicked religious organization has repeatedly declared that Jehovah’s servants are carrying on a money-making scheme and are indulging in a campaign of hate and intolerance. They further lied saying that Jehovah’s witnesses are Communists. The commercial element accordingly, in their propaganda sheets, the daily press and magazines, continue to publish such lies against Jehovah’s witnesses, while at the same time those publications refuse to publish any true statement of the facts, even for pay. Thus it is seen that the commercial element, through their propaganda sheets and at the instance of religionists, willfully and deliberately and with malice aforethought, resist God and persecute his. servants. They continue such bitter opposition to all the publications concerning Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. They have put forth their endeavors to prevent the radio from being used to broadcast the message of The Theocratic Government. They prevent Jehovah’s witnesses from obtaining the use of public halls for their assemblies. Concerning rooming accommodations and advertising for the Jehovah’s witnesses assembly in St. Louis, Mo., in August, 1941, the St. Louis Chamber of Commerce put the “kibosh” on the whole thing; and they wrote the hotels there that they had better listen to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy’s advice, and hence the hotels had “everything engaged"; no room for the ambassadors of The Theocratic Government. The commercial press stoops to the basest lies against Jehovah’s servants, and does so always at the instance of the Roman Hier
366
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
archy and their other religious allies, as at St. Louis.
The ready and willing servant of the commercial giants, who traffic in human blood and property, is the “strong-arm squad” and the military group. They continually heap reproach upon the name of Jehovah God and his servants. These servants of God they denounce as pacifists and charge that they are unpatriotic and dangerous to the security of the state. They willingly and wickedly circulate reports that the publications of Jehovah’s witnesses are subversive and should be suppressed for that reason. This commercial and military group, acting at the instance and advice of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, attempt to force upon the servants of God compulsory saluting of flags contrary to the commandment of Almighty God. The ruling powers of this world demand of Jehovah’s covenant people that they, in violation of their covenant obligations toward God, enlist and fight under the banner of such rulers; and if Jehovah’s covenant people refuse to do so they suffer imprisonment or other harsh punishment, even death. Although the law of such nations declares that a minister of the gospel shall not be required to do military service, the acting authorities who have to do with carrying the law into operation say to these faithful covenant people of God: “We do not recognize you as a minister, nor that you are a sincere, conscientious objector to engaging in war; therefore you must join the fighting forces and serve under our banner.”
All of these things God will not forget at Armageddon. He will permit none of that commercial element of Satan’s organization to find the way of escape from execution at the hands of God’s great Executioner, Christ Jesus, at that battle. They will not be hid. This, of course, does not apply to legitimate and honest dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of necessity, but the application is to that class of commercial men who prey upon the people and use their power wickedly against mankind, and particularly against the servants of Almighty God.
The Ammonites of ancient times, who were half brothers of the Moabites, joined in the conspiracy and concerted action against Jehoshaphat, the king of the typical Theocracy at Jerusalem. The Ammonites pictured that element of Satan’s organization known as the patriotic, nationalistic politicians, who not only support but actively operate Satan’s political organization, and which is made specially manifest in the Nazis, Fascists, and other radical rulers, which carry out the persecution work of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The name “Ammon” means “inbred”. The Nazi politicians are extremists and fanatical on the “inbred” idea, priding themselves on what they call “pure Aryan blood” with not the slightest taint of Jewish blood to “defile” them. The ancient Ammonites worshiped the demongod entitled “Milcom”, which name means “their king”, or their political ruler. The Ammonites, therefore, picture this extreme, radical political element, of which the Nazis and Fascists and other totalitarians are striking examples. Because Jehovah made the Jews of ancient days his chosen people, the Nazis seize upon that pretext to persecute Jehovah’s witnesses, because they declare that Jehovah is the true and almighty God. The modern-day Ammonites are allied with all other elements of Satan’s organization, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, in their assault against the people of Jehovah God.
Jehovah takes full notice of the reviling of his people by the Ammonites of modern days, this political element which works with the religionists for political gain. The totalitarians are now determined to rule the world or to bring about the destruction of the nations. They get their inspiration, of course, from the Devil by and through the religious element, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. None of these like the message of God, because it discloses that The Theocracy shall rule the whole world in righteousness and that the totalitarian rule shall soon for ever cease. These modernday Ammonites, or politicians, join forces with the Hierarchy to destroy Jehovah’s servants and to prevent the spreading of the gospel of God’s kingdom. To accomplish their wicked purpose they enact laws giving men dictatorial or arbitrary powers to enable the chief political ruler to declare an emergency when he desires and to thus justify his actions in taking away all privileges of those who love and serve the Almighty God. Thus have many of Jehovah’s witnesses been imprisoned and killed in the dictatorial countries, not for wrongdoing, but because they persist in declaring the good news of The Theocratic Government. Those enemies of God and his servants will find no hiding place at Armageddon. They will not be hid.
Jehovah says of the modern-day Ammonites and Moabites: “They have reproached my people, and magnified themselves.” (Zeph. 2:8) The political and commercial elements, supported by the military and “strong-arm squad”, insist that those who have devoted themselves to Jehovah must now put the state above Almighty God and therefore “render unto Caesar” all allegiance and support. In this they bring great reproach upon Jehovah’s name and upon those who serve him. Hoping to fully control the rising generation the political, commercial and military elements, acting at the behest of the big religious group, attempt to compel the small children to salute flags, <rheil” men, and engage in other ceremonies in violation of God’s law. Bent upon arbitrary rule or ruin, they go beyond all proper limits and insist that the law of the state is supreme and that the state must be obeyed under any and all circumstances. They magnify men and rulers and thus magnify and exalt themselves against God, blaspheming and reproaching his name. They shall find no way to escape the wrath of Almighty God at Armageddon.
Pointing to the approaching enemy King Jehoshaphat said in prayer to Jehovah God: “And now, behold, the children of Ammon, and Moab, and mount Seir, whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not.” (2 Chron. 20:10) Thus Jehoshaphat located definitely that political, commercial and religious element combined now invading the place where God’s faithful covenant people are properly located in his service as his witnesses. In the aforementioned combine of conspirators against Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government are those mentioned prophetically as “mount Seir”, that is, the religious element of the Devil’s organization under the leadership and dominating influence of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority, and which people, like those of “mount Seir” in olden time, make their nests high up, like the foul birds that nested in the mountains
December 1,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
367
of Seir. The Mount Seir-ites were closely associated with the Esauites or Edomites. Esau, the twin brother of Jacob, “went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob. . . . Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir. Esau is Edom.” (Gen. 36:6-8) The Mount Seirites were Devil-worshipers or demon-religionists, like the Edomites.
The name “Edom” means “red”, and is a reminder of Esau’s failure to appreciate God’s favor toward him concerning the Abrahamic birthright, which birthright Esau sold to his brother Jacob for the paltry sum of a mess of pottage, that his selfish appetite might be appeased. “And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom [Red (marginal reading)].” (Gen. 25:30) Esau was the firstborn and apparently had the first claim to the Abrahamic birthright, but it was the will of Jehovah God that it should be otherwise. (See Genesis 22:18; 25:23-26.) The descendants of Esau, that is, the Edomites, must therefore represent a class of religious persons who are apparently the firstborn and in line for the kingdom of heaven. The Edomites more specifically stand for and represent that class of men who have organized and carried on religion in the name of God and Christ, but who in truth and in fact have been and are the representatives of the Devil, the chief of the demons, and who are hence a part of the Devil’s organization. The Edomites, the offspring of Esau, therefore clearly stand for the modern-day official religious representatives of the Devil, to wit, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allies, the other clergy. Those clergymen who organized and carried on the so-called “Protestant religion” are joined together with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy; and it has been true since the World War of 19141918 that this combined crowd has sought the death of the true followers of Christ Jesus. The clergy of the Catholic and so-called “Protestant” organizations are vigorously working together at this day to destroy the true followers of the Lord.
The Abrahamic birthright privileges, as set forth at Genesis 12: 3 and 22:17,18, were claimed by the religious clergy because they have always claimed to be the ones favored of God. Jehovah foreknew that they would be unfaithful and would fall away completely to demonism or religion, and therefore he foretold such in the prophecies concerning the Edomites. Jesus foretold that the Abrahamic birthright privileges concerning The Theocracy and as held out to and claimed by the religious clergy would be taken away from them because they failed to bring forth the fruits (the truth) of the Kingdom or The Theocratic Government. (See Matthew 21:43-45.) It is only the clergy that, like Esau or Edom, have tried to compete with Jehovah’s true servants for the Kingdom privileges. This corresponds exactly with Esau’s rivalry toward Jacob for the birthright of his father. Esau tried to kill Jacob, and the modern-day Edomites likewise now try to kill and destroy Jehovah’s true witnesses, pictured by Jacob. The prophecy of Obadiah shows that the modern-day religious Edomites would enter into a conspiracy against the true followers of Christ, the witnesses of Jehovah. The prophecy also refers to the two other elements of Satan’s organization, the modern-day Moabites and Ammonites, which form “the principal of the flock” of the religious clergy, and all of
which are falsely called “Christians”. In the modern fulfillment of the prophecy the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allied so-called “Protestant” clergymen lead in a conspiracy against God’s “hidden ones”, whom he has selected to be members of his “holy nation”, his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. The “principal of the flock”, the modern Moabites and Ammonites, have joined in this conspiracy and are now this day committing overt acts against the covenant people of Jehovah God, and against his kingdom, The Theocracy. (See Psalm 83: 3-8.) It is the Devil’s organization, pictured by Moab, Ammon and Edom, which attempts to take away from others freedom of thought, speech, assembly, and action, in the worship of Jehovah God. These worldly representatives of the Devil’s visible organization use cruel means against Jehovah’s witnesses to prevent these from telling the truth to others, which Jehovah has commanded shall be told, and they attempt to bring about the destruction of these faithful Christian men and women who do proclaim God’s truth in obedience to his commandments.
Concerning the religious-totalitarian “king of the north” combine of our day Daniel’s prophecy, chapter eleven, verse forty-one, says: “He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.” (For an explanation of this verse of prophecy see page 359 herein.) But Jehovah will not spare those three modern-day elements. Note His words to this effect:
’‘Concerning Edom, thus- saith the Lord of hosts; . . . Also Edom shall be a desolation; every one that goeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof. As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the Lord, no man shall abide there, neither shall a son of man dwell in it.” (Jer. 49:7,17,18) “Surely Moab [the modern Moabites, the commercial traffickers] shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon [the political ruling element] as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation.” (Zeph. 2: 9) This is the judgment written against them, and that judgment will be executed at Armageddon. Destruction shall come upon them by the superhuman power, as in the case of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. As “that righteous man”, Lot, fled from Sodom and was saved from the destruction that came upon those cities, so the persons of good-will toward God and his Theocratic Government and who now flee to the place of safety he provides under The Theocracy may be saved at Armageddon. Many of these persons of good-will are now under the dominating control of the political and commercial and religious elements; but by taking their stand firmly on the side of Jehovah and his Theocracy they may escape to the place of safety. (2 Pet. 2:6-8; Gen. 19:15-29) Sodom and Gomorrah were reduced to complete desolation, from which there is no possibility of recovery; and so likewise the modern Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites shall be destroyed, and the place where they have inhabited shall be, as prophesied, “even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation.” The religious-totalitarian rule and rulers, the commercial robbers and those who have defied Jehovah God and his Theocracy, shall perish for ever at the battle of Armageddon, as the prophecy declares.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
AFTER “FAYTHER O’HOOLIGAN’S” ROOMS BOYCOTT
“Jehovah’s witnesses making return visits on people in St. Louis, Mo., area are meeting with many interesting experiences, and, among other things, this feature is very noticeable: Hundreds of the St. Louis people willingly tell these Kingdom publishers calling upon them of the fine impression they have of the witnesses that roomed with them during the Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses, August 6-10. Many of these people tell the publishers of the kind and comforting letters they are receiving from those witnesses who stayed with them during that convention. Some of the publishers making the back-calls find that these letters which the out-of-town witnesses were thoughtful enough to write have done much to break down misunderstanding and prejudice that existed in the minds of the people in the past, and have made it possible quite often for the publishers to place additional literature with the people and start some model studies.”
IN A NEW YORK CITY APARTMENT HOUSE
“While I was inquiring for a man who had taken some literature from me at one time, a man on the second floor heard my conversation downstairs and came down to find out if I was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. Then he asked me to come to his apartment. There he showed me a Bible with many scriptures marked. He said he and his wife were studying the Bible with the book Religion that we put out and that he and his wife wanted to become Jehovah’s witnesses. After this he told how his relatives were writing mysterious letters to them from Canada. The letters were not clear because they seemed to try to convey something and yet were not directly on any certain subject, but just said they would like to tell them something but could not write it’. Later his wife went to Canada to investigate what they would not write, and then she began to write the same way. So he went up to Canada to investigate, and he found his folks and many others had quit the Catholic church and were all Jehovah’s covenant people. All of them would meet quietly to study the Bible with Bible study helps. Because the mail was censored, they would not say too much in a letter. When I was making this call they had just gotten back from Canada, and they were already trying to get their friends to study the Bible and become interested in the truth. Two days after this call he and his wife went out in the service and did very well. They have already read part of Children and are very happy to learn the wonderful prospects before them.”
FROM THE PIONEER HOME, COVENTRY, ENGLAND
“While engaging in the door-to-door work a publisher met a gentleman and his son. They had recently-moved from Coventry. While in Coventry they had regularly observed the pavement witnessing undertaken by the Coventry pioneers and company publishers. When this call was made on them they showed great interest and immediately accepted the truth with considerable enthusiasm. The son has now enrolled as a pioneer. One Sunday morning one of the pioneers was working a road. This road had been worked the previous day by mistake. He met a gentleman and commenced a model study with him. Within two weeks this man was witnessing from door to door, and at the service
meeting he asked for a phonograph. He works in the Public Assistance Institution and has got right inside with the lecture recordings, a thing we had never been able to do before. He is now reaching people with the Kingdom message to whom the message had never been taken previously. Both this man and his wife are now regular publishers.”
CLERGY DEFIANCE OF SUPREME COURT RULING
“Here, in Biloxi, Miss., at 10: 30 a.m., while I was placing The Watchtower with two persons of good-will, a Catholic priest named Frank Quinn (the same person who a year ago grabbed a petition blank from a publisher and also had his picture taken a short time ago heckling a publisher faithfully doing his duty to the Lord) began to interfere by telling those obtaining the magazines to not do so as these were junk, trash, etc. I told him to beat it as all knew he had on the robes of Baal and he was proving it by interfering with my peaceful as well as lawful work of declaring the Kingdom to those of good-will. Upon snapping his picture, as some of us who are regular in the street work carry a camera with us, he howled, yelling to an officer on the comer across the street to arrest the person with the camera. The officer arrested me and, upon appearance at the station house, the officer was sent back to his post, the chief of police taking charge. A question was asked, 'Why was “Father” Quinn’s picture taken?’ I told chief of pqlice Aldnzo Gabrich that it was good evidence to get pictures of anyone interfering with one’s liberty. Then I told him to seal the camera as evidence in the case. The chief of police at once showed himself to be a tool dominated by the Hierarchy by destroying the camera, also striking me in the face with his fist as several Catholic policemen grabbed me, holding me so I could not defend myself, and the priest standing by watching. Threats to find ways or means to stop me permanently from engaging in this work were also made, the chief of police stating to another Jehovah’s witness that I was to be arrested every time I was seen on the streets with these magazines, on some charge or other, until one was found that would fit, and that maybe I would resist arrest. As no charges were pressed against me, though I was held in jail six hours with nothing to eat or drink (until brought in by friends), I was released, the-policemen doing so laughing. The priest mentioned really broke the law by disturbing the peace. We will be on the streets again Friday, armed with the ‘sword of the spirit’ and truth.”
AMONG BOSTON’S CHINESE LAUNDRYMEN
“I noticed that the book Enemies and the booklet Conspiracy Against Democracy had been printed in Chinese. I ordered ten Enemies in Chinese and a supply of Conspiracy booklets. In two hours’ time I placed them among the Chinese laundrymen around my home 11 had expected some results, but these were far beyond my expectation. I am now going to order a larger supply and continue this work. I think it would be a splendid idea to mention such a work to the friends, not only in the Chinese language but others. I presented Enemies and Conspiracy for a 25c contribution, also leaving (if they take it) an English booklet. About 50 percent of my calls I placed this combination. The literature does the talking, and very little I said. The main thing seemed to be, showing the literature."
368

THE WATCHTOWER
Pubuskis Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE G TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	* Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
orrioiEs
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” -Isaiah 54:I3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos la now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to •‘fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
BUS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all peeple of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents In the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
Unitrd Statzs, *1.00; Canada and Misczllanzovs Forzion, *1.60; Grzat Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Exprezc Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, Britleb, South African and Australasian remittances should bo made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreon Omers
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian_________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 6, Ontario, Canada
Australasian 7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld. N. S. W., Australia
South African	Boston Bouse, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this fournol appear In several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of inflrmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have Ths "Watchtower free upon written application to the pubUsbers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it Wo are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year la required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers; Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of addrpss, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) wUI be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered os ssoond-oloss matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, lite.
“GREAT MULTITUDE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Regardless of the incoming of winter then, December marks another month-long season of special united activity known as “Great Multitude” Testimony Period. Those persons of good-will who shall form part of the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors are now quickly coming forth ere the wintertime of Armageddon sets in on the world, and they will, in increasing numbers, take part with the remnant members in this united Testimony. All such are cordially invited to join in putting in as many homes as possible the excellent combination offer of the new book Children and the new booklet Comfort AU That Mourn, on a contribution of 25c. We shall be glad to give references to any wanting to get in touch with and to co-operate with the nearest organized company of publishers of The Theocracy. At the close of December the usual report on the full month’s activities and results should be submitted.
1*42 CALENDAR
The text chosen for the year 1942, to wit, “Blameless in the day of our Lord” (1 Cor. 1: 8), provide* the theme for a calendar picture which is most befitting these day* of decision. Highly artistic and novel, the picture clearly and eloquently seta out the choice God’* covenant people must make concerning the great issue of world domination. Beneath is a neat calendar pad, indi
cating the line of activity of Jehovah’s blameless ones for each month of 1942, naming the special Testimony Periods and also the special endeavors to be made during the intervening months. The contribution for this service calendar is 25c each, or $1.00 for 5 copies mailed together to one address. Companies should send in combination orders, with remittance to cover, through their local company servant.
RE THE 1*42 YEARBOOK
Due to the uncertain and disrupted conditions on earth over which we have no control the information for the compilation of a report of the work world-wide for the service year 1940-1941 is belated. Hence the production of the 1942 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses has been unavoidably held up, till after the beginning of the new calendar year. Announcement of its publication will be made shortly, and which report, we believe, will be well worth waiting for.
“CONSOLATION”
Do you find enlightenment and joy in reading The Watch-towerf Then you are certain to find enjoyment and profit in reading its companion magazine, Consolation, put out by the same publishers. With many thousands Consolation serves a vital and (.Continued on page 38t)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXII	December 15, 1941	No. 24
DEMON RULE ENDING
PART 7
“And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.”—Dan. 2: 44.
"T EHOVAH has declared his purpose to set up his I invincible and everlasting government, which is J The Theocracy, of Christ Jesus as King. His purpose stands and cannot be removed. (Isa. 55: 10,11; 46:11) Every person now in a covenant with Jehovah knows that the above statement is absolutely true. Every part of the prophecy which God caused Daniel to write down is in exact harmony and magnifies these facts, to wit: That Satan, the enemy, has for centuries ruled the world in wickedness, and that Jehovah will set up his great government to be administered by the righteous and beloved One, Christ Jesus, and that Jehovah’s government will literally and completely destroy Satan’s organization. Jehovah’s name will then be completely vindicated, and his glory shall fill the whole earth.
2	In the prophecy of Daniel 2: 31-45 description is given of a “great image”, which is a picture of Satan’s organization and the various elements thereof by which he has ruled the world. (See The Watchtower 1930, pages 227-233, 243-248, under the title “A Great Image”.) Because Lucifer in the beginning was clothed with authority by Jehovah God and thereafter became the wicked one, Satan, the head of that image picturing the Devil’s organization, is described as “gold”. “Silver” of the image was used to picture the princes of Satan’s organization that operate next to him, such as Gog, his field marshal. (Dan. 10:13,20; Ezek. 38:2,3) “Copper” of the image symbolizes the wicked angels or demons that operate by Satan’s direction, and which, as the prophecy states, “bear rule over all the earth.” Such are the demons now that have and exercise ruling power over the nations of the earth. Satan being the chief of demons, it is Satan, the princes and wicked angels that are meant by the term “demon rule or rulers”. It is against such demon powers that, as is stated in the Scriptures, the faithful supporters of The Theocracy war at the present time. (Eph. 6:12) Up to this point in the prophetic image that which is represented by the “gold”, “silver,” and “copper”, is
invisible to human eyes; but that wicked organization has a visible part on earth that operates amongst men. In the great image that visible part is described in these words: “His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.” (Dan. 2: 33) The legs and feet are always under, support and bear up and act under the direction of the head and other members of the body above the legs. The “head” pictures the real ruling power, while the “legs” picture the visible elements of the organization of Satan on earth, which operate and rule all the nations of the earth “at the time of the end”. They are the world powers embracing all those of the two kings, “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”. (Dan. 11: 40) There are three elements that operate together in carrying out the visible rule of the earth, to wit: political, commercial and religious; and as subsidiary to these and a part of them all is the military and strong-arm squad. The political or commercial elements are pictured by the iron legs and the iron that is in the feet. That which is pictured by the iron operates the military, which does the breaking. The feet of the image appear as “part of iron and part of clay”. Clay has the appearance of stone, and therefore in the picture it is a camouflage or fraudulent thing, because it claims to be stone, likened unto the Lord, but is not. (Isa. 28:16; 8:14) It is the means by which the people are deceived. The “clay” of the image pictures religion; which means is employed under the direction of the invisible demons, and deceives and entraps the people. The feet include the ten toes, which are a part of the feet, and which are pictured as iron smeared over with clay, that is, the religious element. “Ten” is a symbol of earthly completeness; and hence the ten toes picture or represent the complete list of all the nations of the earth which at “the time of the end” go totalitarian. Iron and clay have no real cleaving together; and therefore well symbolize that in due time there shall be a complete breaking up and separation of the political, commercial and religious elements. The prophecy makes it clear that the un-
371
372
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
derstanding of what this image represents “shall be in the latter days”. (Dan. 2: 28) That is the present time. All the prophecy of Daniel, therefore, now begins to clarify in the minds of those who love and serve Jehovah.
’ The text first above cited from Daniel 2:44 says: “And in the days of these kings.” What kings! The answer is, the combined ruling powers of the earth, all the kings of the earth, including both “the north" and “the south”, described in the eleventh chapter of the prophecy. At the time when these kings are ruling they announce their purpose to rule the earth, that is, to exercise world domination contrary to Jehovah God. They are therefore in complete opposition to The Theocracy. “In the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom.” What is that kingdom which the God of heaven sets up! It is The Theocratic Government, which is the government of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus, His King. Christ Jesus is now enthroned; hence The Theocracy has come; and all the kings of earth are arrayed against The Theocracy, and this will become more pronounced in the very near future. Will The Theocracy, Jehovah’s kingdom, be able to withstand the opposition of Satan’s organization! Concerning The Theocracy, his kingdom, Jehovah says: ‘Which shall never be destroyed.” It is the “everlasting kingdom”. (Dan. 7:27) It is invincible and shall stand forever.
4	Satan, the arch demon, has always operated his organization by wicked angels and demonized men, and always contrary to the will of God. Concerning The Theocracy Jehovah says: “And the kingdom shall not be left to other people.” No one in Satan’s crowd will have anything to do with that kingdom. The Theocracy shall be forever ruled from heaven by Christ Jesus; and those on earth who are representatives of that government will execute the judgments heretofore written. (Isa. 32:1) There will be no politics, commerce or religion in The Theocracy. How will The Theocracy affect the kingdoms of Satan’s organization! Of The Theocracy Jehovah says in this prophecy: “It shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms,” that is, the ruling powers of Satan. That means the end of demon rule for ever, because Jehovah says of The Theocracy: “And it shall stand for ever.” Return now to the consideration of the prophecy of Daniel as related to “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, as set forth in the eleventh chapter of that prophecy.
5	As heretofore stated, after verse forty of that prophecy “the king of the south” disappears from the prophetic picture. Nowhere in the prophecy does it appear that “the king of the north”, that is, the “Axis powers”, shall be victorious in the present war between the two “kings”, nor does the prophecy indicate that “the king of the south” will suffer defeat
in battle at the hands of “the king of the north”. “The king of the south" claims to be fighting for the survival of democracies. “The king of the south” suffers complete defeat so far as its announced purpose is concerned, and that defeat is not in battle with “the king of the north” by force of arms, but in this: All nations forming “the king of the south” become arbitrary and totalitarian; and the facts show that that is now practically accomplished. All these nations becoming totalitarian, the liberties of the people completely disappear, and the people are regimented and controlled in all matters. The nations composing “the king of the south” manifestly have reasoned that they must adopt the totalitarian system in order to successfully fight against the “Axis powers”. All admit that regardless of the result of the present war the nations will never return to the former method of rule. Thus it will be seen that Satan accomplishes his purpose to drive all nations into the dictatorial camp. As the visible world power began with Nimrod, the dictator of Babylon, which name stands for Satan’s “woman” or organization (Rev. 17:1-3), so in these last days the visible world powers have all become dictatorial under Satan’s organization, and hence all are properly called “Babylon the great” ; that is, nations composing the entire earthly organization. “And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.” (Rev. 18: 2, 3) Thus the Lord identifies those who are of “Babylon”.
“PEACE”
’ Will the present world conflict between the “Axis powers” and the so-called “democracies”, the opposers, end in a decisive victory for either side! The prophecy indicates the contrary result; and since we have no way of determining the future save by the prophecy of God, as set forth in the Bible, we know that that way is correct. All the prophecies and the present-day facts indicate that the contending nations will before long enter into some sort of peace treaty. It is quite manifest that the religious element of these belligerent nations now plays a double role, with the expectation of being the leader or chief element sitting at the peace conference or peace table. On September 4, 1941, while this was being written, the New York J ournal-American and other papers published the following pertinent statements, to wit: “Pope ready to sit at peace parley.” “Pope will seek a peace to last through the ages.” Tt is the constant
December 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER
373
hope and hourly prayer of Pope Pius XII, the leader of the Roman Catholic Christendom. . . . He is considering offering the Vatican as the site of the peace conference. If there are objections or difficulties some other edifice might be offered. It is not beyond the realm of possibility that one of the Catholic cathedrals of even a United States city might be honored.’ Catholic priests at public functions recently have advocated that the pope should be the chief delegate at the peace conference. The president of the United States has recently sent again his personal ambassador to the Vatican. The purpose is obvious. As both sides, “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, are working to the same end, world domination, both will see the necessity quite soon of making some arrangement, and it may be expected that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy will take a leading part in that peace conference.
7	From other scriptures it is certain that in the near future the religious element will take the lead in announcing to the world, to wit, “Peace and safety!” When the anticipated peace conference assembles, the Hierarchy of the Roman Catholic system will be prominent there and, being looked upon as the spiritual advisers of the nations, and being the demons’ chief instrument to hoodwink the people, will perform an important part in the conference. When the peace treaty is signed, the pope will receive the greatest amount of credit for having brought it about. That peace treaty is almost certain to proclaim what is now called “The New Order in Europe”, “The New League of Nations,” for which the pope has been praying. That will be the full consummation of ‘the abomination that maketh desolate standing where it ought not to stand’, claiming the right and authority of world dominion qt world domination. (Mark 13:14) Then all the nations of earth will be under the “beast”, that is, that totalitarian monstrosity that arbitrarily rules, and all the people will be required to hail the “beast”. Upon the back of the “beast”, symbolically speaking, the religious element, the leader, will ride. (Rev. 17: 3-7) Then the proclamation of world peace by that combined ruling power, particularly the religious element, will be made. That peace will be of very brief duration, as the Scriptures indicate: “For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.” (1 Thess. 5:3) Relating to this same time, the prophecy of Daniel says:
8	“But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him; therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.”—Dan. 11:44.
8	The “tidings”, or “reports”, which the prophecy says come from the east and the north, not only
trouble the “Axis powers”, but greatly disturb all that form a part of the totalitarian rule of the earth and of all the people who put their faith in that totalitarian ruling power of the earth. It therefore appears that this part of the prophecy has not yet had complete fulfillment, but that it is in course of fulfillment, and this, in the light of other prophecy, seems to clearly indicate what will be the result. First let “the east” and “the north”, from whence come the disturbing reports, be identified.
10	“The north,” named in this part of the prophecy, refers to the position of Almighty God, Jehovah, and this is definitely made to appear from the Scriptures. Zion, Jehovah’s capital organization, is the place of his habitation and which is described in the Scriptures as “on the sides of the north”. “For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.” (Ps. 132:13,14) “Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole [new] earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King.”—Ps. 48: 2.
11	The Beloved Son of Jehovah, Christ Jesus, is the King of The Theocratic Government, which Jehovah God has created, raised up, and put in operation to rule the world in righteousness. It is from the throne of Jehovah that The Theocratic Government has come forth to carry out his purpose. Therefore Jehovah says, as is set down in the prophecy: “I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name; and he shall come upon princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.” (Isa. 41: 25) This scripture also identifies Christ Jesus as the One referred to by the word “east”, or “the sunrising”.
12	Jehovah God is the great Judge, the Supreme Judge, and He has appointed Christ Jesus to judge the world and has given him power to execute all judgment. Note, therefore, that Jehovah says of himself and of Christ Jesus: “Let us come near together to judgment. Who raised up the righteous man [Christ Jesus, the Sun of righteousness, before whom all the nations are assembled] from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him [see Psalm 2:6-9], and made him rule over kings! He [Christ Jesus, the King and Judge upon his throne] gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow. He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not gone with his feet. Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning! I the Lord, the first, and with the last; I am he.”—Isa. 41:1-4.
18	Throughout the prophetic Scriptures the term “beast” is used to denote government. Jehovah gave his word that he would raise up a righteous government that would destroy all unrighteousness, that is
374
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to say, Satan’s entire organization and power. That righteous government has for its King Christ Jesus, and the Scriptures describe Christ Jesus as coming from the east or sunrising. Jehovah’s purpose cannot be revoked or set aside; hence we know that Jehovah, having announced his purpose, is certain to perform it; and concerning this he says: “Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me. Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure; calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that execute th my counsel from a far country; yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.”—Isa. 46: 9-11.
14	It is Jehovah, the Almighty God, who promotes the righteous and brings to destruction the wicked. Note that in Psalm 75 is written this proof: “For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south: but God [in Zion; his throne is on the side of the north] is the judge; he putteth down one, and setteth up another.”—Ps. 75:6,7.
15	Lucifer was a bright and shining one in Jehovah’s organization at one time, before he rebelled. He recognized “the north” as the place of highest authority, therefore the seat of Jehovah God. With wicked covetousness in his heart Lueifer, thereafter known as Satan, said: “For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High.”—Isa. 14:12-14.
16	When Satan put forth his totalitarian rule with Nimrod in the saddle that organization took the name "the king of the north”, and a like organization has borne the name since, manifestly because always in opposition to The Theocracy. The organization designated “the king of the south” served to hold in line the peoples who desired freedom of selfgovernment. Now in these last days “the king of the south” has fallen completely under demon rule and all nations have become totalitarian, all of the contending factions fighting for world domination, and all against Jehovah and his King. The tidings or reports that “trouble him”, as stated in Daniel 11: 44, could not possibly come from “the king of the south” or any other earthly organization. Both the “kings” are totalitarian, and are from this point on pictured as one.
” From whence do the troublesome “reports” come! Manifestly those reports or tidings come from Jehovah and Christ Jesus. Whatever those reports are, they greatly disturb the totalitarian earthly or
ganization. Christ Jesus was prefigured by Cyrus of Persia, whereas Jehovah, the Almighty God, was prefigured by Darius the Mede, of Medo-Persia. It is the Almighty God, Jehovah, and Christ Jesus as King that sent forth the message which troubles the enemy. Those tidings constitute a warning from Jehovah that Armageddon is about to be fought. The Devil knows this, and his cohorts are made to know it.
WARNINGS
18	It was in 1927 that the Lord by his sixth angel poured out his “vial” upon the great river Euphrates, “that the way of the kings of the east [kings who are from the Sun-rising (Diaglott)] might be prepared.” (Rev. 16:12; also see Light, Book One, page 160; Book Two, page 36) “The kings of the east [or, sunrising]” here mentioned are Christ Jesus and the glorified, resurrected members of his body, and are the same as that mentioned by Daniel as “out of the east”. (Dan. 11:44) That message poured out, above mentioned, was a warning, and it was poured out upon the peoples, represented by the river Euphrates, and was there referring to Satan’s organization, and particularly the religious element thereof. Satan knew then that his time is short, and prepared for the final showdown; and therefore he and his horde of demons, and demon-controlled representatives on earth, busy themselves to prepare for Armageddon; and concerning this it is written, in Revelation 16:13,14,16: “And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon."
’’Since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple his faithful servants have been sent forth by him to offer “an offering in righteousness”, and by this they have been used to sound out the message of warning of the approaching wrath of God, that is, the battle of Armageddon. A great educational campaign by Jehovah’s witnesses, under the direction of the Lord, has been carried on to serve such warning to the people and to the rulers; but how much heed has been given to such warnings it is not possible for anyone to now tell. Such warnings have been repeatedly sounded during the past ten years. At Columbus, Ohio, convention in 1937 the slogan of Jehovah’s servants at that time was taken from Obadiah 1, and was heralded throughout the land, to wit: “Thus saith the Lord God concerning Edom [religionists, whom ‘the king of the north’ does not touch], We have heard a rumour from the Lord, and
December 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
375
an ambassador is sent among the heathen [nations], Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.” These warnings have been very shocking to the religious susceptibilities of the great religious institutions, but the Roman Catholic religious system, led by the Hierarchy, continue to say: “When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come [nigh] unto us” (Isa. 28:15); thus indicating that even though the warning has disturbed them and frightened them they do not believe what the warning contains. A warning specifically directed to the dictator of Germany was sounded by Jehovah’s servants March 25, 1934, and another on October 7, 1934. The dictator may have been disturbed, but he gave no outward evidence of giving heed thereto.
20	From London, in the message “Face the Facts”, delivered September 11, 1938, a warning was specifically given to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and to the dictatorial government, the totalitarian monstrosity, “the king of the north.” At that same time the slogan was proclaimed, “Religion is a snare and a racket.” June 25, 1939, from Madison Square Garden, New York, again the warning was sounded, and particularly to the religious and totalitarian elements. It appears that such warning angered the religionists and allies forming the totalitarian ruling pow’er. The message set out in the books Enemies and Religion contained warnings to the religious, political and commercial combine that now rule the earth contrary to God’s will. Such warnings have been sounded by Jehovah’s witnesses and companions, and, without doubt, under the direction of the Lord, but the totalitarian combine still regards Jehovah’s witnesses as a sect of religionists, which will soon pass out. These witnesses, like a swarm of locusts, worry the would-be rulers and allies; but none of these appear to be the “tidings out of the east and out of the north”, mentioned by Daniel, that trouble the totalitarian rulers and allies.—Dan. 11: 44.
FINAL WARNING
21	It appears that the totalitarian combine are not convinced that the warning sounded by Jehovah’s witnesses emanates from the Lord; but mark this: Jehovah caused his prophet Ezekiel to record in sixty-four different places and times in that prophecy this statement concerning the totalitarian combine : “And ye shall know that I am the Lord that smiteth.” (Ezek. 7: 9) (See Vindication, Book Three, under index referring to “They shall know the Lord”.) “The end [that is, the final end] shall be at the time appointed”; and it appears from the prophecy that just preceding the final end the Lord sends forth tidings, or reports, that constitute such a forcible warning that the crowd that has set up the “abomination of desolation” will be compelled to give
heed to it, and that warning not only will trouble them but will frighten them beyond description. Says the Lord: “An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the land. Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judye thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity; but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.”—Ezek. 7:1-4.
12	Just how and when the final warning will be given by the Lord no man can now tell, but it seems reasonable that the Lord will use his faithful covenant people that are on the earth to have some part in sounding that final warning. That warning will be so absolutely emphatic that all the nations of the earth will know it. It seems that such warning must be sounded shortly after the “Peace and safety” proclamation is made known by the ‘desolating abomination’ crowd. The words here appear appropriate to him, the totalitarian “beast”: “Let not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace.” (1 Ki. 2:6) The Lord’s warning will trouble the head of every one who has to do with the ‘desolating abomination’. —Ps. 110:6.
2S For some time God’s “strange work” has been in progress, and it appears that the same is now about done and, when it is done, Jehovah’s “strange act” takes place. The “strange work” has been a warning to all, and particularly to those who insist on exercising world domination in defiance of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. Those repeated warnings the totalitarian rulers and all who are bent upon world domination have scorned. To such Jehovah says: ‘Wait until the day when I rise up to the prey’; that is, until the hour when the Lord begins the execution of his “strange act”. It seems that just then, after the Lord does rise up, he will give such an emphatic warning that the combined rulers that form the ‘desolating abomination’ will be compelled to hear and to give heed and it will cause them to tremble in their boots. And what will be the final effect of that emphatic warning from the Lord? and what will the totalitarian rulers do?
24 “He [totalitarian rulers] shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many,” says the prophecy of Daniel. (11: 44) By the time that “Peace and safety” proclamation is announced the totalitarian, demonized rulers will conclude that everything on the earth is well in hand, and that Jehovah’s witnesses and companions are safely tucked away. But when the emphatic message is heard by them from ‘the north and the east’, that is, from Jehovah and Christ Jesus, the demonized ruling elements will conclude that they must com
376
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
pletely rid the earth of Jehovah’s witnesses. All others of the earth are under control; hence it is Jehovah’s servants that are marked for utter destruction according to the prophecy.
55 The question at issue is: The Theocracy against the 'desolating abomination’, Who shall rule! All nations are now against The Theocracy. Only the remnant and their companions advocate The Theocracy and proclaim it to the people. Following the totalitarian announcement of “Peace and safety”, and when the remnant and ever-increasing number of the “other sheep” of the Lord vociferously hail The Theocracy and its King, that may be the signal for the demonized rulers to go forth with great heat, maliciously determined to wipe out all advocates of the Theocratic Government. Shall that heated fury of the combined demonized rulers frighten Jehovah’s covenant people and cause them to yield! or will they hold fast their integrity! Jehovah speaks to his covenant people in this connection: “I, even I, am he that comforteth you; who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass; and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth!” —Isa. 51:12,13.
26 The faithful will stand still and see the power of Almighty God by Christ Jesus exercised in their behalf and for their salvation. The true servants of The Theocracy will hold fast their integrity. Such is the crucial testing time and, like the faithful men of old, the faithful of the present time will stand firm and unmovable and blameless before the Lord.
2	T To his faithful servants Jehovah speaks: “Out of the north an evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land. And I will utter my judgments against them, touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.” (Jer. 1:14,16) “And I looked, and behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire.”—Ezek. 1:4.
28	It is Christ Jesus, the glorious King of The Theocracy, that executes Jehovah’s judgment upon the enemy. Thus the disturbing “tidings” and the destruction upon demonized rulers come from the north and from the east. (Ezek. 43: 2, 3) The last desperate effort put forth by the demonized rulers, the combined totalitarian dictators, to destroy The Theocracy and to rule the earth contrary to God’s purpose will be put forth. Will that effort of the totalitarians succeed!
29	“And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet
he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.” —Dan. 11: 45.
*° The demonized rulers, determined to “stay put” and to control the earth, “plant” their tents between “the seas” (that is, the people in general) and those who are wholly devoted to The Theocracy, and which latter are described in the prophecy as “the glorious holy mountain”. {Young’s) It is that glorious holy mountain, or kingdom, which shall be exalted above all things of the earth. (Isa. 2:2,3) That glorious mountain is The Theocracy, including the remnant on the earth at the time of Armageddon. Having been alienated from God by reason of the hypocrisy and influence of religionists, the people in general which bear up and support the totalitarian, ruling power are designated as “the seas”. It appears that in the last desperate stand the religionists, or demonized rulers, will attempt to prevent any and all in the “seas” from coming forth and fleeing to the “glorious holy mountain”, which is The Theocratic Government. It may be that at this point the Lord will open the eyes of multitudes, who will escape and find refuge under The Theocracy. The enemy, the totalitarians, will fight desperately and furiously, but ‘he shall find no help’.
81	That battle of the great day of God Almighty will bring the demons’ rule to its final end. That battle is not to be fought between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, because at that time all nations will be absorbed into the demoncontrolled totalitarian rule. The great and final fight is the battle of Armageddon, in which Christ Jesus, the glorious King, makes war upon all the forces of Satan, both visible and invisible. The totalitarians’ structure is what is now called “the new World Order”, “the new League of Nations”; and those rulers expect it to endure forever. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims that it is founded on the rock and beyond the reach of the gates of hell. (Matt. 16:18) But let those who have faith in God be assured that all the plantings of the demon-controlled world, including religion, politics and commerce, have been done contrary to Jehovah’s will, and without his approval, and concerning which Jesus says: “Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.” (Matt. 15:13) That totalitarian, demon rule is the house of the wicked one, and at the battle of Armageddon shall suffer complete destruction, while The Theocracy shall endure forever: “The house of the wicked shall be overthrown; but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish.” (Prov. 14:11) Desperately shall the wicked fight for existence.
82	“Yet he [demonized ruling powers of the earth] shall come to his end, and none shall help him.” All the commercial powers of the earth, including the wealth of the Vatican, will be of no help against the
December 15, 1941
THE WATCHTOWER.
377
forces of The King of The Theocracy: “For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose; therefore have I cried concerning this, Their strength is to sit still.” (Isa. 30:7) “Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they all shall fail together.” (Isa. 31:3) “And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and when all her helpers shall be destroyed.”—Ezek. 30: 8.
33	The Devil, the chief of demons, and all of his demon forces shall be of no help in that great fight. It is the time when Jehovah shows his supreme power, as he promised (Ex. 9:16); and that power nothing can resist. Thus the end for ever of Nazi-Fascist-Hierarchy rule will come, and that will mark the end for ever of demon rule.
34	It is in the days of these dictatorial powers that oppress the people and persecute all who serve The Theocracy, all of these kings of the earth described by Daniel’s prophecy, that the God of heaven will bring into action his kingdom, which he has builded up, that blessed kingdom, The Theocracy. All who serve under that kingdom must be righteous; therefore none of the worldly crowd now known shall have any part in it. The Theocracy is the everlasting kingdom. Christ Jesus the King is pictured in Daniel’s prophecy (chapter two) as a “stone . . . cut out” of Jehovah’s universal organization, which destroys all demon rule and every vestige thereof. That glorious Theocracy shall “break in pieces and consume all these [demonized] kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever”.—Dan. 2:44,45.
OTHER PICTURES
35	Further confirming the conclusion that neither “the king of the north” nor “the king of the south” will win a decisive victory in the conflict now raging between them for world domination, take note of the prophetic picture set forth at Revelation 19:19, to wit: “And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army.”
33	This pictures all the forces of demon rule in battle array against the King of The Theocracy. The “beast” there mentioned symbolizes the demonized rule of the earth, represented particularly in the “Axis powers”, and which will include all the kings and nations of the earth finally. The “false prophet” there mentioned particularly pictures the nations that claim to be fighting for democracy in proclaiming the rights of the people, but which in fact contend for world domination for selfish reasons. Therefore it appears that at the battle of Armageddon both
“the king of the north” and “the king of the south” will be living, going concerns, and active and, while thus living, will be destroyed by The King of The Theocracy, as stated, to wit: “And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.” (Rev. 19:20) This is another picture marking the end of demonized rule.
3T All prophecies of God set down in the Scriptures are in exact harmony and entirely consistent. Each one makes known the development of some part of Jehovah’s purpose. The meaning of these prophecies the Lord reveals to his faithful people in his own due time and for their aid and comfort. Another prophecy disclosing the end of demon rule is that set down at 2 Chronicles 20th chapter. That prophecy is considered in detail in The Watchtoicer of July 1 and 15, 1938. Briefly attention is here directed to it.
33 Jehoshaphat, whose name means “Jehovah Vindicated”, was the king of Israel, the typical covenant people of .Jehovah. As king he prefigured Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy, who is the vindicator of Jehovah’s name. The nations Ammon, Moab and Mount Seir, in the order named, pictured the political, commercial and religious elements that form the visible governing powers of the dictatorial or totalitarian state. Those three nations conspired together to bring about the destruction of Jehovah's typical people, and with that malicious purpose they marched into the land of Palestine to make their destructive attack. The Israelites were entirely unable to repel that attack alone, even as the representatives of The Theocracy now on earth could not possibly repel the attack of the totalitarian powers. God, through his prophet, sent a message to the Israelites, to wit: ‘Be not afraid by reason of this great multitude; the battle is not yours, but God's.’ A like situation obtains at Armageddon. The Israelites marched in force to meet the enemy, singing as they went the praises of Jehovah. Then the Lord set an ambushment against the enemy, and they were smitten. Ammon and Moab destroyed first those of Mount Seir, and then destroyed each other. The Israelites struck not a blow, but they saw the work of the Lord, and returned with songs of praise to his name.
” The antitypical monstrosity pictured by Ammon, Moab and Mount Seir is the totalitarian combine now insisting upon world domination. As to the time of the complete fulfillment of this part of the prophecy, it appears that all the nations, which will have gone totalitarian, will at the time be at peace, apparently. They will all be engaged in the same thing. The cry by them, “Peace and safety!” will be made. As Daniel
378
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
says, they then hear the tidings from God and Christ, or “the north” and “the east”, that give them great trouble, and their combined forces march out to destroy all that stand for The Theocracy. Jehovah gives the command, and Christ Jesus, the King, with his host of heaven, moves into action. The battle of the great day of God Almighty is on! The result is the destruction of demonized rule, particularly of icligion first, after which follows the destruction of all other elements that oppose and fight against The Theocracy.
corroboration
40 The Lord Jesus Christ uttered the great prophecy of Revelation. Attention is here directed to the seventeenth chapter, which discloses the end of religion, and the chapter that follows shows the complete destruction of all who oppose The Theocracy. Students of divine prophecy know that Revelation is written in symbols. Satan’s organization, in the seventeenth chapter, is pictured by a woman and designated in that prophecy “Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth”. She gives birth to the totalitarian monster as well as to all other wicked organizations. “Beast,” in the prophecy, symbolically stands for visible ruling powers that attempt to gain world domination and which at times rule. (Rev. 17:8) That “beast” of verse eight appeared in the form of the League of Nations, and which has now been succeeded by or shortly will be completely succeeded by all the nations of earth gone totalitarian. The woman, described in the prophecy as riding on the back of the beast, stands for the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the chief religious system or abomination that dominates the earth, and all other religions that join with her. She is described in the prophecy as the “whore” because of her hypocritical claim to represent the Lord God and Christ and at the same time mixing up with and forming a part of Satan’s organization. (Rev. 17:1,2) (See James 4:4.) “Ten” is a number symbolic of earthly completeness; and therefore the “ten horns” or “kings” mentioned in the prophecy stand for all the nations of the earth, which nations at the time of the end become totalitarian. All of these, therefore, give their power and strength to the “beast”, that is to say, to the totalitarian system of rule, the beastly, demon dominating power. 'All these have one mind’ (Rev. 17:13); that is to say, all have one purpose and are using their means to fight against The Theocracy and to destroy all who advocate The Theocratic Government. “The Lamb” is Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy, and all who are with him support The Theocracy: “These [all the totalitarian nations] shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them; for he is Lord of
lords, and King of kings; and they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.”—Rev. 17:14.
41 This prophecy of Revelation then identifies “the waters . . . where the whore sitteth” as the peoples of the earth, which Daniel describes as “the sea” and which “the whore” attempts to keep away from The Theocracy. That same Devil system pictured by the woman “reigneth over the kings of the earth”. (Rev. 17:15,18) The prophecy describes what follows, and which description is in exact harmony with 2 Chronicles 20th chapter. The “ten horns” (the political and commercial elements of the totalitarian rule) seeing that the religious element of that combine is a fraud and a snare and that they have been duped, God puts it in their hearts to fulfill his will. (Rev. 17:16,17) They turn against the religious element and, like a great scourge, destroy her, even as Jehovah, by his prophet, elsewhere describes, to wit: “And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.” (Isa. 28: 18) Thus Jehovah God makes known to his faithful servants his purpose to destroy every vestige of Satanic rule.
41 Those who love the great Theocrat and his King now see why these prophecies were written long ago and why the meaning thereof is now revealed. The great Jehovah from the beginning knew the trying and testing times that would come to his covenant people at the end, and therefore he caused to be written all these prophecies, and concerning which his faithful apostle says: “For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.”—Rom. 15: 4.
48 Jehovah’s servants are now facing a crucial test. They must hold fast their integrity, if they are to receive protection and life and for ever enjoy the blessings of The Theocratic Government. The Lord caused his faithful apostle long ago to write a message to those servants of God who should be on the earth at the time of the end. God’s people are there informed that they must now be at complete unity and all of one mind, that is, all completely for The Theocracy. Hence this message to them: “So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be BLAMELESS IN THE DAY OF OUR LORD Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.” —1 Cor. 1: 7-10.
December 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
379
“ STAND FAST FOR THE THEOCRACY! It will be folly to now turn to the beggarly totalitarian ruling elements. Give ear always to what the Lord says: “I will hear what God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints;
but let them not turn again to folly.” (Ps. 85: 8) “The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.”—Ps. 29:11.
END
TRIUMPH FOR THEOCRACY
TIE great Theocrat created man in his own image and put him on the earth. He put man in the garden of Eden to dress and keep it. (Note Genesis 1:28 and 2:15.) God thereby made the perfect man a part of his great universal organization and commanded that man should remain always in harmony with his Creator and his fixed laws. That there are various divisions of God’s universal organization is certain from the Scriptures.
The beginning of God’s creation was his beloved Son, called “The Logos” or “The Word”, and thereafter all things created were created by The Logos as the deputy of Jehovah God. (Rev. 3:14; Col. 1:15; John 1: 1-3) “By him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the first born from the dead; that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. For it pleased the Father [Jehovah] that in him [Christ Jesus] should all fulness dwell.”—Col. 1:16-19.
This establishes beyond a question of doubt that in God’s organization there are thrones, dominions, principalities, angels and servants. One of the titles given to the mighty chief deputy of Jehovah is “The bright and morning star” (Rev. 22:16), which title “star” also means prince. (Num. 24:17) There was another “star” in God’s universal organization. At Job 38:7 it is recorded that when God laid the foundation of the earth as a home for man “the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy”. That other “star”, or prince, was the spirit creature Lucifer.
Lucifer was appointed to a high office in God's organization. To him it is said, at Ezekiel 28:14: “Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so; thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.” “Anointed” means that he was designated to fill a certain office. The word “covereth” applies to one who provides protection, defense or supervision as an overseer. Lucifer was in Eden, the garden of God, where Adam was put, and, Lucifer being made an officer in Jehovah’s organization, it seems clear that man was under the special supervision of Lucifer and the perfect man was therefore a part of Lucifer’s subordinate organization and hence in the great organization of Jehovah. Since Ezekiel’s prophecy, chapter one, shows that God’s organization is like a wheel within a wheel, then it may well be said that Lucifer’s part of the organization was one of the wheels in the greater wheel. This, of course, applies when he was in harmony with Jehovah. Lucifer was made glorious and beautiful to look upon when he appeared in Eden, as shown at Ezekiel 28:13: “Thou hast been in
Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created.” He was therefore a light-bearer and clothed with power and authority.
God created the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air and brought them before Adam and caused him to give each one a name, and they were subject to Adam. (See Genesis 1:28; 2:19,20.) Since Lucifer was invisible overlord of Adam, it follows that all these beasts of the field and fowls of the air were under his superior supervision.
Lucifer was undoubtedly the most beautiful in appearance of all creatures in his immediate organization which God had provided for Lucifer. He had much, but he coveted more, and by reason thereof he became the great enemy of God. (Jer. 51:13) Being made perfect and beautiful and being given a commission of great authority he was dutybound to be wholly loyal to God. Lucifer became lawless, and from that time he was God’s enemy : “Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.” (Ezek. 28: 15) “Iniquity” means lawlessness or that which is contrary to law. From that day until now Lucifer has been interfering with God’s organization, and, at Matthew 13:25-30, 39, Jesus is authority for the statement that that one is the enemy.
When Lucifer rebelled against God and started on his course of lawlessness or wickedness God changed Lucifer’s name, or gave him different names, and one of these names is Satan, which means opposer or adversary. This signifies he is the enemy of God and that he resists everything that God does.
Concerning Lucifer it is written: “0 Lucifer, son of the morning, . . thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High.” (Isa 14.12-14) That he carried out his covetous desire expressed in these words is true beyond any question of doubt. Having an organization, he determined to turn the entire thing against God, or in opposition to God, and to set up a throne in the mount (or organization) of the congregation (or assembly) of God’s creation in the sides of the north (in the position occupied by Jehovah). Therefore he said: “I will be like the Most High.” God had given Lucifer an organization which this one, as Satan, now proceeds to use and to make as nearly like Jehovah’s organization as possible and yet use it for his own selfish and wicked purposes in opposing Jehovah. Jehovah God permitted him to take his own wicked course and bides His own good time when, as He states, ‘Lucifer shall be
380
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.’—Isa. 14:12,15.
Satan called his visible organization on earth Bab-il, meaning “the gate to god”. Doubtless his purpose was to have it understood that through his organization is the way to come to him to worship, even as the way to God is through His organization. Without a question of doubt Satan is the “god of this world”. (2 Cor. 4:3,4) Bab-il, or Babylon, is the name of Satan’s “woman”, who symbolizes his organization. Jehovah named the wicked organization “Ba-bel”, which means confusion.—Gen. 11: 9.
The beginning of the earthly part of Satan’s organization was under “the mighty hunter”, Nimrod, and to the city organized under him was given the name Babylon, which is the name of Satan’s “woman” (his organization). Although the first kingdom to be organized, Babylon was the third in order as a world power. As world powers Egypt and Assyria preceded Babylon. Daniel the prophet was a Jewish captive in Babylon in the days of Nebuchadnezzar the king. Being king of Babylon at the time of his dream concerning the terrible metallic image and the stone which destroyed it, Nebuchadnezzar pictured Satan, the real and invisible head of the organization.
The description of that image, in Daniel’s prophecy chapter two, mentions three precious metals, to wit, gold, silver, and copper (called “brass” by a mistranslation). It mentions one base metal, iron. The meaning of these metals is significant, otherwise the Lord would not have them in his Word in connection with this image. At Genesis 2:11,12, gold is first mentioned in the Bible as being in the land of Havilah, which land was watered by one of the heads of the rivers that flowed out of Eden. In the sacred tabernacle and in the temple of the Jews the Most Holy was overlaid with fine gold, and the cherubs in the Most Holy were made of gold. (See Exodus 25:17-19; 1 Kings 6:22-28.) The tabernacle and the temple pictured God’s organization. Gold is symbolic of things divine. The saints of Zion are “comparable to fine gold”.—Lam. 4: 2.
Silver is a precious metal and was used in connection with the tabernacle and temple service. (Ex. 26:19) The platters, bowls and other utensils used in that service were made of silver. (Num. 7:13; 1 Chron. 28:17) Silver is next in order in value as compared with gold, but, of course, of less value than gold. It is mentioned as second in the terrible image of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream.
Copper is another precious metal, but of less value than silver. The word “brass”, as appearing in the Authorized Version Bible, is a mistranslation, and should be “copper”; brass, as is well known, is a combination of metals. Copper also was used in connection with the tabernacle and temple. (Ex. 38: 3) Gold, silver and copper are classed as “noble” metals and have their relative value as in the order named. The description of Lucifer when he was in Eden, as given at Ezekiel 28:13, shows he was covered with gold and precious stones which God gave to him when he was created or when installed in office.
In Daniel 2: 31, 32 the statement is made that the image seen in the dream was of excellent brightness, great and terrible, and that the head was of fine gold, the breast and arms of silver, and the belly and thighs of copper (mistranslated “brass”). The image was great and terrible because it was in opposition to the great Theocrat Jehovah
and was the picture of complete wickedness. The image pictured Satan’s organization, of which the wicked one is the head. Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had the dream, and it was appropriate to use him and his dream to make this picture to be recorded in the Bible and which discloses Satan’s organization and fully identifies it in God's due time. Gold is the only appropriate metal that could represent the head of that organization at the time it was created.
In giving God’s interpretation of the dream, Daniel said, addressing Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon. “Thou, 0 king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory. And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the heaven, hath he given into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.” (Dan. 2: 37, 38) This scripture could not specifically apply to Nebuchadnezzar himself, except in a representative capacity. It is not true that the God of heaven had given Nebuchadnezzar the universal kingdom, because the Babylonish empire was Satan’s organization, organized and operated in opposition to God. God made Lucifer the golden head of the organization which was given him before his deflection. Lucifer had now turned his organization to wickedness. Lucifer’s organization, being of divine origin, is properly symbolized by gold as the head of that organization. The fact that it was afterwards turned to wickedness would not at all change the original symbol. In Daniel’s day Nebuchadnezzar was holding the earthly position of king or ruler as the visible representative of Satan, the real head. Therefore the description of the head of the image fits Satan exactly as the “head of gold”. Because the beasts of the field and the birds of the air were subject to Adam and he was under Lucifer, the description in Daniel 2:38 exactly fits Lucifer as the ruler of the world, the “head of gold”. Proof conclusive that Nebuchadnezzar was Satan’s representative is the fact that immediately thereafter Nebuchadnezzar set up a golden image, contrary to God’s law, and commanded God’s chosen people to worship that image. (Read Daniel 3:1 and Exodus 20: 3,4.) With Jerusalem’s destruction by Nebuchadnezzar in 606 B.C. Jehovah God had withdrawn his favor from the Israelites because that people had yielded to the Devil and demonism, and now the Devil had become the universal ruler over earth.
Nebuchadnezzar was the visible representative of Satan, and therefore in the representative capacity it was said to Nebuchadnezzar: ‘Thou art a king of kings.’ The Israelites had been unfaithful to their covenant with God and had fallen away from God to Satan and now came under Satan’s organization. God declared through the prophet Ezekiel (21: 24-27) that this condition should continue until the coming of him “whose right it is” to rule. Therefore the rule of Nebuchadnezzar was not by divine right; he was not the representative of Jehovah. The statement by the apostle Paul, “Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God,” has been misapplied time and again. It has no reference whatsoever to any part of Satan’s organization, and could not have. Paul’s statement must apply and does apply exclusively to God’s organization.
December 15,1941
THE WATCHTOWER
381
The Gentile (non-Jewish) powers of this earth were never “ordained of God”. Satan has been their god in defiance of Jehovah; and this fact is fully supported by the words of Jesus and the apostles.—John 12: 31; 14: 30 ; 2 Cor. 4:3,4.
Continuing, Daniel says (vs. 39): “And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass [copper], which shall bear rule over all the earth.” The word “after” does not have reference to time, but rather to inferiority, or station below Satan in his organization. The <fkingdom” has reference to rulership. In a kingdom a prince is a ruler under a superior power. It is certain that Satan would constitute his organization as nearly as possible like that of Jehovah; that is, Satan would take and did take the superior or supreme position, and in his organization and under him would be princes or rulers.
Daniel 10:13, 20 tells of the invisible rulers of Satan under the titles of “the prince of Persia” and “the prince of Grecia)’. These “princes” were so powerful that Michael had to interfere in behalf of the angel that was sent to Daniel with a message. These invisible princes or rulers in Satan’s organization are shown as a part of the terrible “image”. As silver and copper are inferior or next in order to gold, therefore the symbolic image shows that these two metals, instead of representing world powers on earth, represent orders lower than Lucifer in the great organization. Until the end of the “times of the Gentiles”, in A.D. 1914, Satan was seated “in the sides of the north”, where he had fixed a throne with his deputy rulers with him. (Note Revelation 12: 3-7.) These latter deputy rulers, named and symbolized by silver, doubtless did not come directly in contact with the nations of the earth, but that duty of direct contact was assigned and is assigned to other spirits, the company of wicked angels pictured by copper. Evidently these princes of Grecia and Persia were exercising power superior to angels and were therefore successfully resisting an angel of Jehovah that was on the way to Daniel with a message.
Be it now noted that in verse 39, above quoted, it is stated that the “third kingdom of brass [copper]” shall "bear rule over all the earth”. This statement is limited to the third order, or copper class, and therefore proves that the immediate rule of the earth has been under the control of the demons, evil angels, directed by Satan the head, and in this rule he has been assisted by his invisible princes. Jesus referred to Satan as “the prince [or, chief] of this world”, and hence chief of devils. (John 14:30; Matt. 9 : 34 ; 12: 24) In Jesus’ time men were possessed of demons, or devils, which he cast out. (Matt. 9: 32, 33; 12: 22) Jesus’ testimony is conclusive that these devils were not Satan himself, but were a host of wicked angels operating about the earth. Thus the conclusion upon Daniel’s prophecy is supported by the words of Jesus and by the further inspired words, at Ephesians 6:12, to wit: “We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.” Here the apostle Paul shows that Satan’s invisible organization is made up of “principalities” (superior power), “powers” (officers of power in the organization), and “rulers” (wicked
angels). The three “noble metals” of Daniel therefore describe the three invisible parts of Satan’s organization.
As God’s organization is sometimes pictured by a man, so here Satan’s organization is pictured by this image in the form of a man. The legs support and bear up the man The legs are beneath the head of the man and carry the man about. The legs of the image, therefore, represent the inferior and visible parts of Satan’s organization under the head, but which parts support the head and act in obedience to the head. The description of the terrible image shows that the legs were of iron, “and as iron that breaketh [in pieces] all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.” This part of the image pictures the world powers, every one of them, beginning with the first world power, Egypt, to the present day, all of which are of Satan’s organization. From the time of Egypt until now these world powers have oppressed and bruised and broken in pieces the people. There is no exception whatsoever to this rule. The history of the nations of earth is written in human blood unrighteously shed, because the ruling factors have oppressed, bruised and broken to pieces the people by employing military power. To apply this picture of the “legs” as some religionists do to the Roman empire alone would be entirely foreign to the facts. It is by the facts well known to be true that at the proper time the prophecy concerning the “image” must be understood.
The feet and toes of the image are shown to be part of iron and part of clay. The feet and toes are essentially a part of the legs and support this image which is Satan’s organization. Clay has the appearance of stone. It is a camouflage, a means of practicing hypocrisy. The visible part of Satan’s organization has at all times had three component parts, to wit, commercial, political, and religious. The commercial and political have formed and operated the military, which has bruised and broken the people; while the religious element has furnished the hypocritical screen to hide the real, wicked purpose of the ruling powers. It has been the camouflage and the prime instrument of hypocrisy. In every world power and every nation religion has been employed to induce the people to believe that the world powers are exercised by divine right. Coming down to modern times we see that “organized Christianity”, so called, is the religious element of the ruling powers of earth Therein is found the greatest exhibition of hypocrisy that has ever been made. It claims that the nations exist and operate by divine right and that the League of Nations represents God and his kingdom on the earth and is an exact expression thereof.
Daniel 2:41 reads: “And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes part of potters’ clay and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided.” This is further supported by the fact that the religious element is a part of the ruling factors, and Revelation 17:16,17 shows that before the final end of Satan’s rule the religious elements, the very embodiment of hypocrisy, will be exposed and then the wicked alliance between religion and the totalitarian world powers that has ruled and oppressed the people will be disclosed.
Daniel 2: 43 continues: “And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men; but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.” There is no real cleav
382
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
ing together between iron and clay; and this shows that there is really nothing that sincerely binds the commercial and political elements to their religious frauds. The chief objective of the enemy Satan is to turn the people away from Jehovah and keep them under the wicked one’s control. He uses the commercial and political elements that operate and control the military to coerce the people, and uses the religious element to hoodwink and deceive them. The three elements mingle themselves with the seed of men, and with high-sounding words claim to be the saviors of men, and insist that the people must support their organization if they would live. There are ten toes to the feet, and these symbolically represent all the nations of “Christendom” in the conspiracy under their father and head, Satan, to keep the people in subjection and under control and against Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. (See pages 371-372 herein.)
To destroy the terrible “image”, which is Satan’s organization, Jehovah uses “The Stone”. That at once identifies “The Stone” as God’s Executive and Priest acting as the Head of his organization. The Logos or Word of God was the beginning of God’s creation, and has since been His active agent in the creation of all other things that were created. When Lucifer at Eden turned his organization to wickedness Jehovah God expressed his purpose to bring forth a new thing, which would be the “seed” or offspring of his “woman”, his great universal organization. (Read Genesis 3:15.) Satan had a “seed”, and since then others have become his offspring, as shown at John 8:42-44. It is the seed of God’s “woman”, Zion, that will destroy Satan and his seed of his woman, Babylon. Therefore at Daniel 2: 45 it is written: “Forasmuch as thou sawest that The Stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.” If Satan understood the prophecy, then the utterance of it was serving notice upon him how God would accomplish the destruction of his wicked organization. No wonder Satan made every possible effort to destroy Jesus, “The Stone.”
‘The stone was cut out of the mountain without hands ’ Here “the mountain” is God’s universal organization. To “cut out” means to bring forth or produce something new. That would mean to bring out from his universal organization that which is pictured by “The Stone”, and in doing so no hands are employed. It is all done by the will of God. Jehovah having purposed it, it must be done and the accomplishment of his purpose is absolutely certain. “The
Stone,” therefore, is God’s anointed King of his Theocratic Government. He is the world’s rightful Ruler. (Ezek. 21:27) At Revelation 12:5 he appears under the symbol of “the man child”, who is to “rule all nations with a rod of iron”. The Stone is cut out of “the mountain”, God’s universal organization, in this, that it is the “man child”, born by Zion. (Isa. 66:7) He is the one to whom Psalm 2: 9 refers when it says: “Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” Jehovah God carried out his expressed purpose and has prepared for his beloved Son a city, or organization, of which Christ Jesus is made the Head, and which new organization is the capital city, or chief part, of the universal organization of Jehovah. It is symbolized, at Revelation 21, by the name “the holy Jerusalem”, Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ Jesus.
It is God’s new creation, the very pinnacle of his creation. God made Lucifer the golden head of an organization, which organization Lucifer long ago turned against Jehovah and of which he made every part to be the enemy of God. Jehovah would now have it known that he has made his beloved Son the Head of the new organization and clothed him with divine authority for ever. This new organization shall destroy the enemies of God and be forever to his glory.
Daniel 2: 44 announces God’s decree or judgment upon the terrible “image”. At the time of the enforcement of the judgment this terrible image must be compi^etely in existence, head to toes, and must be completely destroyed The Stone strikes the image, first on the feet, and then breaks and grinds to pieces Satan’s entire organization, and a great whirlwind carries it completely away. Satan’s entire organization must be and will be destroyed at the battle of Armageddon. As represented by the terrible image, it is “broken to pieces” and “no place was found” for it (Dan. 2:35) Thus Babylon, or Satan’s organization, of which Nebuchadnezzar was a symbol and the visible ruler at the time of the dream, is shown to completely fall and never shall be again.
Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ Jesus, The Stone, is complete before the striking of the “image” is done ;\fter the destruction of Satan’s organization the beneficial operations of the kingdom or Theocratic Government of the Lord will extend to every part of the earth and fill it with life and joy and happiness, as when, in the prophetic dream, “the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.”—Dan. 2: 35.
“And it shall stand for ever.”—Dan. 2: 44.
(Continued from page 370)
important need in building them up in faith, hope and courage in these days of spreading infidelity, hopelessness and fear, and thus brings its readers solid comfort. It does not, of course, take the place of The Watchtower, which is devoted exclusively to Bible study and instruction. Consolation actually complements this magazine by publishing true-to-fact, uncensored news concerning world conditions and happenings which the commercial publications fear and refuse to print but which the trusting public should learn so as to be warned of the operations and purposes of deadly enemies, and bo be able to free oneself from their power and influence and thus avoid disaster. Consolation further publishes in each issue a special page, entitled “Counsel”, contributed by Judge Rutherford, president of Watchtower, in ad
dition to unusual reports on the strange work and experiences of those throughout the world who are announcing to men of goodwill the ideal government which the great “God of all comfort” is now setting up for the relief and blessing of all faithful and obedient humankind. Consolation is a 32-page magazine, published every other Wednesday. A year’s subscription, of 26 issues, is just $1.00 in the United States, or $1.25 abroad. Forward your subscription to Watchtower, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 18: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 7), fl 1-20 inclusive, The Watchtower December 15, 1941.
Week of January 25: “Demon Rule Ending” (Part 7), fl 21-44 inclusive, The Watchtower December 15, 1941.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEERING IN VENEZUELA, SOUTH AMERICA
"This is to inform you of a visit I made to the Delta Amacuro in the lower part of the river Orinoco. The message was quite new to the folks there; anyway I pressed the message of truth, by the help of God. I remained twenty days, giving night and day phonograph lectures. Nearly all seemed to enjoy them. Some of the recordings were 'Religion Is a Snare', in Spanish and English; 'Government and Peace,’ 'Victory,' 'Purgatory,' 'Sanctification,' and others. Verbal questions were answered promptly according to the Watch Tower’s teachings of the Bible. A certain proud-looking gentleman, known later to be a lawyer, claimed he had a right to question me about my ‘religion’. I told him I had none, but my faith relies solely on the truth of the Holy Bible. I then informed him that this Society is made up of a group of humble men and women who love righteousness, hence Christians. He said he was more a Christian than I. I said, 'No doubt!’ Then I questioned him of his belief in Christ and His resurrection. He said he had no belief in the resurrection. I told him no one can be a Christian if there is no belief in the resurrection of Christ. I furthered the questioning by asking: 'Who is God?’ He answered, ‘Nature!’ I asked, 'Do you worship nature when you go to your church?’ if so, he was worshiping an idol and not Jehovah God, the Omnipotent. He got angry and said I am too hot to carry 'the Sword’. I said the Sword without zeal isn’t worth much, and he as a lawyer without any ardor in his work demonstrates his weakness. Then I closed by attending to something better. The visit to the Delta Amacuro met with good reception. I placed fifty books; booklets I gave away freely by way of advertising the good work, hoping to return in September to do better, as the river Orinoco is a bit unpleasant in these months.”
AT A MODEL STUDY IN NEW MEXICO
"While we three sisters, aged 14 and 12 and 9 years, were conducting a model study at the home of Mr. and Mrs. Brown with Mrs. Brown, we were disturbed by her husband’s telling their two little children, ages 5 and 2 years, to run up to the door and cry out, ‘Reds! and Redism!’ etc.; but the model study went on, by the Lord’s grace. After the study we were talking about different things when the husband came in and said: ‘Now listen, I don’t want you kids coming into my home and criticizing my kids again.’ We spoke up and said we were not criticizing them, and we asked him what we said about them. He said: 'You know I was lying out there on the bed and heard every d-------
word of it.’ (Then the demons really got hold of him.) ‘I’ve had enough of those s---b------Jehovah’s witnesses
in my home teaching their d---Redism.’-Mrs. Brown spoke
up and said: ‘We were teaching the Bible.’ To this he replied: 'Teaching the Bible, h---1 They are teaching Redism, Nazism, Communism, Fascism.’ Then he pointed his finger at us three children and said: ‘I will kick the hout of you. Go back to Russia where you came from, for there is a home there for such people as you.’ He said our father was a s----b------coward to come down here, but
had to send us poor, ignorant kids (saps) to teach Redism; and if our dad would come down he would knock his G------
d----nose in.’ He had his fists all doubled up as if dad
was there; he was sure shaking all over. That is one time we got to see the demons working in a man, and we thank the Lord that none of us was harmed. We three children and Mrs. Brown are going to be baptized by our zone servant today, September 7. Mrs. Brown has been going out in the service with us and has taken a firm stand for the Kingdom. This week she came down to our place for the model study.”
ARKANSAS SHEEP TAKING THEIR STAND
"Spring Hill, Ark., is a little village of about thirty houses and a few stores, and considered a very 'goaty’ place. As we passed through it twice a day when working with Mr. and Mrs. W------, we thought we would work it early
one morning. We found no interest at all until the last house I worked. The young woman had Riches. She had gotten it several years ago, read it many times and passed it around to her neighbors to read. She did not know that was the same literature Henry W------ was distributing, as her
neighbors had told so many lies about Henry, calling him a Fifth Columnist, 'for Hitler,’ and ‘taking instructions from a Negro’, etc. She was delighted when she learned the truth, and ordered more books. Her next-door neighbor was there at the time and she ordered the whole set of books, and they promised to go to the next Assembly. A few miles farther another woman listened to the phonograph recording ‘Message of Hope’, and she contributed for eight booklets, amidst many jeers of six women at a quilting party, telling her not to get the literature and that they had burned this literature. She said she had heard a lot about Jehovah's witnesses and now she was going to investigate.”
MISUNDERSTANDING CORRECTED
“A lady writing up to the London office for a dozen Final War booklets wrote back on receiving them, stating she was sorry we believed in war. I was asked to make a back-call on her. Upon arriving, I received no answer, so I wrote a note on a Watchtower saying I would call again, and dropped it in. Second call, she was still away, but had been back in the meantime and left a note outside, telling me when she would be home. I returned at the appointed time. Result: Misunderstanding straightened out and she was very interested. After hearing some records, bearing on the subject of war, etc., she took Salvation and some booklets, and I arranged for her to hear the records ‘Government and Peace’. In the meantime she had given all the booklets away, and she asked me to bring her some more. One day she met me in the street and, on greeting me, asked me what I was doing. I showed her the books and the testimony card, explaining I was doing the greatest work in the world. She asked if she could have still more booklets, as she had been sending them everywhere, including a bound book to Mr. Lloyd George, as she thought him a very good man. She received a letter of appreciation from him. She took Some more booklets from me, and made arrangements for me to see her in a day or two. I told her the Lord had an appointed way of doing the work, and I am sure she will be along to the meetings very soon. She asked me to call and see her neighbor, which resulted in the placement of Salvation and a booklet.”
883
INDEX FOR 1941
JANUARY 1
Drama of Vengeance (Part 3)  3
Battle Begins .......................  8
The Higher Powers Theocratic ---------- 11
“No More Sea” ............  -.......... 14
Field Experiences ..................... 16
“Ehud's Sword” Testimony Period ........ 2
Watchtower Studies...................... 2
Foreign-Language Subscriptions ......... 2
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’e witnesses ... 2
Satlefled ..........................    16
1941 Calendar ..............-...........16
MAY 1
Victory Song (Part 6)-----------------131
They “That Love Him” ____________  137
Kingdom Work ........................ 139
Order of Resurrection --------------  139
Ruler Out of Bethlehem ...............  142
Field Experiences ......................144
"Theocratic Ambassadors "Testimony Period 130
Watchtower Studies......................130
Model Study No. 3...................... 130
Use Renewal Subscription Blank _________130
SEPTEMBER 1
Children of the King ................ 259
By Purchase ....................... 260
Other Children 262
The Mandate ....................... 263
Duty of Children -----------------  265
A Kingdom Prayer ..............-.....—	266
Is Religion Holy? ....................269
Field Experiences ....................272
"Lightning-War” Testimony Period .....258
Children ............................ 258
Watchtower Studies __________________ 258
JANUARY 15
Drama of Vengeance (Part 4) ..........19
Wicked Flourish ....................20
“Meet the Lord” ......................27
Seven-headed Organization ............29
Field Experiences .......................32
“Ehud’s Sword” Testimony	Period ......18
Watchtower Studies ......................18
Satie fled ..............................18
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’e witneeees —.. 18
1941 Calendar ...............—.......-...31
MAY 15
Noah’s Day ............................ 147
Blind Indifference ...................147
Violence .............................148
Moral Delinquency ..................  160
What Body Is Raised? ...................155
The Ideal Government ...................168
Field Experiences ......................100
“Theocratic Ambassadors” Testimony Period 146
Watchtower Studies .....................146
Model Study No. 3 ............._........140
Use Renewal Subscription Blank .........146
SEPTEMBER 15
Demon Rule Ending (Part 1)-----------276
Prominent ..............-----------277
Identification .................—... 277
Theocratic Assembly at St. Louis .—.. 282
Children ............................  274
Watchtower Studies ..................  274
Comfort All That Mourn ................—274
Jehovah’e Servante Defended------------274
FEBRUARY 1
Drama of Vengeance	(Part	5) .... 35
The Theocracy .......................36
“Other Sheep” .......................37
Obedience to Higher	Powers ............44
Field Experiences .....................48
“Ehud’s Sword" Testimony	Period ...... 34
Memorial ............................. 34
Theocracy ............................ 34
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’e	witnesses ..47
1941 Calendar .........................47
Watchtower Studies ................... 47
FEBRUARY 15
Obedience .......-.....................61
Religion and Christianity ...........55
Resurrection ..........................62
Field Experiences .....................64
“Ehud's Sword” Testimony Period .......60
Theocracy .............................60
Model Study No. 3 .....................60
Memorial ..............................60
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’e witnesses ..63
1941 Calendar .........................63
Watchtower Studies ................... 63
JUNE I
Man’s True Guide ......................163
False Gods ..........................164
Authenticity ........................166
Prophecy ........................... 168
“Rich Men, Weep and Howl" .............171
Who Bears Up the Government? ..........174
Field Experiences .....................176
"Theocratic Ambassadors” Testimony Period 162
Watchtower Studies ....................162
Vacation ..............................162
Use Renewal Subscription Blank ........162
JUNE 15
Covenant Obligations ..................179
His Witnesses .......................181
Covenant-Breakers ...................183
Covenant-Keepers ....................184
Safe Highway ..........................187
Who Is God? ...........................190
Field Experiences .....................192
“Theocratic Ambassadors" Testimony Period 178
Opportunity for Service ...............178
Vacation ..............................178
Watchtower Studies ....................178
OCTOBER 1
Demon Rule Ending (Part 2) —........— 291
‘Desolating Abomination' .............298
“On Darth Peace"—to Whom ? .........—. 299
Hero-Worship a Snare....................302
Field Experiences ..................... 304
“Lightning-War” Testimony Period ...—290
Children ...........................- -	290
Comfort All That Mourn ................ 290
Jehovah’e Servante Defended ............303
Watchtower Studies .................- -	303
Notice .............................—	303
OCTOBER 15
Demon Rule Ending (Part	3) ..........307
God’s People .......................310
Help .................-............ 313
Character or Integrity—Which? ....... 315
Lightning-War ........................317
Field Experiences ....................320
“Lightning-War” Testimony Period ....—	300
Children ............................ 306
Comfort AU That Mourn---------------— 306
Jehovah’e Servante Defended ..........319
Watchtower Studies _________—----------319
MARCH 1
67 73
74
76 80 66
66 66 66 79 79
Victory Song (Part 1) ...................
Fear ..................................
Frog Plague on "Christendom” ............
The First Resurrection ..................
Field Experiences .......................
God and the State .......................
Memorial ................................
Watchtower Studies ......................
Theocracy ...............................
Model Study No 3 ........................
Use Renewal Subscription Blank ..........
JULY 1
Those That Forget God .................196
Worship .............................198
Very Religious ......................199
Assembly for Worship ..................203
“His Chariot" ........................ 204
A Witness Who Did Not See Death .......207
Field Experiences ....	  208
“Pure Language” Testimony Period ..... 194
Opportunity for Service .............. 194
Vacation ..............................194
Watchtower Studies ....................194
NOVEMBER 1
Demon Rule Ending (Part 4) ......... 323
Hold Fast .......................... 329
Prophecy of the Transfiguration .... 330
No Apologies for Theocracy ..........—	333
Field Experiences ...................336
“Great Multitude" Testimony Period ...322
Watchtower Studies ...............   322
Report of the Jehovah’e witneeeee Aeeembly 322
MARCH 15
Victory Song (Part 2)	 83
Evidence of Impending Disaster .......91
A God of Purpose .................... 94
Field Experiences ....................96
“The Sign” Testimony Period ..........82
Theocracy ..............................82
Memorial .............................  82
Model Study No. 3 ......................95
God and the State ....................  96
Watchtower Studies .....................96
JULY 15
The Wise ................................211
How to Begin ..........................213
Integrity .............................218
Shortening the Days .....................219
Hypocritical Counterfeit ................222
Refuge Farms (Letter) .................. 223
Field Experiences ...................... 224
“Pure Language” Testimony Period ....... 210
Watchtower Studies ......................210
Vacation ................................210
Use Renewal Subscription Blank ..........210
NOVEMBER 15
Demon Rule Ending (Part 5) ----------339
Unity Now In the War ________________346
Modern Visits of Jehovah __________ 348
Field Experiences ...............   352
"Great Multitude” Testimony Period .338
Watchtower Studies ...............  338
Report of the Jehovah'e witneeeee Aeeembly 338
APRIL 1 Victory Song (Part 3) ................. 99
Final Warning ........................ 106
"Not Left in Hell" ....................109
Field Experiences .....................112
“The Sign” Testimony Period ........... 98
Theocracy ............................. 98
Model Study	No.	3 ................... 98
Memorial .............................. 98
God and the State .....................Ill
Watchtower Studies .....................Ill
AUGUST 1
When the Righteous	Rule .............227
Be Wise ...........................   236
Assembly in St. Louis ................. 236
God and Man ............................236
Proxy ..................................237
Field Experiences ......................240
“Pure Language” Testimony Period .......226
Notice of Annual Meeting ...	.....226
Notice to British Watchtower Subscribers .. 226
Watchtower Studies .....................226
Vacation   ...................-—............. 226
DECEMBER 1
Demon Rule Ending (Part 6) ____________355
Treachery and Hypocrisy _____________367
■The Abominable Thing' ............  358
All Totalitarian . .............._...	360
“Great Multitude" Survives Armageddon .... 362
Conspirators Against Theocracy ........365
Field Experiences .................... 368
“Great Multitude” Testimony Period ... 364
Watchtower Studies ................... 354
Report of the Jehovah’e witneeeee Aeeembly 354
APRIL 15
Victory Song (Part 4) .................115
The Fight ...........................118
Who Will Be Passed Over?...............122
Wounded Head Healed .................  126
Field Experiences ...................  128
“The Sign” Testimony Period........... 114
Model Study No. 3 ...................  114
Watchtower Studies ___________________ 114
Use Renewal Subscription Blank _______ 114
AUGUST 15
Integrity ...............................243
The Issue ...........................  245
The Test ..............................246
Facts in Fulfillment.................  248
The Way to Life .......................  260
Whose Prayers Are Answered ? ..........  263
Field Experiences .......................266
“Pure Language" Testimony	Period _______242
Watchtower Studies ..................... 242
Notice of Annua] Meeting ............... 242
Use Renewal Subscription Blank ..........242
DECEMBER 15 Demon Rule Ending (Part 7) ..-....... 371
“Peace" ........................    372
Final Warning ...................   376
Triumph for Theocracy ____________    379
Field Experiences.................    383
Index for 1941 ...................... 384
“Great Multitude" Testimony Period ___370
1942 Calendar .....................   370
Re the 1942 Yearbook _________________370
Coneolation ......................... 370
Watchtower Studies__________________  382
384