R861 : page 1 

VOL. VII. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY, 1886. 

NO. 11. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 
BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 40 Federal Street, Allegheny, Pa. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS: --Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat~yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it-- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 



satisfieth not? Hearken diligently~and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."-- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R861 : page 1 



MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



We have concluded on the above name rather than the one at 
first proposed, Millennial Day Dawn. It is with pleasure that we 
announce the first volume of this work as about ready. It will 
doubtless be in the hands of those who at once send in their 
orders, before our next issue. Orders sent us will be filled in 
rotation as received. 

We would regret the delay since the first announcement of this 
book, had it not been unavoidable. But we now see the Lord's 
hand in it, working together for good. The preparation of our 
monthly issue of the TOWER, together with the large 
correspondence which it entails, and other needful privileges and 
duties, have necessarily limited the time available for the 
preparation of the book; and the plan we at first proposed of 
having different subjects prepared by different brethren, was 
soon found wholly impracticable from various reasons. 

Besides and above all this, we found that the subject spread itself 
far beyond our calculations. Soon it was found that one volume 
would be too bulksome, and by and by we found that two 
volumes would not properly set forth what we desired. In 
consequence we have settled upon a plan which we trust will 
meet the approval of all our friends; namely, of making several 
volumes of the work, we cannot yet say definitely how many. 
The first volume, which is now about ready, will treat 
exclusively of the "Plan of the Ages;" the second of the Times 
and Seasons of Scripture, and succeeding volumes as may be 
hereafter announced. 

Volume I. contains sixteen chapters, and is a neat volume of 351 
pages bound in cloth. The price of the volume will be one dollar; 
but we will supply Vol. I and the TOWER for one year for one 
dollar and twenty-five cents, or what is the same, will charge 
those at present subscribers to the TOWER seventy-five cents ~ 
postage prepaid by us. 

This, we believe, will not only be just the book you will want for 
your own reading, but one you will desire to lend, perhaps more 
than any of the succeeding volumes. It takes up the subject at a 
point where the skeptically inclined will be deeply interested, 
and proceeds step by step in the order we deem best calculated to 
reveal the truth without stumbling the truth seeker. We commit 
this work to the care of the Lord and to you as his stewards. May 
it be so faithfully used as to prepare the way in your hearts as 
well as in the hearts of your neighbors for the next volume when 



it shall be ready-which will not be so long a time as you have 
waited for this~probably in less than a year. May it be in your 
hands an implement furnished of God by which you may be 
enabled to serve and honor him, and bless his children about 
you, with a knowledge of His glorious plan. 

We might remark that if the proceeds of the sale of this volume 
shall exceed its cost, such excess will still be in the Lord's 
service and will go toward the further spread of the truth and to 
glorify 

R862 : page 1 

His name. 

To avoid mistakes we will again name the price of Vol. I. 
Millennial Dawn: One copy, $1.00. One copy and one Z.W.T. 
subscription, 1.25 One copy to those already subscribers, .75 
Four copies and one Tower subscription, 3.00 Seven copies, 

5.00. Fifteen copies 10.00. 

The above includes postage or expressage prepaid by us. Be sure 
to send your full address very plainly written. Where you order 
but one or two copies send only your Post Office address; but 
where you order more, mention your nearest Express office as 
well as your Post Office, that we may send by the least 
expensive way. 

Those who upon the first announcement sent in fifty cents as the 
price, need send nothing additional. We will fill their orders first 
of all. 



R862 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

It would appear that all are more quick to apprehend, and less 
likely to soon forget the outward visible evidences and 
manifestations that we are in the day of the Lord, than the no less 
sure, and even more important transactions not so apparent to the 
natural mind. For instance, many seem to realize and to be 
deeply impressed with the yearly accumulating evidences that 
we are in "the time of trouble" foretold as one of the prominent 
features of the day of the Lord's presence; and they see that it has 
gathered force, and will with every successive wave as it 
approaches the great climax of "trouble, such as never was since 
there was a nation." But many seem to see less clearly, and to 
more quickly forget another phase of the trouble of this day, 
which in many respects much more deeply concerns the saints. 
And though we have repeatedly called attention to it before, it is 
expedient for you that we again put you in remembrance of these 
deeply important matters. 



We refer to the trouble upon the Church~the testing, the shaking, 
the melting and disintegrating fiery trial, which is to test every 
professed child of God~the battle between truth and error, 
between light and darkness, which is the Church's share in the 
"battle of the great day of God Almighty, "~a fire, in which the 
wood, hay and stubble of error shall be entirely consumed; and 
from which there shall remain only the gold, silver, and precious 
stones of truth—a battle in which not only error shall fall forever 
before the truth, but in which all controlled by error and lacking 
the armor of truth, shall fall. 

We do not say that those who will fall shall be utterly and 
forever cast down; thank God for the good hope that so many of 
them as shall fall into the ditch because of the blinding errors of 
the god of this age (2 Cor. 4:4), though they shall thus be proved 
unworthy of a place among the overcomers who receive the 
grand prize, shall nevertheless ultimately be recovered from the 
snare of the adversary, and caused to see clearly-being brought 
to an accurate knowledge of the truth and freed from the 
blindings of false teachings. 

Their falling will not be accidental but according to a definitely 
arranged plan. The trials will come in such manner as will serve 
to test and prove the faithful and wholly consecrated. God has 
provided in his Word an armament full and complete for all the 
truly consecrated; and those who are such will take heed; and if 
they take heed they "shall never fall," but receive an abundant 
entrance into the kingdom.— 2 Pet. 1:3-11. 

Aside from Paul's statement of the fiery trials of this day in 
which every man's faith- structure will be tried by fire (1 Cor. 
3:13), and his other statement that we shall need the whole armor 
of God that we may be able to stand in this evil day (Eph. 6:13), 
we have Peter's statement that the judgment or trial of this day 
shall begin first with the house of God and extend to all others; 
in this he also intimates that only the saints will stand the test, 
while all others will fall. Aside from these our Lord's words also 
show that we must watch, and that the deceptions of this day will 
be sufficient to deceive if it were possible the very elect. 
Furthermore we have the symbolic representations of this 
trouble, etc., in a very striking picture in the Psalms. The ninety- 
first psalm describes in figures of speech, both the nominal and 
the real Church during this day of trouble. The arrows of sarcasm 
will pierce some, and the pestilence of infidelity and darkness 
will waylay others; and the destructive and subversive teachings 
of "science falsely so-called," claiming to be at its very zenith, its 
noontide of light and glory, will sap the strength of others, and 
cause them to waste away, so that those who shall be able to 
stand, will be as one to a thousand who will fall.— See verses 5-7. 

The cause of the protection of those who do not fall is stated: - 
They make the Most High their habitation; they live in God; they 



abide under the shadow of the Almighty; their trust is in Him and 
not in self, nor in the arm of flesh. Verses 1,2,9,14. 

The means God will use for helping and keeping this class from 
falling is clearly stated. The Lord will provide assistance through 
his messengers or servants, and by these the FEET or last 
members of the body of Christ shall be helped and kept from 
falling; for they shall sustain, strengthen and uphold them by the 
word of truth. In this way God will provide help for every true 
member of the body, providing them with the whole armor of 
God, that they may be able to stand, and having done all, to 
stand: as it is written, His truth shall be the shield and buckler of 
all such, and he shall give a message to his messengers 
concerning or relating to them.-- Verses 11,12,4. 

Many who can see the world's time of trouble as already begun, 
fail to see that this trouble and trial upon the Church has not only 
begun, but is much farther advanced than the labor troubles. 

So far as the nominal Church in general is concerned, though we 
can see the trouble and testing coming upon it, yet we see that 
the vast majority of its membership is as yet too soundly asleep 
to stumble. They must get awake before they can stumble over 
anything. And while they are getting awake gradually and 
beginning to think and reason, the various agencies for their 
stumbling and fall are fast shaping themselves. The stumbling 
stone, strange to say, is Christ Jesus. He shall be not only a 
sacred hiding place for some (Psa. 32:7-9; 119:114), but also for 
a stone of stumbling and rock of offence to both the houses of 
Israel.~Isa. 8:14. 

The two houses of Israel here referred to are evidently the fleshly 
and the spiritual houses. The nominal fleshly house stumbled at 
the first advent, and nominal spiritual Israel is to similarly 
stumble during the second advent~a remnant only in either case 
stands the test, while the great mass stumble. (Matt. 15:14; Rom. 
9:27; 11:5.) The prophetic statement cannot refer to the ten and 
two tribes as two houses of Israel; for really that was a split in 
the one house or family of Israel. Furthermore, in the trial in 
which the stumbling occurred, the Master addressed himself to 
the lost sheep of the house (not houses) of Israel. The ten tribes 
which split off (2 Chron. 10:16,17) have since been called the 
lost tribes, and if they are referred to in the prophecy as another 
separate house of Israel from those who stumbled, the question 
would be, When will that ten-tribe house stumble? It must be 
still future if they are the other "house." But no; all Israel was 
represented by the one house which stumbled at the first advent 
(2 Chron. 11:13-17), and the other house is evidently the Gospel 
Church nominal,~Christendom —whose fall, under the figure of 
Babylon, is so graphically portrayed in our Lord's revelations of 
the future, from which also God's people are called to come out, 
that they fall not but may be enabled to stand.-Rev. 18:4. 



A careful examination will show, too, that the two houses 
stumbled and fell over the same rock, for similar reasons, though 
at different times. Jesus testified that the Jewish house fell partly 
because they had substituted human traditions and were 
following human leaders and parties instead of God and his 
Word. And so it is now: the Word of God is made void, robbed 
of its real force and power by human creeds and traditions. 
Hence the people are easily ensnared and deceived, whereas they 
should be in knowledge men, thoroughly furnished, and able to 
teach God's plan, instead of being babes, unskillful in the Word, 
liable to be carried about by every windy doctrine. The 
thousands who shall fall for every one able to stand in this evil 
day, is not out of proportion to the large number of unskillful 
babes, compared to the few who have grown up into him in all 
things, which is the only head over all, Christ. Heb. 5:12-14. 

Fleshly Israel stumbled over the CROSS of Christ, and it seems 
astounding to think that the second Israel is to stumble over the 
same. When one remembers how the cross has for centuries been 
the symbol of all that is holy and good, that its very shape has 
become sacred, that it has been lifted before the people upon 
church spires, worn upon the person, and pictured by artists and 
poets, it does seem astonishing and almost incredible that the 
great nominal Church should ever stumble over the cross. 
Nevertheless such is to be the case. 

R863 : page 2 

The Apostle Paul declares the cross of Christ to be the great 
stumbling block of all classes. To the Jew, schooled under the 
Law to attempt to do his best to serve God, the cross of Christ 
became a stumbling block, because they could not realize that 
that which they had for centuries been trying to accomplish for 
themselves, by an attempted keeping of the law, should now be 
handed to them as a free gift. Proud of their own supposed 
holiness, attainments, and ability, in the matter of keeping God's 
law, and thus justifying themselves before God, they overlooked 
the fact that their yearly cleansing was by the typical blood of 
beasts, on a typical Day of Atonement. And seeing no necessity 
for a sacrifice for their sins, they were offended by the bare 
suggestion that they needed a sin-offering to make them 
acceptable with God, and hence they stumbled over the cross. 
"Israel which followed after righteousness [justification] attained 
not... because they sought it not through faith, but as attainable 
through works of the law. For they struck against the stumbling 
stone~as it is written." --Rom. 9:31-33. 

The Apostle says again, "The Jews require a sign and the Greeks 
seek after wisdom." The Jews, claiming to be God's children, 
would have walked by sight if God had forced the matter upon 
their attention in a manner not requiring faith; and the Greeks, 
the learned of the world, would have become followers of Christ, 
had the plan of salvation been more consistent with their worldly 



wisdom. But, continues Paul, "we preach Christ crucified, unto 
the Jews a STUMBLINGBLOCK, and unto the Greeks 
foolishness." For the preaching of the CROSS is to the perishing 
world foolishness; but to us being saved, IT is the power of God. 
--1 Cor. 1:22-24,17,18. Compare Gal. 5:1-11. 

The church, up to the present time, while it has held and 
advanced many errors for over eighteen centuries, has held 
firmly to the doctrine of redemption through the precious blood 
of Christ. Yet they have held to it blindly, and generally without 
even an attempt to understand the philosophy of the wondrous 
plan. The doctrine being advanced by the clergy and also plainly 
stated in the Scriptures, and the mass of the church being 
accustomed to accept the teaching of the clergy without 
investigation, the doctrine of the cross, redemption, has for these 
reasons met with little open opposition except from the world, 
since the days of Apostles, until very recently. It has not only 
been accepted by the church nominal, but gradually the civilized 
world, under the influence of the church, has also assented to the 
doctrine, though blindly; and if they have not professed faith in it 
before, they frequently do so when about to die. 

But of very recent years a change has been coming over public 
sentiment both in and out of the church, caused by the general 
increase of knowledge in this Day of the Lord. The former 
authority and prestige of the nominal church, and its teachers, 
and many errors, are fast giving way, as the world is beginning 
to reason—not from a Scriptural standpoint however, but from 
the standpoint of their own ideas. And of course from such a 
standpoint, and failing entirely to understand the grand design of 
the divine plan, the cross of Christ, redemption, ransom, through 
his precious blood, is foolishness, and is discarded with, and as a 
part of the rubbish of error. This being the world's conclusion, 
and the nominal church being composed largely of the world, 
and the balance being mere "babes in Christ," utterly ignorant of 
the plan of God, and taught from earliest infancy the lessons of 
worldly conformity, the great mass of the nominal church is just 
ready to stumble over the cross, as its prototype the first house, 
Israel after the flesh, did. They will conceive God's favor without 
a ransom, while his favor in the ransom they will stumble over 
and reject. 

Having learned to think and reason on other subjects, just as fast 
as they get awake and begin to think and reason upon religious 
subjects, they are being confronted by this question: If the 
penalty of sin is everlasting torture, how can we understand the 
statements of church creeds and the Bible, when they declare 
that Jesus became our substitute, or ransom, and suffered in our 
stead, the just for the unjust to secure for us justification and a 
return to divine favor? Would not this imply that he must suffer 
eternal torture, IF that were our penalty? 



All who can and will think at all, must concede that either one or 
the other of these doctrines (eternal torture, or ransom) must be 
erroneous, and must be discarded; and observation assures us 
that nine out of ten, or as the Scriptures put it, a thousand to one, 
will stumble and reject the cross of Christ. Many will hold firmly 
to the unscriptural idea of everlasting torture as the wages of sin; 
while others, carrying to an extreme the opposite of their former 
false ideas of divine wrath against sin, conclude that there is no 
penalty against sin, to require a ransom. They thus overlook 
entirely the penalty pronounced against sin, namely, death, and 
the proof of ransom contained in the fact that Christ died for our 
sins~the just one for the sinful to bring us [back] to a state of 
acceptability before God. In a word, the revulsion caused by 
seeing the error of the horrible and unscriptural idea of eternal 
torture, leads them to ignore the plain statement of Scripture that 
"The wages of sin is death," and also that eternal life is the gift of 
God through Jesus Christ our Lord (Rom. 6:23.)-- through his 
sacrifice finished on the cross. Nor should we be greatly 
surprised at this, when we remember the words of Hebrews 5:14. 

Within the past eight years, the enemies of the cross of Christ 
have multiplied theories supported by deceptive sophistries, the 
object of which appears to be any thing, or any theory, to 
disprove the fact that Jesus' death was the ransom (corresponding 
price) for all. For though these theories are contradictory of each 
other, they never oppose each other; nor need they, seeing they 
have the one aim. 

The theories advanced to fill the place of the cross are various 
enough to suit the crotchets of any and every class anxious to get 
rid of it. And many of the blinded followers accept all no-ransom 
theories, ignorant of and blinded to their contradictory character. 

ONE NO-RANSOM THEORY 

claims that Jehovah is bound in justice to save men, and that 
since justice requires their salvation, no ransom-sacrifice was 
necessary. The theory implies of course, that God has been doing 
his creatures an injustice in punishing what he calls sin in them, 
for which in reality he only was to blame; for as they claim 
(rejecting, or rather perverting the account in Genesis), God 
created man imperfect, and he could not avoid sinning. They 
claim, to the contrary of Scripture, that Adam's act was one of 
obedience to a law implanted by the Creator, and so with all sin. 

Hence the claim of this theory is, that God being the real author 
of sin, he sooner or later must do men the justice of releasing 
them from the penalty of that which they claim he only was 
responsible for. Thus they would make it appear that for six 
thousand years God has not only condemned and punished 
mankind unjustly for evil, for which he himself was the 
responsible or guilty one, but they insist that now his JUSTICE, 
backed by sympathy, is about to conquer him, and that he will 



compensate men for the injustice and false condemnation of the 
past by untold blessings in the future. But we ask if such a God- 
dishonoring view were correct —if it were true that God has 
injured and dealt unjustly with his creatures for six thousand 
years, what guarantee can be given of reform on his part? Is not 
proof of such reform wholly lacking? Does not God himself say, 
I am the same, I change not? Ah, but say they, he has promised 
to restore mankind. Yes, we answer, but what confidence could 
be placed in the promises of an unjust being? None; justice and 
truth are dependent qualities, injustice and untruth go hand in 
hand, while justice and truth are twins. If these theorists prove, to 
their own satisfaction, that God has been unjust, it is folly for 
them to rely upon the promises of such a being. They make him 
a liar in any event; for they say that he calls mankind sinners, 
whereas they reason (falsely) that he alone is the transgressor. Of 
course with this view there is no place for the ransom; for at 
most the cross, the death of Jesus, would then be only an 
expression of sorrow and repentance on God's part for having 
wronged his creatures; a show of his love by which he desires to 
win back mankind's love and respect. In such a view, Jesus 
sacrifice was God's offering to man and not for man's sin. 

A SECOND NO-RANSOM THEORY 

claims that God's course in condemning mankind was just, but 
that his love is superior to his justice, and that, though justice has 
held out in the past, during six thousand years, the time for love 
to conquer is at hand. Here again the fallen perverted judgment 
reasons of God from its fallen standpoint, and as a parent might 
allow his love for his child to conquer his justice and reverse his 
threats, so they reason of God, and confidently they ask~Is not 
the love of God greater than that of man? Aye, we answer, God 
in all his qualities is infinitely greater than fallen man, but as his 
love is greater than ours, so his justice is greater than ours, and 
more so, because in all his loss man has held to love beyond any 
other feature of his original likeness to his Creator. Even the 
brute creation have held to love also as their strong love of their 
offspring proves. Hence we say that God's justice is pre- 
eminently higher than man's. 

But as we have heretofore shown, God's attributes are not at 
warfare, the one conquering the other; and it is only our fallen 
state that makes it so with us. The Wisdom, Power, Love and 
Justice 

R864 : page 2 

of God, each being perfect and operating in unison, He never has 
necessity for a conflict with himself. But this theory of 
overbalancing love, has no use for the cross, no use for the 
ransom, and sees no necessity for a corresponding price. It 
claims that God's love conquers and pays no price to justice for 
the sinner, and scorns the sentiment that— 



Jesus died and paid it all, 
All the debt we owed." 

This theory seeks to cover its deformity by much talk about the 
love of God and many direct and indirect slurs upon his justice. 
By magnifying the love of God at the expense of his justice, they 
cloak themselves as angels [messengers] of light and love, while 
touching a sympathetic cord in the hearts of those so long 
accustomed to false ideas of God's plan, which exaggerated his 
justice to fiendish cruelty, and hid his love almost entirely. 

But blind as the other, only in another direction, these love 
theorists ignore the fact that though for the past six thousand 
years God's justice has held full sway over the race of sinners, 
and sickness, pain, sorrow and death in a thousand forms have 
caused the whole creation to groan and travail in pain together, 
yet God's LOVE has offered no protest against it. In fact his love 
has been manifested only once, and that in the very case which 
these theorists deny: namely, in the ransom. In this and nowhere 
else in all the past, was manifested the Love of God toward us: 
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that 
we might live through him. God has loved the world always; but 
his love has been vailed, not manifested except by this one act. 
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and 
sent his Son to be the propitiation [hilasmos-satisfaction or 
appeasement] for our sins. "He was manifested to take away our 
sin."-l John 3:5; 4:9,10. 

How blind are they who, from past history and from past 
experience, have learned nothing; and while rejecting the 
efficacy of the one act manifesting love, claim that in God's 
character love over-balances justice and conquers it. Ah, though 
the past and present are one continuous chastisement, enforcing 
the lesson that God is just, and will by no means CLEAR 
[excuse] the guilty, the future alone must reveal God's love and 
must show his wisdom; for those whom he could not justly clear, 
his wisdom and love have rescued by redemption, and only the 
future will reveal to the world what through his Word, God hath 
even now made known unto his saints—that "the man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." - 
-1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

A THIRD NO-RANSOM THEORY 

runs on this wise: All that God demands of man is that he shall 
do the best he can to live a righteous (moral) life, and whoever 
does this is acceptable to God, whether he knows Jesus or not. 
This doctrine of the fall, say they, is ridiculous and absurd, and 
passages of Scripture teaching thus [for instance Gen. 3, Rom. 
5:15-19, etc.] should be ignored as the mistaken ideas of a more 
ignorant age than ours; or, as others say, as false statements 
given of God because of human ignorance. These theorists will 
praise the character of Jesus, and commend it to all men as an 



example of self-denial for the good of others, though they do not 
advise that other men should do as he did, but rather that they 
should follow in a general way his teachings without going to the 
foolish extreme to which they consider that he went. These, like 
the others, entirely ignore the ransom without attempting a 
critical explanation of the Bible statements regarding that feature 
of Jesus' work; and while speaking of him as a Saviour, they 
mean nothing more by that term than when it is applied to other 
notables; as for instance, Abraham Lincoln, who is styled the 
saviour of his country, because during the civil war he was 
largely instrumental in preserving or saving the union by 
breaking down the secession of the Southern States. When these 
theorists speak of Jesus as the Saviour and Redeemer, they 
mentally attach to those words the idea of deliverer or teacher 
merely, and not the Scriptural idea of Ransomer, as well as 
Leader and Deliverer. 

These, with a look of compassion for the ignorance of the hearer 
will explain, that God has from time to time raised up great 
teachers among various peoples, as he raised up Jesus among the 
Jews; and that these have all been saviours, in the sense that by 
both their teachings and examples they delivered many from 
degrading vices and immoralities injurious both to mind and 
body. In a list of such saviours, such names as those of Socrates, 
Confucius, Zoroaster, Moses and Mahomet, would stand side by 
side with that of Jesus. Is it any wonder that such a theory is 
esteemed by the carnally minded, as "broad" and "liberal" and 
"advanced"? It removes at once the "stumbling-block" and 
foolish feature~the CROSS~and exhorts men to follow any 
good exemplar, whether Jesus or any other, and teaches them to 
depend for acceptance before God not upon the merits of Christ, 
made applicable to them through his sacrificial death, but upon 
their own merit and righteousness. —Compare Rom. 10:3 and 
5:10. And no wonder that such a view is popular among those 
who in pride of heart scorn to receive the gift of God as an 
unmerited favor. 

A FOURTH NO-RANSOM THEORY 

claims that the life and trials and temptations of Jesus, were 
really deceptions; that all the while he was a spirit being, merely 
using the flesh as a covering like his clothing. Really, they claim, 
he was not "made flesh," and did not take our nature, but merely 
appeared to do so, appeared or pretended to be tempted, 
pretended sorrow and pain and death in order to set men an 
EXAMPLE. Of course these cannot admit the force of the 
ransom [antilutron— a corresponding price]; for according to this 
theory there was no real correspondence between Jesus and men. 
And when they claim that he was a great and worthy example, 
they seemingly forget two things: first, that a life of fraud and 
deception would not be a proper example; and secondly, while 
claiming that Jesus was sinless, they claim that his life was an 



example for all the world, of how to put away sin. But how could 
he who knew no sin be an example of putting it away? Ah, but 
say these, the Apostle says, "He died unto sin once;" and since 
we are to follow in his footsteps, should not we also, die unto 
sin? That is to say, should we not regard his life as a battle with 
sin, and should we not esteem that by such 

R864 : page 3 

an example he profits us, and not as a ransom or sacrifice for our 
sins? 

Yes, yes, we see; having taken away the foundation of faith, the 
ransom- sacrifice, they are entirely confused in the use of 
Scripture language. When the Apostle says, "He died unto [or 
because of] sin once," he refers to the fact that sin and 
condemnation had passed upon all the race through Adam; and 
because of that fact Christ died, laid down, surrendered his life, 
and became the victim of sin's penalty, death, in order that thus 
he might redeem all from under that lasting penalty. And though 
we were dead [guilty and condemned], those who realize his 
perfect work, are to reckon themselves as released, set free, and 
no longer subject to sin and death, but as though made alive from 
the dead through Christ's sacrifice. And henceforth we should 
realize ourselves justified freely from all things, and enabled to 
present our justified selves (not our sins) a sacrifice to God, holy 
and acceptable through Christ's cleansing redemption. 

He put away or expiated our sins when he gave himself a ransom 
for all. And since he did not have, and hence did not put away 
sin from himself, it follows that he could not be an example to 
men, of how to put away their own sins by sacrifice. 

Jesus' sacrifice consisted not in resisting sin; sin is an unlawful 
thing in any, hence to resist it could not be a sacrifice. The 
sacrifice of Jesus consisted not in abstaining from sin, (though he 
did so abstain), but in the surrender of the rights and privileges 
legally and properly his, --even unto death. He made his soul 
[being, existence] an offering for sin—our sin. And those who 
follow his example should not imagine that their efforts to resist 
sin (though proper) are any part or share in the sacrifice of 
Christ. But, putting away sin so far as we are able, and realizing 
that all our sins past and weaknesses present, are fully covered 
by Jesus' sacrifice, such have been invited during the Gospel Age 
to follow Jesus' example and deny themselves legitimate 
pleasures and privileges in their endeavors to serve the truth, 
honor God, and bless their fellow creatures; and they are 
promised that if thus now conformed to the image and example 
of God's Son, they shall by and by be with him and like him and 
share his glory. 

This class of no-ransom theorists, though fully aware of the 
meaning of the words ransom and redeem, as used in the Bible, 
ignobly give out the impression that these words found in many 



texts, are not in open and direct conflict with their theory. They 
give this impression, not so much by what they say on the 
subject, as by the inference they give by freely quoting the very 
texts which pointedly and directly contradict their position. Satan 
has long found bluffing a successful plan with many. 

A FIFTH NO-RANSOM THEORY 

and one into which the other theories all seem more or less to 
merge, might be termed a Modified Evolution Theory. One of 
the advocates of this theory effects to be a holiness and faith 
paper, impressing this every month upon its readers by 
publishing a diary list of donations 

R865 : page 3 

of which the following is a sample:-- "An offering, $2.44 from 
England, has been the only provision for the entire week." In 
explanation of this donation, a Scripture is misapplied thus: 
"Surely the isles shall wait for me; and the sons of strangers shall 
build up thy walls and their kings shall minister unto thee." 

We have great sympathy with a true life of faith and true faith 
homes, but remembering the Apostle's words, "Hast thou faith, 
have it to thyself" (Rom. 14:22); and Jesus' words, "When thou 
prayest enter into thy closet... and pray to thy Father which is in 
secret. ...Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites... 
when thou fastest anoint thy head and wash thy face that thou 
appear not unto men to fast," etc. We can have no sympathy with 
the above form of begging misnamed~a life of faith. However, 
some are deceived by such pretensions as others were at our 
Lord's first advent. And for the same reason that our Lord spoke 
plainly, we speak plainly, namely, because some deceived by 
these methods, are ready to swallow their teachings without 
examination, and they, like the Pharisees, are making void the 
Word of God through their theories while claiming great 
reverence for it. 

In view of what we have said, you should not be surprised to 
learn that the journal we describe, has its outside covered with 
texts of Scripture as well as the headline of every page, while in 
the manner illustrated below, it seeks to make void the Word of 
God by coupling quotations from it with its own teachings, 
directly opposed to it. 

Under the head of Dispensational Seed, it first quotes John 
12:24,* and then proceeds to ignore and deny the ransom, in a 
most subtle manner, and applies the above text not to our Lord 
alone, but to many others of whom he was one. Thus instead of 
Jesus' death being the one and only ransom, it was but like that 
of others-one of the steps, of dispensational advancement. It 
says: "The Bible history gives several epochs of spiritual 
unfoldment [another way of saying evolution, one less grating to 
the ear of some, and more likely to catch the unwary] 



corresponding to the several days of natural creation. The first 
spiritual day extended from Adam to Noah, and the development 
of character was general.... The same spirit of God that moved 
upon the face of the waters when the earth was without form and 
void, brooded over humanity and operated in harmony with the 
higher human forces, acting as a seed-force to bring the moral 
chaos of the first day of spiritual creation into form, life and 
spiritual consciousness. ...Noah was the first ripe man [seed] that 
brought about a dispensational revolution in moral 
character.... He was the representative character of natural and 
spiritual forces in equilibrium." [In proof of this the quotation 
from Scripture is given.] "Noah was a just man, and perfect in 
his generations." 

"Second Day. The spiritual forces evolved by Noah, ripened as 
dispensational seed in Abraham.... He was brought into 
corresponding environments that advanced and perfected his 
spiritual character. 

"Third Day. The spiritual conditions already evolved and 
appropriated, ripened in Moses. ...He was a hidden man known 
and understood better by his God, than the murmuring people 
HE GAVE HIS LIFE TO ELEVATE.... Thus he proved himself 
equal to a great dispensational revolution." 

"Fourth Day. John the Baptist was the next representative man 
that characterized a new spiritual creation.... He adjusted his life 
to the higher forces, so that he fulfilled all righteousness." 

"Fifth Day. Jesus was the NEXT and LAST representative seed- 
man of Bible history.... Jesus embodied into organic life the new 
factor or spiritual forces. ...All preceding spiritual conditions 
were latent in his organism; hence he was able to carry spiritual 
law farther than any other previous seed-man. ...He ripened 
absolutely, in that organically he never saw death. He laid down 
the life that is subject to death, by keeping an equilibrium of 
inner and outer relations, and became concretely the resurrection 
and the life. The HARVEST which will be yielded will be the 
redemption of all men." 

To some it may be needless that we should point out the 
unscripturalness of this theory. We trust that many of our readers 
are so "thoroughly furnished" as to be able to see through such 
snares of the Adversary. We say snares of the Adversary 
advisedly, for "We are not ignorant of his devices." We know 
well that it is his accustomed and favorite method to assume to 
be a light bearer, a holy and faithful servant of dispensational 
truth, and if he can get any of God's children to serve him and his 
cause in the livery of heaven, he well knows that the darkness 
will be the more confusing and blinding to the Lord's sheep. 

Nevertheless, we will point out the errors of the above, being 
aware from letters received that many who for their time and 
opportunity should be teachers and able to assist others, are 



really babes, and have need that one should teach them again, 
which be the first principles of the doctrine of Christ. (Heb. 
5:12.) Alas! it is the first principles, the foundation of all, that 
professing Christians feel most secure upon, yet they have never 
received intelligently and in simplicity the first principles, and 
hence this is the stone of stumbling. 

This theory be it observed, like all other no-ransom theories fully 
developed, points out the ultimate everlasting salvation of all 
men. This is but consistent on their part, for if God's plan is one 
of evolution by steps and stages with which man has nothing to 
do, it would be the only reasonable conclusion for them to reach, 
that God would finally make them right. For it is a further part of 
these theories, that Adam, instead of being created in the image 
of God, was created more in the image of the brute creation, if 
not directly evolved from a brute. And they account for the 
statement of Genesis (l:27)~"In the image of God created he 
him," by saying that the language applies to man as he will be 
when the process of creation, "unfoldment," or evolution, is 
complete by processes described above; namely seed-men or 
saviors, each of whom "gave his life to elevate" (see above) but 
none of them to redeem the people. Thus these have really the 
same idea as the third class of theorists mentioned above, only 
more deceptive, in that they attempt to wrest the Scriptures to 
suit their theory, while the others reject interfering Bible 
statements; and while these make a list of Saviors and claim that 
Noah, Abraham, Moses and John share with Jesus in evolving 
truth and bringing mankind up to perfection, the others are more 
reasonable in naming Moses, Confucius, Socrates, Zoroaster, 
and Mahomet with Jesus as the great elevators of the race; for 
surely if the idea be the elevating of the race in general, as is 
claimed, it would be simply absurd to count ALL the teachers 
(saviours) in one little nation in a little corner of the world and to 
leave the masses without. 

Now let us contrast with this the Bible account. We do not say 
that the Bible account is the most reasonable view; on the 
contrary, we concede at once, that to the carnally minded and to 
the carnal babes (1 Cor. 3:1) it will appear less reasonable than 
these theories. What we expect to do is to show that whether 
esteemed reasonable or unreasonable these no-ransom, evolution 
theories, are in open and direct variance with the Bible, so that 
those who hold to the Bible may be set free from the blinding 
delusion that the Bible favors such views in any wise. For 
ourselves, we can surely say that the Bible theory is most 
reasonable and the OTHERS from this standpoint most 
unreasonable. 

The Bible starts out with the statement that Adam was created an 
image of God in flesh—possessing mental and moral qualities 
like to those of his Creator, but limited to (perfect) earthly (i.e. 
human) scope or capacity. It tells of his trial, of his disobedience, 



and of the death penalty or curse, which came upon him in 
consequence thereof. It points to that sin as the cause and source 
of all the evil (curse), which has befallen man; and declares that 
man when rejected of God and left to himself, made haste 
downward, degrading himself mentally, physically and morally 
more and more, until the whole world was so terribly corrupt that 
he removed them with a flood of water. So then, the very reverse 
of the above theory is true of the period from Adam to Noah; for 
instead of developing character, all character was lost save in the 
case of the one family of Noah. "God saw that the wickedness of 
man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart was only evil [sinful] continually."-- (Gen. 
6:5.) And hence a more bare-faced lie in the name of truth, is 
scarcely conceivable, than the one this theory advances for what 
it terms its first day of spiritual unfoldment. 

The text cited to prove this; namely, "Noah was a just man and 
perfect in his generations," (Gen. 6:9) is totally misapplied. It 
refers simply to the fact that his family line or generations had 
not been mixed or corrupted in the manner described in verses 2 
and 4 (See article "Sons of God and daughters of men," in 
TOWER of June, 1884.) 

But let us settle this first day of spiritual unfoldment once and 
forever for "him that hath an ear to hear," and into its grave will 
fall the same theory as it relates to the succeeding days. 

Not only have we the foregoing straightforward account given 
through Moses, but we have it corroborated by the most notable 
among the apostles 



R866 : page 3 

and prophets, and by our Lord. The apostle Paul reminds us of 
the first temptation saying, "I fear lest by any means as Satan 
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be 
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ." (2 Cor. 11:3.); 
and again he tells us that though Eve was deceived, Adam sinned 
knowingly (1 Tim. 2:14.); and again he declares that 
condemnation and death came upon all through Adam's 
disobedience~"By the offence of one judgment came upon all" 
"By one man's disobedience many became sinners." "By one 
man sin entered into the world and death by [as a result or 
penalty of] sin. "--(Rom. 5:12,16-19,20.) This harmonizes with 
the prophetic statements that God created man upright and 
crowned him with glory and honor and set him over the works of 
his hands, but that man sought out many inventions [sinful 
devices]. -Psa. 8:5-8; Eccles. 7:29. 

Yes, says Paul, They changed the glory of the incorruptible God. 
When they knew God, they honored him not as God, were not 
obedient to him, etc. Wherefore God gave them over etc., and 



the glory and perfection waned with each generation. (Rom. 
1:20-32.) Yes, says Peter, God spared not the angels that 
sinned,... and spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth 
person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in a flood upon the 
wicked. (2 Pet. 2:4,5.) And so, in whatever direction we look, we 
find that degradation, and not advancement, was the course from 
Adam to Noah. From being "very good" and called a "Son of 
God" (Luke 3:38), and provided an Eden home, and granted 
access and communion with the King of kings, and crowned 
with glory and honor as Jehovah's representative in the rulership 
of earth, the race lost all these and became so depraved that they 
were unfit even to be allowed to live a few years under the curse. 
If there was a spiritual unfoldment there, it was the unfolding of 
a terribly bad spirit. 

Then God's plan of salvation, as expressed in Scripture, utterly 
annihilates this evolution theory. He not only condemns the sin 
and pronounces the death penalty, but mentions the various 
incidental troubles as resulting from the same in these words: 
"Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow 
[pain] and thy conception; in sorrow shalt thou bring forth 
children." And unto Adam he said, "Because thou hast hearkened 
unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which I 
commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it, cursed is the 
ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of 
thy life... till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou 
taken... and unto dust shalt thou return." "Therefore the Lord sent 
him forth from the garden of Eden.. ..So he drove out the man." 
And in the midst of all this God did not hint at evolution to a 
higher condition, but told of a great fall, and held out only a dim 
hope of a recovery. And afterward, in all the repeated references 
to man's sin and a recovery from it and its penalty, and in every 
type and sacrifice it was clearly indicated that without the 
shedding of blood there could be no remission of sins, no return 
to fellowship with the Creator, and no further life. 

And, finally, when he of whom Moses and the prophets wrote, 
and whom the sacrifices for sins typified had come, what said he 
and his faithful Apostles of the evolution of mankind from a 
position one step above the monkey, up to perfection? Did they 
state this to be his mission? Not one such word. Quite 

R866 : page 4 

to the contrary, the Master stated his mission, saying that he had 
"come to seek and to save that which was LOST." (Luke 19:10.) 
Thus he places things in a reverse light from that of our 
evolution no-ransom theorists. According to their idea, what was 
lost was degradation and animalism and brutality, and the 
valuable thing was being gradually gained by evolution and 
development at the hands of great teachers or what it calls "seed- 
men"; hence, for the Lord to "save that which was lost," would 
be to wholly upset their theory that man had already made four 



steps forward and merely lost brutality. But the apostles keep up 
the Lord's idea of getting back something very valuable, 
originally possessed, but lost. Thus Peter speaks of the great 
blessings to come in due time through Christ Jesus, and assures 
his hearers (Acts 3:19-21.) that, as a result of blotting out of sins 
there would come times of restitution or restoration, which he 
claims was the story of all the holy prophets. Thus Peter's 
testimony alone would completely vanquish the evolution 
theory, not to mention our Lord and "all the holy prophets" and 
other apostles. 

But our Lord not only states that he came to save that which was 
lost, but he proceeds to tell us of its final recovery, showing John 
and the Church through his visions (Rev. 1:1; 21:10-27 and 22:1- 
7) the Paradise restored and sin and its curse or penalty removed, 
and no more pain or tears or death. 

And notice finally that the restoration which Peter mentions, is 
effected by the "precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without 
blemish and without spot," "Who his own self bare our sins in 
his own body on the tree." (1 Pet. 1:18,19; 2:24.) The prophets 
testify to the redemption as well as to the restitution, in scores of 
texts of which we cite but one, Isaiah 53. Paul not only tells us 
that by one man's disobedience all came under sin and 
condemnation to its penalty, and that thus death passed upon all 
men, but when assuring us of a restitution to life, that as through 
Adam all die, even so through Christ shall all be made alive, etc., 
he gives us the method by which the change is effected from the 
curse of sin and death, to the blessings of divine favor and life, 
saying: "While we were yet sinners Christ died for us" and 
"being now justified by his blood we shall be saved from wrath 
through him." (Rom. 5:8,9. Compare also Eph. 1:7; Col. 1:14.) 
And let the apostle John add his testimony, he says, "He is the 
propitiation [satisfaction, or appeasement] for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 
2:2.) And now hear the Master tell how he gained the right to 
loose the prisoners of sin and death from the tomb, and to offer 
life, restitution to all for whom life and all had been lost. He 
says, "The Son of Man came... to give his life a ransom [price] 
for many." (Luke 10:45; Matt. 20:28.) And in the symbolic 
representations of the future, it is carefully noted, not only that 
the Lamb that was slain redeemed by his blood, [his death] but it 
is shown that only his blood can purge or wash away sin and 
present the sinner acceptable before the Father, in the merit of 
his imputed robe of righteousness. 

Among all those whose bliss the Redeemer pictures before us in 
his Revelation of the coming glories, none were heard singing 
Glory to God for the "evolution" and spiritual unfoldment which 
brought us here, for the reason that none will reach there by that 
route; but the Apostle did in vision hear the anthems arise from 
the blood-washed multitude, out of every nation, redeemed ~ 



"Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his own 
blood." There the honors of salvation are not divided among 
saviours, but are ascribed to a work of redemption by one 
Saviour anointed of Jehovah, of whom all shall sing "Thou art 
worthy to take the book and to open the seals thereof; for thou 
wast slain and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of 
every kindred and tongue and people and nation."-- Rev. 5:9. 

Ah yes, beloved! Jesus Christ the crucified Redeemer is the 
stone of stumbling and rock of offence both in his first and 
second presence: but "there is none other name given under 
heaven or among men whereby we must be saved." 

Among all the teachings of heathen philosophies not one 
corresponds with the Bible in its three main features-- first, that 
the curse or penalty of death came upon all men through one 
man's disobedience; secondly, that penalty met in the person of 
another one whom God hath set forth to be a satisfaction for the 
sins of all (1 John 2:2); and thirdly, a resurrection as the means 
of deliverance to life and divine favor procured by such ransom. 
On the contrary heathen philosophies advocate evolution and 
spiritual unfoldment by "seed-men" or great teachers; and that of 
the Brahmans is in advance of all others, tracing evolution into 
the future and claiming that all obedient followers of their 
teachings finally become absorbed into their God, as of the same 
essence. So then, those who would receive these theories as new, 
as dispensational light, are really going back to heathen theories 
which existed before Christianity was founded—before life and 
immortality were brought to light. 

Seeing we are so warned and guarded by our Father's Word 
against the snares and pitfalls of this day of the Lord, it behooves 
all to be on their guard. Many who have caught glimpses of the 
truth now dispensationally due, should beware of receiving as 
truth everything which calls itself "dispensational truth." Receive 
nothing without close scrutiny, well knowing that our adversary 
is a counterfeiter of no little experience, who knows well the 
forms and names most likely to entrap. 

How shall you know? The apostle says, "Prove all things, hold 
fast that which is good." But how shall we prove? There are 
always some to say that truth is error as well as to call error 
truth. Yes, it is a part of the adversary's policy to put light for 
darkness as well as darkness for light, and even their candor and 
their desire to use the advice of the apostle to "prove all things," 
has been made a snare to some. They understand it to mean that 
they must reject nothing which claims to be of God, and which 
quotes 

R867 : page 4 

from the Bible in its support. Hence some keep reading all they 
can lay their hands on, and are in a constant state of unrest; as 
the same apostle describes it, "Ever learning and never able to 



come to a knowledge of the truth." (2 Tim. 3:7.) They do not 
understand what is meant by "proving," else they might, without 
difficulty, quickly test or prove every doctrine presented to them. 

Draughtsmen or carpenters would test whether an angle were 
true or untrue in a moment, by putting their square upon it, thus 
proving it. A mason would prove or test the trueness of a wall by 
his plumb-line. And just so every one engaged in building up 
himself and others in the most holy faith, is provided with a 
square and plummet by which every item of truth can be tested 
speedily and positively, namely the Bible. And the more 
thoroughly we are acquainted with it and skilled in its use, the 
more quickly we shall be able to prove all things by it. It is able 
to make us wise, and in it the man of God is thoroughly 
furnished.~2 Tim. 3:15,17. Use and experience will soon teach 
you how to measure speedily any new view presented. Measure 
its foundation first of all; if its foundation is out of square, stop 
there; you are through with proving it- -you have proved it to be 
false, untrue, and to handle or measure at it further, is to run the 
risk Eve ran when she allowed the Serpent to talk to her about 
how good and desirable was the fruit which she knew was 
contrary to God's word. "I fear, lest by any means as the serpent 
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be 
corrupted from the simplicity [simple truth] that is in Christ." (2 
Cor. 11:3. Compare verses 12-15.) 

This we know is the difficulty with many. They go on to 
compare God's plan with other theories, and the more they do so 
the more confused they are apt to become; and judging mostly 
by their own opinions, prejudices, or education, they are as apt to 
take the error as the truth. Learn then, that the Bible lays down as 
the basis of all blessings God has provided for fallen man, as the 
foundation of all hope, the death of Christ~a ransom [a 
corresponding price] for all. As you proceed you will find that 
nearly all of the erroneous theories presented to you, will prove 
themselves false by being crooked in the foundation. Less than 
one hour should disprove any of the above no ransom theories to 
a mere beginner, or babe, and one glance should be sufficient to 
a man of God thoroughly furnished. 

By thus learning to rightly and promptly prove all things, you 
will not only be free from harassing uncertainty, but you will 
have moments and hours saved for building up yourself and 
others in the truth—in that which will stand the test. Wherever 
you find the foundation true, measure on, prove on, rejecting the 
untrue, and accepting the true, up every course to the very top, 
using the same square and plummet. But you will not find many 
to require testing above the foundation, or at most, the first 
course or two above it; for finding these badly twisted and 
untrue, or as in the no-ransom views, entirely gone, you will 
readily see that all built upon them are also untrue, and thus your 
work of testing them may be speedily accomplished. 



Inform yourself thoroughly as to the meaning of the word 
RANSOM. It occurs but three times in the Greek-Matt. 20:28; 
Mark 10:45; 1 Tim. 2:6. It signifies TO RECOVER by paying a 
price. The Greek word rendered ransom is intensified in the last 
of these texts so as to signify a recovery by the payment of a 
corresponding price. And the Apostle's use of it clearly and 
unequivocally, teaches that our Lord Jesus bought back for man 
a right to life and all the favors of God, lost through sin, by 
taking man's nature and then giving himself a 
CORRESPONDING price for that which was lost. Thus 
informed on what the Bible does mean by the word ransom, you 
should resent as an insult, not only to your intelligence, but also 
as a most outrageous insult to God's Word, the insinuations and 
inferences thrown out by those who quote these texts containing 
the word ransom, while denying that we were bought with a 
price-denying that man ever had or lost God's image, and that 
Jesus came to save (recover) that which was lost. Settle it forever 
in your hearts that the theories which find it necessary to deceive 
and misrepresent and shun the light of full investigation, are not 
of God. "To the law and to the testimony;" prove them by these, 
beginning at the foundation. "If they speak not according to this 
word, it is because there is no light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) The 
more you handle error, the more you love to handle that which 
you have thus proved to be off the true foundation, the more 
likely you are to be snared by the enemy and smitten down by 
this noontide pestilence. (Psa. 91:6.) You will have plenty to do 
to help yourself and others to put on the whole armor of God and 
to stand in this evil day without tampering with, or further 
examining, that which you once prove false-out of harmony 
with the fundamentals of Christianity. 

OTHER DEVICES 

Another device and snare is known as the "Christian Scientists'" 
views. Their chief hobby is that any disease of the body can and 
should be cured by the power of the mind, the will; they call 
these "mind cures" as distinguished from faith cures; cures 
accomplished through power of will, and not through faith in 
God's power or by prayer. This is in the same line as those 
above, so far as Jesus' ransom is concerned. They claim their 
mind cures to be a step in advance of all others, the highest 
attainment of human evolution or spirit unfoldment. 

It is a fact well known to all physicians, that the mind has great 
power over the body, either in inducing or arresting disease; 
hence the greater success sometimes of one physician over that 
of another using the same remedies; the one securing the 
confidence and mental co-operation of the patient more than the 
other. So with these mind curers, they get their patient to will 
and determine upon recovery, and inspire confidence, and thus 
sometimes produce cures in cases of long standing; and when 



they are unsuccessful, the patient is blamed with a lack of 
determination or loss of confidence. 

The fact is, that being in the Dawn of the Millennial age, it is in 
harmony with the divine plan to gradually encourage the world 
to look toward and expect, the blessings of restitution to health, 
strength and a gradual return to perfection of being and fulness 
of life. And as the labor troubles come in spasms and go to come 
again with increased force, thus gradually drawing on into the 
great time of trouble and dissolution of earthly governments and 
readiness for the heavenly, so with restitution in the matter of 
healings, etc. It seems to be God's plan to let it come in waves, 
each time dying out, yet each time becoming more general and 
wide-spread, thus drawing on gradually and preparing mankind 
for the full dawn of restitution in its due season. 

And as in everything else and at every other period, (2 Tim. 3:8. 
Acts 16:16-18.) Satan seeks, as usual, to draw attention from the 
truth by counterfeiting it and using his counterfeit as a snare in 
two ways: first, to mislead by erroneous teachings using the light 
as a trap; and secondly, by disparaging the facts of the genuine. 
So mind curers or the so called "Christian Scientists" (without a 
Christ), and their so called "seances" are but a step in the 
direction of Spirit-ism (misnamed "Spiritualism") which 
outwardly has fallen into disfavor, though really, privately, it is 
extending its influence daily. 

Another similar effort to hand-truck Christian people into the 
great Omnibus of Spiritism, is a little paper published on the 
Pacific Coast, which goes under various names, one of the most 
popular of which is the "Father's Love." This journal selects 
from other papers some good, simple articles as a sugar coating, 
which with its title, we doubt not often entraps for a time at least 
God's hungry children, only to feed them on no ransom, and 
dispensational evolution, and to introduce to them out and out 
spiritist publications. 

What shall we say to these things, dear brethren: these have all 
sprung up just recently, and how many more are yet to come 
God and Satan only know. Is there not every reason for us to 
believe that the Lord did not overstate the terrible battle between 
truth and error, when he foretold that a thousand would fall to 
one who would stand, upheld by God's truth and its messengers? 
(Psa. 91:4,11,12.) There is every reason to think that the Master 
did not overstate it when he said, "If it were possible they would 
deceive the very elect" (Matt. 24:24); and to believe the apostle's 
statement that we would need the whole armor of God that we 
might be able to stand. Remember the test— Jesus in the flesh, a 
ransom for all. 



My soul be on thy guard, 

Ten thousand foes arise; 

The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize." 



*Those interested might do well to refer to the treatment of this 
text, in the TOWER of February, 1885, after reading this article. 



R867 : page 4 

THE CHART OF THE AGES. 

Upon the inside of this number you will find a copy of the 
Chart of the Ages, such as we once had mounted upon rollers, 
the supply of which has for some time been exhausted, 
preventing us from filling many applications received. We take 
this method of placing it in the hands of all our readers. 

R868 : page 4 

We trust that it may have a two-fold effect: first, that you may 
be blessed by a fresh examination of the chart and its lessons, as 
expressed in the explanation furnished in the pamphlet "FOOD" 
page 105. (Every reader is welcome to a copy of "FOOD" free.) 
Secondly, we hope that being quickened and refreshed by a clear 
view of our Father's plan, you may be stimulated as well as 
enabled, to explain the plan to others, illustrating it by the chart. 
Thus, no matter how simply you tell it, you can preach the "good 
tidings of great joy which shall be to all people." The chart will 
not only interest and hold the attention of your thoughtful 
neighbor, but will make the truth the more easy of 
comprehension. Thus many can let their light so shine as to 
honor their Heavenly Father, as well as to bless and refresh their 
neighbors and friends. 



'WRITE DOWN THE VISION AND MAKE IT PLAIN UPON TABLES, THAT EVERY ONE MAY READ IT FLUENTLY/ 

HABAKKUK 2 2. 



THE 

TABERNACLE 

<IF THE WILDERNESS 

THE HARMONY OF IIS 1EACHJJVG5 




CHART OF THE AGES, 

HAUSTRATINC THE PLAN OF GOD FOK BRINGING MANY SONS TO GLORY, AND HIS PURPOSE 

H Kn regard in an acfminiHlratEort *f the fulnc** *f xh* ar-pointLTl iim ?5h u rtunaw all iJLinffF imr^tr out Huid, tvwi urofcr tbc AnoJirttd One; Lh* 

things, in h^ven flnd «JlO LhLligs 4>n rartn.— UimSct Him,"— E&L 1 1 1 0— DiagtoU.. 



tdz'j-^i /Ju tf.AinrJ d/ (.fir -^K^f. 
jfttftt^Hf tl\£ SQU1£ ST flFS tf-f 
H^^ijfdr^f in I'tfiri&ri? +rOin jj'rt 

C7wrt #/ rf eMl THE f O-UJfr 

»y PERFECT liVMAV plane. 
Tw» _ "Hfty" r*Pr&ttftU. tk* 

tSatt* BEGOTTEN of thw 

Spirit. Tfttf- Moit Holy, frrjure^f 
the jrroHii ivil, r£prfxrntjj the 
PfflFMCT SPIRITUAL ***- 

ttJJlf* The *Sm^ pfoAj & 

rfi'mc* pf rapJV— rr G"ik>r^. ffdft^r 


