Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, K Y., MARCH 1, 1917 


No. 5 


PROCLAIMERS OF THE KINGDOM MESSAGE 

"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation ; that saith unto Zion, thy God reigneth ! ' '- 


Looking down through the corridors of the ages, and viewing
 the closing part of the Gospel age, the Prophet of the Lord 
wrote concerning that time in the words of our text. The 
Gospel age opened with the clarion notes of the Master announcing
, "The kingdom of heaven is at handl" The King was 
then upon the earth ; but before he could attain to the glorified 
condition and assume the authority of his great office he must 
suffer, die and rise again. So those who compose the members 
of his body must likewise suffer and die and rise from the 
dead before the kingdom will be fully in operation. Throughout
 the Gospel age, therefore, the body members have been in 
course of preparation, and many Scriptures teach thiat at the 
close of the age those remaining in the flesh to finish the work 
would be especially honored by the Lord. 

"FEET MEMBERS" OF THE MYSTICAL CHRIST 
St. Paul, in addressing the Corinthian church, uses a human
 body to illustrate The Christ, saying, "For as the body 
is one and hath many members, and ail the members of that 
body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ." (1 Oor. 
12:12-27) The Apostle calls attention to the importance of 
each part of the body, and the office that each performs. In 
another place he says, "He (Jesus) is the Head of the body, 
the church; who is the beginning, the first-born from the 
dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence." 
(Colossians 1:18) The Head, Christ Jesus, was born first, 
and it follows, therefore, that the last members of the body 
to be born would properly be designated "feet members." 

Hence the Prophet Isaiah refers prophetically to these last 
members of the body, who would participate in the glorious 
privilege of announcing the glad tidings on the earth. He describes
 them as "beautiful." Evidently their beauty does not 
appeal to the world. Their special beauty is not a beauty of 
the flesh ; they are beautiful by reason of the sweet, unselfish, 
sacrificing spirit manifested. Their great desire is to announce
 the King and the blessings which his kingdom will 
bring. 

TTie word "mountains" in the text symbolically represents 
kingdoms. At this time we see the kingdoms of the earth 
torn with the strife of the most horrible war in history. Ejrery 
nation is threatened with disruption. All peoples desire lasting
 peace, yet know not how to obtain it. Everywhere men's 
hearts are failing them for fear because of what they now see 
upon the world, and they are fearful that even worse things 
will come. "All faces gather blackness." — Joel 2:6. 

The Prophet Isaiah contrasts this condition of distress 
amongst the peoples of the earth with the condition and work 
of the "feet members" of the body of Christ, and with ecstasy 
exclaims, How beautiful are the feet of the Messiah now engaged
 in publishing peace, in giving to the«world the message 
that will bring a lasting peace; who bring good tidings of good; 
who are bringing to the dying race the sweet message of salvation
 ! Truly wonderful is the position occupied by every spiritbegotten
 one who in this harvest time fully appreciates the 
privilege of serving the Lord! These are coworkers with the 
present King, engaged in a special sense in proclaiming the 


-Isaiah 62:7. 

closing message of the age — "The kingdom of heaven is at 
hand'^fche King is present! 

It has been the privilege of the Watch Toweb Bible asd 
Tract Society since its organization to send out brethren designated
 as pilgrims, or lecturers, to proclaim this glorious 
message to those who have hearing ears. The Lord gave the 
harvest message to the Laodicean church, the faithful ones 
of whom compose the "feet members" of Christ; and he gave it 
through his especially chosen servant, according to his promise. 
(Matthew 24:45-47) All. the "feet members*' who are now 
engaged in proclaiming this precious message received their 
enlightenment by partaking of the "food" which the Lord sent 
through his chosen servant. The Watch Toweb unhesitatingly 
proclaims Brother Russell as "that faithful and wise servant" 
He delivered the message faithfully, finished his course and has 
now entered into his reward. Through him the Lord gave to 
the church the message that is so essential to each one who in 
this harvest time would win the glorious prize. 

We cannot too strongly urge upon the pilgrim brethren, 
therefore, that they emphasize to the various classes the necessity
 of adhering strictly to the message which the Lord gave 
through this chosen channel. Any departure from tihe message 
at this time must necessarily be displeasing to the Lord and 
work a detriment to those thus turning aside to accept some 
other message or scheme. 

The pilgrims have the privilege of opening the way. It 
has been found necessary for others to follow up the pilgrim 
work, that those who have manifested some interest in present 
truth may be encouraged to greater growth in knowledge. 
THE COLPOKTEUE WORK 
The Society has long recognized the importance of the colporteur
 work. If we were to draw comparisons, we would say 
that the colporteurs do the most important work of all, because
 they are bearing this message of glad tidings of peace 
and good will in a form that enables the one receiving it to 
feed upon it in the quiet of the home, and thus to grow thereby. 
The colporteurs, therefore, enjoy a wonderful privilege as 
coworkers with the Master in the field. The strongest of our 
pilgrim brethren are unable to deliver more than three lectures 
daily, whereas the colporteur who places only one volume in 
the hands of the interested thereby preaches many discourses, 
and in such connected and convenient form that they may be 
referred to as often as desired. The colporteurs are in no sense 
book agents, but are truly ambassadors of the Lord, delivering 
his message of reconciliation to the world. It is our desire to 
encourage the colporteurs all we can to be as diligent as ever, 
and rather to speed up than to become faint or weary in their 
minds. 

At this time the majority of people have some ready money 
and are anxious to know the meaning of the great distress 
among the nations. The colporteurs, by placing the Scripture 
Studies before them, thus bring that which will fully answer 
their questions and satisfy their desires. We hope to hear of 
more becoming active in the colporteur field by Spring time, 
and trust that they may labor with diligence before the great 


[6049] 


(68-69) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BXOOKLYN, N. Y. 


night of darkness, when no man can work, fully settles down 
upon the world. Truly the harvest is white, but the laborers 
are few! 

THE PASTORAL WOBX 

t We do not always have the foresight that we desire. Often 
mistakes are made unwittingly. The Lord permits such experiences
 to teach us lessons. It now appears that there is 
danger of the colporteur and pastoral work conflicting at times, 
whereas these two important branches should be a great aid 
one to the other. 

A man who attempts to walk and steps with one foot on 
the other must necessarily impede his progress. The "feet 
members" that go forth to declare the message of Messiahs 
kingdom would not look so beautiful if one foot interfered with 
the progress of the other. 

During the time Brother Russell was with us as our leader, 
several hundreds of classes of Associated Bible Students elected 
him Pastor, and the Pastoral work was under his direct supervision
 as shepherd of these congregations. lie afterwards 
thought well to suggest this work to all the classes, limiting it 
for a time to the sisters in the congregations. 

After Brother Russell's death, the Society continued the 
name "Pastoral Work" because of having no more appropriate 
name. It was not until about this time that the work was fully 
developed, and the advantages and disadvantages of the first 
outlines could be properly weighed. It has taken time to get 
the work well in hand, and we are convinced that it is now 
no longer wise to limit this work to the sisters, but rather that 
the responsibility should rest upon all the congregation, that 
all should have a voice in it. 

As has already been advised, our new President has 
counseled against the electing of pastors by any of the ecclesias, 
believing that in view of Brother Russell's peculiar relationship
 to the church and out of deference to his memory, none 
should attempt to fill the place of Pastor to the church at this 
time. It is therefore impossible to carry out fully Brother 
Russell's original ideas about the Pastoral work ; hence it becomes
 necessary to make some changes, that the work may 
be conducted efficiently and in harmony with all other branches. 

When a general dies, the members of his .personal staff cease 
to be officers in that capacity; so when Brother Russell died 
those who had been selected as lieutenants under his direction, 
technically speaking, were no longer officers. Acting upon this 
situation, and with perfect harmony, at a business meeting held 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle by the New York City congregation, 
a lieutenant and other officers for the New York Ecclesia were 
elected by the congregation. 

It is now the suggestion of the Society that this course 
be followed by the classes everywhere; or, if it is deemed better
, those holding the positions mi^it resign and the congregation
 proceed as soon as convenient to elect a lieutenant and 
other officers necessary to conduct the work; or, if thought 
wise, reelect the present incumbents. 

The lieutenant elected should then communicate at once 
with the Society's Office at Brooklyn and she will receive from 
the Office assignment of territory and further instructions. All 
territory will be assigned by the Brooklyn Office, but when assigned
 will be districted by the local Lieutenant. The territory
 for both the colporteurs and the pastoral workers being
 assigned from this Office, as is now done in Greater New 
York, will avoid any possible confusion. The pastoral work 
will then be carried on practically as before, with the exceptions
 herein stated. 

BOOK-LOANING FEATURE ONLY INCIDENTAL 
The book-loaning feature of the pastoral work instituted 
by. Brother Russell was originally intended by him to be merely 
incidental and not to be a prominent part of the work; the 
chief part of the work being to call on those who already have 
the books, to interest them in reading, to encourage them to 
attend Chart Talks, and then to organize classes for Berean 
Bible Study. 

Indiscriminate loaning of books in territory where colporteurs
 are canvassing must of necessity be detrimental to 
the colporteur work. Thus one foot would interfere with the 
other, impeding progress. This we all desire to avoid. We 
therefore ask the friends to adopt the following . course, especially
 in cities or towns where colporteurs are at work, in order 
that we may not hinder the colporteurs and yet may still grant 


to the pastoral workers the same privileges they have heretofore
 enjoyed. 

OBDEB OP PBOCEDTJEB 

Al] territory for both the colporteur and the pastoral work 
will be assigned by^the Society, but one map will be used, and 
that the map now used for the colporteur work. The colporteurs
 will first canvass the territory; afterwards the pastoral
 workers will follow in the same territory. Both colporteurs
 and pastoral workers receiving their assignments from 
the Society, there can he no conflict and no interference with 
each other's work. 

When following in the territory that has been colporteured, 
should the pastoral workers find those who desire to purchase 
books, the colporteur still being in the city and working in 
any part thereof, should be sent to that person with the books 
for sale. The pastoral workers should sell no books whatever 
in cities where colporteurs are at work. The names of those 
who have purchased books from the colporteurs should be furnished
 to the pastoral workers, who will call upon suoh and endeavor
 to interest them in reading and in attending Oh art 
Talks, as heretofore outlined in The Watch Tower. After 
the city has been gone over in this manner, the colporteurs 
might then go again over the same territory covered by the 
pastoral workers, this time selling the Manna and Dbama 
iScENARio, and again the pastoral workers could follow the colporteurs
, and thus keep in touch with the people who are 
manifesting interest. The only possible way to avoid one department
's interfering with another is to have everything managed
 from the Society office at Brooklyn. 

As to the loaning of books, this can be done to those who 
•had a chance to purchase from the colporteur, but had not 
done so. Our experience is that one who buys a book is much 
more likely to read it than one who borrows it. We therefore 
would not encourage the loaning of the Studies in the Scriptures
 where this would in any wise interfere with the colporteur
 work. 

VOLUNTEER WOBK 

Where it is possible, it is always better that the volunteer 
workers follow, in the district, both the colporteur and pastoral
 workers. If it is not found practicable to follow the 
pastoral work, the volunteer work should come in between 
the colporteur and pastoral work, thus stirring up as much interest
 as possible in the minds of those in the community. 

The volunteer matter is very valuable. I>o not waste it. 
We earnestly recommend volunteers, where it is possible, to 
Ting the door-bell and hand in the paper to some one in the 
household, or to put it in the doorway. Throwing them ou the 
street, or placing them on empty car seats, or on the ground 
near mail-boxes is not wise. Let us keep in mind t£e importance
 of the message and the necessity of putting it where 
it will do the most good. 

OoncernSng the selection of the district, the canvassers, the 
canvass to be given, and the Chart Talks, we refer the friends 
to the November 1, 1016, Watch Tower. Since the pastoral 
work will henceforth be under the supervision of the entire 
congregation and not under the sisters alone, it would be proper 
that the entire congregation select the speakers; or, in harmony 
with the custom we have oft-times followed, the selection of 
the speakers may be delegated bv the congregation to the elders, 
who will choose those best qualified to deliver such talks. 

We hope that every ecclesia of Associated Bible Students 
in the land will at once organize for the pastoral work, elect 
their lieutenant and have that lieutenant communicate at once 
with the Office of the Society at Brooklyn for instructions and 
the assignment of territory. The Society will see to it that 
this assignment does not in any manner conflict with the colporteur
 assignment, but that it works in conjunction therewith. 

Let us arouse ourselves to the importance of the hour, dear 
brethren. The opportunities are great; the laborers are few. 
The Lord has been pleased to place in the bands of each of us 
the wonderful privilege of publishing the message of salvation. 
As we go forth in the field of labor, let us be inspired with the 
words of Jehovaih spoken through the Prophet: "How beautiful
 upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringetn good 
•tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of 
good ; that publisheth salvation ; that saith unto Zion, thy God 
reigneth! . . — Isaiah 52:7. 


PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

In the early part of January the Board of Directors of the pauy. This contract was to be fully consummated by March 

\yATCH Toweb Bible and Tract SocrsTr entered into a condi- 31 next. 

tional contract for the sale of the raoro-DBAMA of Creation As many friends throughout the country have since expressed 

with certain brethren who had organised the Hena Film Com* the feeling that the Society should retain the Bbama, it has 

[60501 


Maich 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(69-70) 


been mutually agreed by the Board of Directors of the Society
 and the Film Company that the contract of sale for it 
shall be cancelled, and it has been cancelled, the Societt to retain
 the possession and ownership of the Photo-Dbama of 
Creat/ton. 

It is fully and mutually understood by all the parties that 
the cancellation of this contract is without prejudice to any. 

We take this occasion to announce that the Mena Film 
Company is entirely independent from the Watch To web Bible 


and Tbact Society, is not financed by the Society, and the 
Society is not at all interested in it financially, but has the 
kindliest feeling toward all the brethren who are interested 
therein. The Film Company believes that it will produce an 
all- film exhibition which will be instrumental in teaching God's 
plan. 

The friends everywhere must exercise their own will and 
discretion in reference to subscribing for stock, as the Society 
will not attempt to influence them one way or another. 


THE V. D. M. QUESTIONS 

"And the things which thou didst hear from me through many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men, who will be competent 

to instruct others. "— -2 Timothy 2 :2— Diaglott. 

In March, 1915, a student in the Kentucky Wesleyan College
 wrote to us concerning the degree of V. D. M. He had 

read the second page of The Towek, and was deeply impressed 

by the following words which he had found in the second 

paragraph of the standing article on "This Journal and its 

Sacred Mission": 

"Our Berean Lessons are topical rehearsals or reviews of 

our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, 

and very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary 

degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister 

(V. D. M.), which ; translated into English, is Minister of the 

Divine Word." 

Consequently, he wrote to the Society asking that they inform
 him what would be necessary for him to do to merit this 

degree. In reply, he was informed that if he would read carefully
 six volumes of Scbiptube Studies, and then read them 

again to impress their lessons upon his mind and heart, and 

would then write us, we would submit to him a set of questions
, which, if he could answer correctly, would enable us to 

recognize him as a V. D. M. 

In March, 1916, the Society received the following letter 

from this student in the Wesleyan College: 

"I have been a Bible Student since January 4, 1915. 
I ordered a set of Studies in the Scbiptubes at that time 
and I have been very deeply interested in the books ever 
since. I am also a reader of The Watch Toweb, and I 
like it fine, especially its treatment of the International 
Sunday School lessons. I have just completed a careful 
reading of Studies in the ScbiptTjBES. I have read the 
entire set of six volumes twice, and I have carefully looked 
up and read each Scripture citation in the meantime. I 
have read several B, S. M.s also. I am now reading carefully
 twelve pages of the Studies each day, reading each 
Scripture citation as I go. I am consecrated to the Lord 
and his work. 

"It is wonderful what a fine spiritual atmosphere Pastor
 Russell leads one into, if one will read carefully and 
prayerfully his Studies in the Scbiptubes. This fact 
emphatically contradicts the many false and slanderous reports
 made by the modern Pharisees in their ridiculous 
and absurd attempts to assassinate his character. I 
never saw Mr. Russell in my life, but I would stake life 
itself on the above statement I have made. Such a character
 as he is painted to be could not create any such impression
 on people in general as he invariably does. You 
are seized with confidence and assurance that vou are getting
 the truth, presented honestly and sincerely, from the 
very moment you commence reading Studies in the Scbiptubes
. In reading any other literature you get a little 
truth — much error; you lose your confidence, and very 
soon you are entangled in a maze of tradition and rank 
foolishness, which is absolutely revolting to one who has 
the truth. Well did our Master declare, *My people perish 
for lack of knowledge.* 

"I request that you send me your series of questions 
required to be answered by a candidate for the degree of 
Verbi Dei Minister, and also any instructions pertaining 
thereto. .... I could write a book in praise of Studies 
in the Scbiptubes, but will now close, with love and respect
 for the Society and its beloved Pastor." 
As a result, the V. D. M. questions were prepared and sent 

to him, and his were the first answers received and filed. He 

made about 90%. It was then thought well to submit the 

list to the pilgrim brethren. Others requested them and afterwards
 they were sent to the elders, then to the colporteurs, and 

.subsequently to all who sent in requests for them. The pastoral 

workers are now asking for the questions and also many sisters 

who hesitated at first because of having the impression that 

the questions were intended for the elders only. The requests 

are now general, and the Committee is kept busy in trying to 
keep up with them. This has necessitated the formation of the 


V. D. M. Kept., which is endeavoring to serve the friends a* 
faithfully and expeditiously as they possibly can. They have 
regretted their inability to serve the friends as soon as requested
 in many instances, but by the Lord's ^race they have 
"stuck to it/' until now they are getting their heads pretty 
well above water. 

No doubt some of these papers were lost in the mails during
 the Holiday rush ; others were not signed by the writers or 
full address was omitted, so that there was no means of identifying
 them, or advising the writers; still others have failed to 
obtain the required 85%. We are reserving the failures for 
later treatment and advice. For these reasons many have not 
yet heard from their papers, whereas thousands have received 
reply and been made happy. Some of the letters of appreciation
 that we receive are truly refreshing and encouraging. In 
one instance a sister failed; but the Committee thought they 
could greatly encourage this saint by sending her another set 
of questions and advising her to try again. This was her 
reply: "Dearly Beloved Friends in Christ: WTien I saw our 
Secretary, she said, 'You are turned down on your questions.' 
I said, *I am thankful for that; I am going to start right next 
time.' So if I am not right, turn me down again. I make so 
many mistakes and blunders, but I know they are steppingstones
, and make me more careful. Dear friends, I love you 
dearly, and my heart is with you in this great harvest work. 
God bless you all! Pray for me," etc. 

Some have said that they thought the questions, when first 
they looked them over, were easy and elementary, but they 
found afterwards that the more they thought and prayed over 
them, the more important they appeared. We have many letters
 telling us bow much good the preparation of their answers 
to these questions has done them. To put these answers down 
in the right way, and to give appropriate references to the 
Scriptures and Dawns after each answer takes considerable 
time. Many have spent a whole day on them, and some two 
days* These h«ve seemed to receive the largest measure of 
blessing. 

One brother wrote us, after much prayer and study over 
them, that he considered these V. D. M. questions to be "The 
pulse of the church," and a great many have testified to the 
wisdom of Brother Russell in preparing and sending them out. 
No doubt they have helped to raise the standard of eldership 
in many instances. It has certainly endeared our hearts to 
the friends as the V. D. M. Committee has so generously and 
patiently gone over the papers and made brief reply. We would 
have preferred that each paper be answered separately and 
individually, but this would have taken a year or more, even to 
handle the thousands already received, and the Btream continues
 to flow in daily. 

Various friends have requested that we send them a list 
of the correct answers; but this would have interfered with 
the work proposed. We have invariably replied that it was the 
Society's intention, after most of the answers were in, to print 
a list of the correct answers in The Watch Toweb, so that all 
might have the benefit of them in the way of comparison, correction
, confirmation and refreshment. 

The V, D, M. and pastoral work were the two features of 
the harvest which the Lord impressed upon the mind of our 
beloved Brother and Pastor shortly before his departure. How 
wonderful and various have been the mutual blessings connected
 with both of them I It will be the Society's pleasure to 
serve the friends in connection with the V. D. M. questions 
until, in the Lord's providence, they shall cease to flow in. The 
answers will be kept on file for future reference. The Lord sees 
them. It is a fine witness for the truth. They reveal, among 
other things, how the Lord's spirit teaches many humble ones 
of earth far removed from the educational facilities of men. 
"Hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, 
and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them 
that love him?" 


[6051] 


JESUS THE BREAD OF LIFE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "I Am the Bread of Life," published in isaue of March 1, 1908, which please see.] 


THE KING COMETH! 


"See, the King in beauty cometh, 

He, thy long, long absent King; 
As the light of dawn he shineth, 
And his breath is that of spring 
From the night of darkness waking, 
Zion, lift thy voice and sing! 


"From the dust of ages rising, 
Put on all thine ancient might, 

For to thee the crown belongeth, 
And to thee the raiment bright — 

Of the coming age the glory, 

Of the ransomed earth the light." 


JESUS SAVES FROM SIN 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Ye Shall Be Free Indeed," published in issue of February 15, 1899, which pleas 

see.] 


AT THE TEMPLE-SUNDAY, FEB. 4 


For years Brother Russell made the first Sunday in each 
month an occasion for especially inviting the public to The 
New York Temple. Brother Russell was the speaker when at 
home, and the public responded generously to the invitation. 
Prior to The Temple meetings, the Brooklyn Academy of Muaie 
was used in a similar way, and it was often crowded and many 
turned away. Thousands thus heard the truth proclaimed for 
the first time, and many embraced it and are now rejoicing in 
its light. 

Since the death of Brother Russell it has been thought 
well to continue the practise of extending a special invitation 
to the public on the first Sunday of each month. The first effort
 in this direction was put forth for Sunday, February 4, 
Brother Rutherford being the speaker. Advance announcements 


were to the effect that Judge Rutherford, successor to Pastor 
Russell as President of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
, would be the speaker in The Temple at 3 P. M. The results
 are considered such as to justify mention in the columns 
of The Watch Tower. The topic was, "Why Do the" Nations 
War?" About 1,600 gave earnest attention for almost two 
hours, while bo me were turned away. About 135 address cards 
were handed in requesting information along the lines of systematic
 Bible study. 

Brother Rutherford will not speak at The Temple again 
until Sunday, April 1, at 3 P. M, having started Thursday 
evening, February 8, to fill appointments at I>«nver and on 
the Pacific Coast. He will, however, return to Brooklyn about 
March 15. 


HARVEST WORK 


"I thank thee, Lord, for using me 
For thee to work and speak; 
However trembling is the hand, 
The voice however weak; 

"For those to whom, through me, thou hast 
Some heavenly guidance given; 
For some, it may be, saved from grief, 
And some brought nearer heaven. 


"Oh, honor higher, truer far, 

Than earthly fame could bring, 
Thus to be used in work like this, 
So long, by such a King! 

"A blunted sword, a rusted spear, 

Which only he could wield ; 
A broken sickle in his hand, 
To reap his harvest-field!" 


LETTERS OF DEEP INTEREST 


AN ITALIAN BE OTHER BEFORE THE MILITARY TBXBTOAL 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

I will give you a summary of the trial which took place 
at Alessandria, and in which our beloved Brother Kemigio 
Cuminetti gave a fine witness of hia faith before the Military 
Tribunal. 

Sister Fanny Luigi and myself were present at the trial, 
and were happy to have the privilege of supporting with our 
presence our Brother's confession of faith. The President 
questioned him long without finding him in a fault. Here is 
the summary in a few words: 

President: "Accused, be careful! You are before the 
Tribunal, and your position is grave. It seems as if you have 
a desire to laugh at the situation." 

Brother Cuminetti: "I cannot change the expression of 
my face. My heart is so full of joy that my face reflects its 
cheerfulness." 

President: "Why did you not put on the uniform? And 
why did you refuse repeatedly to serve the Fatherland ?" 

Cuminetti: "If it were not for that, I would not be here; 
for I have eommitted nothing reprehensible, except that I 
have refused to put on a uniform which is not suitable for the 
sons of God, whom I serve. In like manner I also, refused to 
wear the distinguishing mark in the factory in which I was 
working, because that little star represented war and hate; 
while the distinguishing mark of the sons of God is peace, and 
love for their neighbor." 

President: "Is it true that in the prison of Cuneo you 
divested yourself of the uniform and remained only in your 
underwear ?" 

Cuminetti: (f Yes; it is perfectly true. Three times I was 
dressed by force; and three times I undressed myself; for I 
was unwilling to wear a uniform which to me implied hate 
for my neighbor. By so doing I did not intend to revolt against 


doing good to others. On the contrary, if I had one hundred 
lives, I would give all my blood to the last drop for my neighbor
's sake. Give me any kind of work, even the most ignominious
 and abject, to do and I will very willingly adapt myself 
to it, to do all that I can to uplift others. But NEVER will 
I give the least help toward doing evil or any thing to injure 
my fellow-men, whom God says I should love and not hate,** 

President: "What schooling have you had?*' 

Cuminetti: "That is of little importance; I have studied 
the Bible." 

President: "I have asked you what schooling you have had. 
Answer that which is asked you." 

Cuminetti : "I have attended day school for three years, 
and night school for two years. But I repeat that this is of 
little importance in comparison to what I have learned in 
studying the precious divine revelation." 

President: "Have you passed the military visit!" 

Oumminetti : "Yes, I was visited three times." 

President: "It is a pity that you have made the acquaintance
 of some persons [Sisters Luigi and Cerulli] who have 
started you upon a wrong road. How long have you studied 
this book which you call the Bible ?" 

Cuminetti: "It is now six years that I have studied the 
Book ; and I am sorry that I did not know it long before/' 

President: "Who teaches you this new religion?" 

Cuminetti: "God himself teaches his own. The elders of 
the Bible Students help me to understand it; but God alone 
opens tiie eyes of our understanding." 

President: "Do you know that your refusal to render obedience
 is a very grave offense? Are you fully aware of what you 
are going against?" 

Cuminetti: "Yes, yes! I know very well. But I am ready 
for all that may come, even to being shot down. I cannot 


(72-76) 


[6052] 


Makcb 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(76-77) 


break the covenant that I have made with the God of the Bible, 
whom I adore/' 

The President then gave the word to the barrister, who 
asked the President to condemn Ouminetti to four years and 
four months of solitary confinement. 

The advocate who was defending our Brother then arose 
and gave a wonderful testimony to the exemplary conduct 
of Ouminetti, who had worked for six consecutive years in 
the laboratories without having a person say one word against 
him. The lawyer said: "Remigio Ouminetti has refused to 
wear the distinguishing mark of war because he already wore 
the distinguishing mark of the sons of peace, of joy. He has 
not wished to act contrary to his conscience. If he had worn 
that distinctive mark, he would have retained his position, 
been relieved from conscription and able to earn a good living 
for his family. But he preferred the way of sacrifice, fully 
conscious of what his refusal would mean to him. Calmly and 
serenely he withdrew from all. Cuminetti's case is a unique 
one in Italy; and we ought to admire hira. He read in the 
Bible that God commands, *Do not kill/ and he does not wish 
to kill. He is an apostle of love. He is in full possession of 
his mental faculties; he is neither silly nor mad. The spirit 
of the Bible has taken possession of him, and makes him act 
against his personal interests." 

The judges went out, and after five minutes returned and 
read the sentence: "For his refusal of obedience to the King 
and to the laws of the nation Ouminetti is condemned to three 
years and two months of detention/* Ouminetti then rendered 
thanks with one of his sweetest smiles* 

When the President asked him whether he had anything 
else to add to his defense, he answered: "I would have many 
things to say on the subject of God's love and on his plan of 
salvation for mankind/' The President was annoyed, and said, 
"That is not what I asked. We have already heard much on 
this subject. I asked whether you have anything to add to 
your defense/' With a smiling face Ouminetti answered, "I 
Tepeat what I have said ; namely, that I am ready to give my 
life for my neighbor's sake; but that I will not move a finger 
to help evil or to injure mankind, even if I myself should be 
shot." 

The trial is over. Sister Fanny and myself had the privilege
 of talking for about fifteen minutes with our beloved 
Brother, who has with great courage and strength stood on 
the side of God. All admired him. Even the judges and his 
accusers were astonished at his appearance — humble, but at 
the same time filled with the courage which the sons of light 
possess because they know to kneel only before the Lord, who 
is worthy of all adoration and absolute obedience. 

At present our beloved Brother is in Gaeta, <a beautiful 
place, with sunshine and the charming beauties of nature. 
He writes letters which exult in love and joy, saying that it 
does not seem like a prison to him. All certainly love him-. 
Indeed, for the sons of God walls of stone are not a prison; 
nor are railings and bars a cage. Under iron and stones the 
innocent soul finds pacific heritage. What is scorn, where 
there is no fault? Virtue despises the contempt of men; and 
unmerited punishment is a shining proof for the innocent, and 
accumulates upon their head a great weight of glory. 

Receive, beloved Brethren, and all the beloved ones in the 
lord, most affectionate greetings from all of your Italian 
brethren, who are rejoicing so much in seeing that their deliverance
 is drawing nigh. 

Your sister in the good fight of faith, 

Mrs. Glaba Cerotli. — Italy* 

A VOICE FROM AN ENGLISH PRISON FAITHTTTLHESS TO THE 
PRINCE OF PEACE 


My Deab Brother : — 

Greetings! Kindly excuse my taking the liberty of writing 
to you, and in pencil, too; but I felt I would like to do so, 
as you have taken such a brotherly and energetic interest in 
the cause for which we gladly suffer. 

Surely our beloved Master, w»ho endured such intensity of 
sorrow for our sakes, is worthy of all ths loving loyalty we 
have for him! 

I am indeed greatly comforted in my light affliction, by 
meditation upon the sources of the strength whereby, the ''Man 
of Sorrows" could so cheerfully and patiently endure! 

What a wonderful Savior is our Jesus! The very thought 
of him is a balm to our souls. 

I do not think I knew him half so well as I have done 
since this stand for principle, and the more we know him, 
the more we love him ; and the more we love him, the easier 
it is to "suffer with him." 

I wonder if we are sufficiently grateful to our dear Father 
for this magnificent gift of his Son. 


I am still waiting for my court-martial, this being the 
fourth week of my detention in safe-custody. I like that expression
, "safe-custody," for I am indeed in the safe custody 
of him in whom I have believed, and who is able and willing 
to keep that which I have committed unto him, against euch 
a time as I shall awake in his likeness. 

After the court-martial, I understand it is to be prison. 
What a privilege, dear brother, to be able to follow the steps 
of the heroes of the past! I never thought I should be so 
honored. I do pray that I may be a brilliant witness during 
this dark era. 

I can assure you, dear brother, that the chief battle is not 
to endure this detention, but to maintain the spirit of the 
Miaster at the same time. However, I find this possible by 
letting Christ's Word dwell in me richly, and by constant 
petition to the throne of grace. Whilst I take advantage of 
these privileges, naught can shake my sure repose! 

Ours is a noble cause! Our I. B. S. A. is an honorable 
movement! Its doctrines are more purifying and elevating 
than those of any other. Its founder was the most wonderful 
Biblical Expositor, and loyal disciple of Christ, in modern 
times. 

It is no small wonder, then, that the members of this 
covenant endeavor by God's grace to maintain such a glorious
 principle! 

May we ever display the banner of love, which the Lord 
hath given us, in the cause of the truth! 

There are many at Lancaster Gate, and in the Bible House, 
with whom I am not acquainted ; nevertheless, being one family 
in God, I forward through you to them my Christian love; 
and of course a goodly share for yourself. 

Praying the Father's richest blessing to be constantly with 
you and yours, believe me to be, dear brother, 

Yours fraternally, in bonds for Christ's sake, 

Joseph H. Shabman. — England. 

"IN NON-COMBATANT CAMP" 

Deab Bbethken of The Watch To web:— < 

This is my third letter to Brooklyn; but I had to destroy 
the other two, owing to the fact that the news in them had 
become out of date before they were posted. As you may 
guess, we have plenty of work to do every day. Up to the 
present the military authorities have treated us very fairly j 
and I see no reason for expecting a harder life than we are 
now experiencing. I have been in the Non-Combatant Corps 
since last* April, and have enjoyed prettv good health. 

No doubt you have received many letters from brethren 
acting as total resisters; i. e., those who refuse to comply 
with any military orders. But as there appear to be very 
few who have accepted the provision of the N. C, 0., I am 
writing to give you as much information as I can under the 
freedom of speech permitted by the censor. Only one member
 of the I. B. S. A. has found a way into this 2d Eastern 
Co., a brother from near London. We are able to see each 
other at almost any time. 

The (fellowship in general is excellent in many respects; 
and we have many a talk and helpful discussion, which you 
can imagine are often very interesting. The greater part of 
this Company is made up of Plymouth Brethren; the remainder
 is composed of many other denominations, and includes 
some atheists. I consider that my religion has already been 
through a severe test by the talks, criticisms and enticements 
that I have had ; and I feel so very happy that I have thus far 
come through stronger and more in love with my religion than 
ever before. So I can say that I feel more than ever grateful
 for the wonderful enlightenment which has come from God 
to me through our dear Pastor Russell, especially in regard 
to the philosophy of the ransom and to the clear, beautiful 
way he has revived the promises and the verity of the Bible 
itself. 

Our daily routine here is, on the average, thus: Awakened 
at 5 A. M.; ^breakfast at 5:45; parade for marching off to 
work at 6:15 or 6:30 (walk two miles each way) ; lunch at 
9:15-9:30. For the midday meal we have an hour. At 5:30 
or so we arrive back in Camp, when we have a full meal, Then 
the evening is free. 

As regards health our position here could not be better; 
for we aTe on the top of a high hill with agricultural ground 
around us and with a fine view of the sea, which is about 
two miles away. The work we have to do is always in the 
way of road repairing, loading and unloading wagons and 
traveling on them. Recently we have been put at building. 

I have seen many of the total resisters who come out 
here. On the whole I think that the newspaper reports about 
them are fairly correct. We pull along with the combatant 
regiments remarkably well ; and on taking an all-around survey 


[6053] 


(77-78) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N\ Y. 


I can easily see that we are being especially looked after from 
above. I have evidences in my diary; and after the war I 
shall be able to speak more freely for and against the military. 
With very much love and prayers from my wife and from 
Your brother in Christ, 

IT. M. Irwin, — ~Now in France. 

WISH TO OOKTHfUE WITH US 
Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

Though our hearts are sad at the loss of our dear Brother 
Russell, yet we rejorce that he has gone to his glorious reward. 

The Loveland class wish you to know that we intend to 
continue with you in the harvest work, asking God's richest 
blessing on our co-operation, and remembering you as ever in 
our daily prayers, Loveland Church. — Colo. 

A VOICE FROM PARIS ECCLESIA 
Excellent Brethren of The Watch Tower: — 

We learned of the departure beyond Jordan of our great 
friend, noble brother and revered pastor, C. T. Russell, almost 
a month after the events which occurred in the days just preceding
 October 31st last. 

Having been prevented earlier, through stress of circumstances
, from mingling our tears with yours in a solemn 
tribute to the memory of God's illustrious messenger to the 
modern Laodiceans, we then thought of immediately sending
 a word of comfort, brotherly love and encouragement 
to the dear family at Bethel, and to all those who have been 
favored of the lx>rd, through him, with the grand mission 
of carrying on the harvest work at Brooklyn Headquarters, 

But as a few weeks only separated us from our general 
assembly at the close of the year, we postponed until then 
the sending of our message, in order that it might have more 
weight and solemnity. We consider that the higher expression
 of our sentiments, permitted at this better opportunity, 
would not be too lofty for fittingly honoring the memory of 
the beloved Pastor, who himself honored us so much and so 
well during his life and by it. 

It would be idle for us at this late time to shed perfumes 
on his ashes, for, as he said once in The Watch Tower, "The 
flowers adorning the graves of the loved ones emit no retroactive
 fragrance back upon the pathway which they trod." 

Nevertheless, we are privileged to bring to the household 
of faith, all vibrating as they are with unalterable love for 
the Lord Jesus, the witness of our faithfulness, expressed as 
follows : 

As best we could, and from the very bottom of our hearts, 
we manifested to Brother Russell, during his life, our high appreciation
 of his instructions to us 5 in the Lord's name; for 
our recognition of his being "that servant" wa3 not limited 
to words only. The more we. grew in knowledge the more increased
 was our joy and willingness to abide by the least of 
his saE&cious, prudent and. forceful a4vice, drawn from the 
heavenly source \ and we attribute to this close and reasonable
 application of his methods of study and teaching, as found 
especially in Vol. o, the individual and collective prosperity of 
our dear Ecclesia. 

We believe we have in this way honored, by our obedience 
to the Lord, his faithful representative, and we desire to 
pledge ourselves before the li>rd to honor the blessed memory
 of that "faithful servant," by conveying the saintly love 
we had for him, together with our zeal, efforts and appreciation
, unto the beloved brethren separated by God for the continuance
 of the "Father's business," heretofore entrusted to 
our dear brother and Pastor, C. T. Russell, now gone to his 
reward. 

In token of our loyalty, the contents of the alabaster box 
of our hearts are- overflowing with precious oil "compounded 
after the art of the apothecary" (Exod, 30:25) — that box 
which we could not break on October 31st last — and are now 
humbly poured at your feet, excellent brethren. 

We enter the year 1917 resolving anew to faithfully stand 
with you and like you, cost what it may — to stand by the 
holy covenant of sacrifice we have made with God and By His 
grac*. We wish you all to be of good cheer, and assure you 
also of our fervent prayers that you may continue to "cry 
aloud" (Isaiah 58:1) upon the walls of Zion, in these last 
days of the Cnurch in the 'flesh; "Prepare to: meet thy God, 
Israer!"-^Amos 4:14. 

We bejieve that the death of our dear Pastor finds its true 
meaning in this supreme appeal, which will be heeded by all 
"who have an ear to hear what the Spirit saith, unto the 
churches" {Rev. 3:13), and whose ardent desire is to see its 
realization. 

We salute here the memory of Brother Russell, and all the 
members of the Elijah body, who are awaiting with us the time 


for entrance into the realms of God's immortal glory. 
"The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all!" 
The Ecclesia of Paris. — France, 

CONTINUED COOPERATION AND PRAYERS 
Dear Brethren: — 

The Altoona Ecclesia by a unanimous vote have expressed 
their determination, by divine aid, to continue their assistance 
and support in the dissemination of the Glad Tidings. You will 
have our continued prayers; and we hope that we may share in 
yours, in order that we may all come off" victorious by his grace. 

With kindest Christian love, Altoona Ecclesia. — Pa. 

PILGRIM VISITS, ETC. 
Dear Co-Laborers ■. — 

As a class, we want a little advice. We are informed that 

Brother A expects to go to Henderson, N< C. in about 

two months, and if we will pay his expenses, he will stop with 

us. Also we had a letter from Brother 33 yesterday 

from Henderson, N. C, speaking of his taking similar trips — 
expenses to be paid by the class he visits — offering to stop 

with us. Also we heard recently from Brother W , who 

together with two sisters shows the Drama. He wants to come 
here and to the neighboring places and show the Drama, we 
bearing his expenses, etc. 

Now in each of these cases please advise us aa a class 
whether to use any money we may have for the Lord's cause 
in these ways or whether we should send it direct to the Society
. We are very grateful to have two pilgrims booked for 
our place in a little over a month ; and rejoice in the blessings 
thus derived. Please let us hear from you in regard to this 
matter at your earliest convenience, as aome of these letters, 
or rather all, are awaiting our decision. 

We desire in these and all matters to do what is pleasing 
to the Lord, and to use the little (money we can spare for 
spiritual things to the best purpose, 

The Class. — Va. 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society sends out 
pilgrim brethren regularly at its expense to serve the brethren
. The classes served are not requested nor expected to 
provide any expense outside of entertainment, all the traveling
 expenses being paid by the Society, Brethren who travel 
about the country and offer their services to classes, provided 
the classes pay their railroad, and other expenses, are not doing 
so under the the direction nor with the approval of the Society
. It is entirely contrary to the policy of the Society for 
brethren to solicit funds from the friends to pay their expenses 
or for any other purpose. We heartily disapprove of such 
course. If any brethren have the time for serving the friends 
and request the Society to provide for them a route, and the 
Society is of the opinion that they are competent to serve and 
that ft is advisable for them to serve in such capacity, an assignment
 will be made and the class notified in the regular 
order. 

Our advice to the brethren is- that they do not agree to pay 
the expenses of any brother who offers to come and serve 
them ; but that all requests for pilgrim visits be made by the 
friends to the Society direct, and the Society will provide for 
service in the manner it has heretofore done. In this we are 
following the policy adopted and carried out by Brother 
Russell from the time of the Society's organization until his 
death. 

The Society attempts to arrange the pilgrim visits in such 
a way that they will in no wise conflict, and with the least expense
 to everyone. 

LOVE AKD COOPERATION ASSURED 
Dear Brethren: — 

We wish to assure you of the determination of the Milwaukee
 class to remain loyal to the truth, and of our desire 
to cooperate heartilv with the brethren at Brooklyn who we 
feel are now directing the harvest work. As you may perhaps
 know, immediately upon hearing of the death of our beloved
 Pastor, we met together and voted to support loyally 
the dear ones at Brooklyn in the continuance of the work yet 
left to be done, and wired you to that effect. We think, however
, it will bear repetition, and «k> again we want to assure 
you of our love and cooperation in every way possible. 

Praying the Lord's continued blessings upon your effort* to 
serve- Him and his cautt, 

Your brethren in Christ, Milwaukee Ecclesia* — Wis. 

HONORARY ELDER AKD COUNSELOR 

Bejjoved Brethren; — 

On the occasion of our midweek prayer, praise a*id testimony
 meeting we had a season of prayer, especially remembering
 our dear President, ajitf those closely connected with. 


[6054] 


March 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


OS -79) 


him, at the Bethel home. The friends take this opportunity 
of expressing their loyalty and love to those who, we believe, 
the dear Lord has been pleased to appoint to continue the work 
of spreading the glorious news of the kingdom, and to say 
further, that the class was unanimous in its Election of our 
dear Brother Rutherford as Counselor and Honorary Elder 
for this term. 

Vours in the Master's service, 

L0NT>U5 (O^T.) Ecclesia. 

ISCXLATION MAKES ONE SYMPATHETIC 

Deably Beloved Bbethken: — 

Some time ago I made the Vow my own. In 19*10 I first 
read Vol. I, Studies in the Scriptubes. I read the entire 
volume in two nights, and completed the second reading of it 
within the week. In six months I had read the entire six 
volumes twice. The Morning Resolve I find to be a great 
help. Sometimes I repeat during the day some clause of it 
which especially appeals to me. 

Among others I have been affected by the "lengthened 
time." I gave up my situation as teacher, also sold some 
property which brought me a small income; and, putting 
what I thought 1 could spare into the work, I apportioned 
off what I thought would supply ray needs until 1915, thinking 
that I was leaving a fair margin. I engaged in the follow-up 
work in connection with the Photo-Dbama and also as colporteur
. But not being able to pay expenses I remained, when 
need arose for me, in my old home, where I am still, although 
my people are all opposed to the truth and consider that I 
am deceived. My isolation has made me more sympathetic 
with those who, like myself, cannot fellowship with the brethren
. However, I have been privileged to speak to a few,, also 
to post tracts, etc. 

Daily I remember you, and your fellow -laborers in the 
harvest work, at the throne of heavenly grace, thanking the 
Lord for the labors of his servant and for the privilege of 
fellowship in his sufferings. 

Yours in the One Hope, .—Ireland, 

A LIFE OF IDEAL CHRISTIAN SEBVICE 
Deab Buethken of the Bethel Home: — 

The removal of our beloved Pastor from the earthly phase 
of his ministry brought to us here a great sorrow and some 
anxious thought respecting the future of the work. We have 
tried to realize how much keener must have been the sorrow 
and perplexity in the Bethel Home, How wonderfully the Lord 
is manifesting his continued care for his work! 

We rejoice for our beloved "brother that, as the victor 
crowned, no shafts of. the enemy can longer touch him. So 
noble himself, how such injustice moist have, pained hiuH But 
no murmur of complaint did he utter — onty solicitude fpr the 
Lord's flock and for the truth. What a picture of sublimity, 
pathos and heroism was his grapple with problems vital to 
the Church during those closing days of that preeiftus life Of 
ideal Christian service! 

We unite in loving sympathy and appreciation of the added 
responsibility which has come to you, and asaure yon that you 
are remembered in our prayers. We request that you pray for 
us wisdom, as we seek loyally to cooperate in whatever arrangements
 the Lord may make for the carrying on of his 
work. The Sydney Ecclesia. — Nova Scotia. 

"THE LITTLE IXOOK WILL NOT BE MISLED*' 

DEAfc Brethren: — ■ 

We realize with you that there is work still to be done in 
the harvest field; and we rejoice in the preparation which 
that faithful servant left for the continuance of The Watch 
Tower for our spiritual nourishment. (Isaiah 21:5, 6) Seeing 
with what carefulness Brother RusseU handled the Lord's 
work, we cannot do otherwise than remain loyal supporters of 
this work, until the symbolic waters are divided and we have 
done all that the Lord haw for us to do. 

So be assured that you have our prayers, our sympathy 
and our love as never before. We shall esteem it a privilege 
to cooperate with you as we may be able. Pray for us, that 
we may be faithful! 

Yours in the one hope of our calling in Christ Jesus, 

Evebett Ecclesia. — Wash. 

"EHDEAVOR TO TOttSH QTTB COTOSE WITH JOY 1 ' 

Beloved Brethren: — 

We are praying that the Lord's blessing may be upon you, 
giving you more of that wisdom which comes from above, 
that as a family we may still enjoy sweet communion with 
each other until our probation closes. 

We mourn with you the taking away of our dear Pastor 
from our midst, through whom we have 'been richly fed these 
many years. Although feeling his loss, our hearts rejoice 


to see that he was faithful unto death, instantaneously entering
 into his great reward, as promised in Revelation 14:13. 
Let us continue to do the Lord's will, that we also may finish 
our course with joy. 

Yours in Him, Camberwell Class. — Jamaica. 

SPARED AN IGNOMINIOUS DEATH 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

We desire as a family to express to you our united sympathy
 in the mutual loss we have sustained by the death of our 
beloved Pastor, and while assuring you that hi3 absence will 
be greatly felt by us, yet we realize it must necessarily be 
more keenly felt by you, who enjoyed his constant personal 
fellowship. 

While sorrowing, yet it ia not as those who have no hope, 
but rather we rejoice that he has entered into his well-earned 
rest, having faithfully laid down his life for the brethren. 

We thank our heavenly Father that his servant, who endured
 so much reproach for the truth, was spared an 
ignominious death, which we had anticipated at the hands of 
the "beast" and his "image" under the direction of the accuser 
of the brethren; also that he was counted worthy to escape 
those things coming upon the world. 

Our prayers ascend to the <*od of all grace, that he may 
richly endow you with wisdom and with the spirit of faithfulness
 to him, and that you may demonstrate this by loyally 
carrying out in every particular the instructions left by 
Brother Russell for the continuance of the work that remains. 

While we pray this for you, we also pray it for ourselves, 
and request your prayers for us to this same end.. With 
those thoughts in mind, we would here like to add that we 
shall endeavor, to the best of our ability* at all costs and 
in the strength of the Lord, to support the Society, and to 
uphold the truths it promulgates, by our hearty cooperation. 

We shall be glad to receive three forms of the V. D. M. 
Questions, which we trust we shall be able to answer satisfactorily
. With Christian love and greetings (Heb. 10:23; 
Rom. 15:4-6), 

Your brethren in the faith, 

Barbara, Mary and Richard Brumehl. — Scotland. 

ENEMIES OF THE TROTH CAN THROW ONLY DUST 
To the Dear Bethel Household: — 

I wish to add my testimony to the many testimonials you 
have received from the dear friends bo widely scattered. 

Our great chieftain has fallen. The firm yet gentle hand 
so long at the helm lies palsied. The loving heart whose 
e'very beat was one of sympathy, is stilled by the hand of 
death. Yet we sorrow not as those who have no hope. Let 
us, one and a&, resolve to 1 take -up the task where he dropped 
it, wd. with increased zeal and vigor carry on the glorious 
harvest work. 

The enemies of our beloved Pastor have made no *erious 
effort to answer his arguments,, but have found it easier to 
attack his character, thereby throwing du«t into the eyea of 
the people. Now, however, ail is changed, and the pastoral 
work is, I believe, destined to wake up the people as nothing 
else has done; and those who in the past have so complacently 
circulated the vile slanders against our beloved Pastor will 
have to face the more serious task of answering his arguments
. 

Beloved, be strong! The yesterdays are past, the present 
only is ours to labor; and if found faithful, the glorious 
after whiles will be ours, also, when we shall meet and greet 
our noble Leader. Yea, more; soon the voice of him "who 
spake "as never man spake" before shall speak back to life 
all our dear dead! 

Your brother in the one hope, 

C. A, Owen.— ^Indianapolis. 

"MAY HIS SPIRIT ANIMATE VSV* 

Beloved Brethren: — 

The news of our Pastor's death was a great surprise and 
shock to us, , but we were reminded of Rev. 14:13. We rejoiced
 to be with him here, may we have an increasing desire 
to greet him in his glorified estate! 

We wish to express to you our great appreciation of the 
character and work of our beloved Pastor, and to extend to 
you in this hour of mutual bereavement, our sincere Christian 
love and sympathy; for while we realize our great loss in his 
departure, you who were with him most and knew him beBt 
will mast keenly feel how good it was to have him with us ! 

We are very pleased to know that the affairs of the Society 
are so arranged that the work can ^o right on, and we will 
remember you daily at the throne Of heavenly grace, that 
the Lord's will may be done. May the spirit of our beloved 
Pastor animate us 'more and more to that same faithfulness 


[6055] 


(79-83) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


unto death, that when the time of our change Bhall come, we 
too may be ready ! 

Sincerely, your brethren, 

Associated Bible Students. — Rochester, A\ Y. 

KEEP HIS MEMOBY GREEN BY MOBE SELF-SACRIFICING 
SERVICE 
Deab Brethben: — 

We have heard from Brother Johnston of your loss, our 
loss and the loss to the whole world, in the death of our brother, 
Charles T. Russell. All of us loved him dearly. His selfsacrificing
 labors on our behalf have been an incentive, and 
have given us a desire to follow him as he followed the Master. 
We have been led by him to the presence of the God of love ; 
the Studies in the Scriptures have shown each of us a new 
Bible. Some of our number have known him in the flesh, and 
have a fond remembrance of the radiant happiness that seemed 
to fill his life. 

Words seem almost inadequate to express our regard for 
our brother. Our emotions at first inclined ua to weep, then our 
sorrow gave place to joy, and we expressed ourselves in the 
words of the 107th Psalm: "Oh, give thanks unto the Lord, 
for He is good; for His mercy endureth forever! 5 ' It is the 
desire of each of our class to keep his memory green by more 
self-sacrificing service, by greater love to the Brethren and 
devotion to the truth. 

Our loving sympathy goes out to all who will miss him 
most, particularly the brethren of the Bethel Home, and we 
trust that you will convey to them our love and the assurance 
that we have prayed that they may be blessed. 

By the grace of God, your Brethren in Christ, 

Durban Ecclesia, — Natal. 
A BIBLE STUDENT AT THE FRONT 

Deab Brethren: — 

You may be interested to know that I became illuminated 
with the glorious truth after having taken the oath for military 
service. I had a few months of supreme happiness and growth 
in knowledge with the Winnipeg Ecclesia. My request for an 
honorable discharge was refused. 

While in England I was able to pay a visit to the London 
Tabernacle, and had the privilege of becoming acquainted 
with several of the brethren there. I have been out here for 
eleven months, and have spent the last nine in the front line 
trenches. I have been transport driver, cook, and for the last 
five months stretcher-bearer. During this time I have had 


many blessings, being able to distribute tracts, loan my 
volumes, and have some heart-to-heart talks with some of the 
men. I have pleasant recollections of my old platoon, who are 
now nearly all gone. They always treated me with respect; 
and several of them asked me to write to their mother or their 

wife if anything happened to them While I rejoice to 

'be able to serve God out here, I look for the time when I may 
once again have fellowship with His people. 

I would like to take this opportunity, dear Brethren, of 
having my name added to the list of those who have taken the 
vow. Our dear Pastor's letter of July 14th has given me great 
happiness and encouragement. May the Lord bless richly your 
labors in His service. 

Your brother in Christ, Richard T. Wood. — Belgium. 
A VOICE FROM INDIA 
Deably Beloved Brethben: — 

We have heard with profound sorrow the news of the passing
 away of our dearly beloved Brother Russell. Bible students
 all over the world have lost in him a much revered leader, 
a great teacher, who was used of God in making known the 
divine plan of salvation, and an earnest Christian who strove 
successfully to follow in the Master's footsteps. We thank 
God for his life and work, which will be an abiding inspiration 
and a noble example to all sincere seekers after truth. 

We desire you to convey our warmest sympathy to the 
.Bethel Family, who will miss his earthly presence and his 
loving personality sadly. Let us, however, rejoice that he 
has fought the good fight, finished his course, kept the faith 
and has received the Crown of Life. 

Madras Ecclesia. — India. 
A WISE HSHEBMAN 

Peas Brethben: — 

We have now tried out the new De Luxe Scenario and 
*ur experience is that we sell them readily for 98c. We have 
been so accustomed in the past to giving the people double 
value for their money that it has spoiled us to some extent! 
While the new De Luxe is not so sturdy a book as the cloth 
(68c) edition, people seem to prefer the higher priced copy. 
We had thought of dropping the De Luxe and specializing on 
the oloth edition, but after experimenting we have decided 
to handle both. We can catch many stray fish by having two 
kinds of bait! 

With much love from us both, 

J. & L. Hutchinson. — Pa. 


WARNING TO THE FRIENDS 


During all the years that Brother Russell Berved the church 
he faithfully guarded the classes against the danger of giving 
the names and addresses of any one for publication. He acted 
upon the theory that the published addresses of the Secretaries 
of the Classes and of the friends would enable an impostor to 
appear in these Classes, claiming to come from another class 
and thereby practice some fraud upon the brethren. Past experiences
 have shown that this has been done on numerous occasions
, and the publication of the addresses of the friends 
only enhances the opportunity of so doing. The Society has 
never deemed it proper to publish the names and addresses of 
these Secretaries. It has held such names in confidence and 
the publication of such names would be a violation of that confidence
. In addition to what has above been said, it gives the 
enemies of the truth an opportunity to deceive the brethren
. Our enemies have for a long time tried to secure the names 
of our class officers and members. We deem it our duty, therefore
, to warn the friends that it is against their interest to submit
 the names and addresses of their class Secretaries or of 
any of the members to any one for publication. 

We also suggest to the friends that they exercise caution 
in entertaining any one who claims to be a brother in the truth, 
unless they are sure he is such, and that they be especially careful
 in regard to any who attempt to borrow money on the statement
 of being in the Truth. 

