Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower to be of practical value? Why not test your memory with the following:
□ Since the Hebrew word translated God is often in the plural form (’Elo·himʹ), does this support the Trinitarian argument for a three-in-one God?
No, it does not. This same Hebrew word, ’Elo·himʹ, is used in the same way for individual divinities, such as Dagon (1 Samuel 5:7) and Marduk (Daniel 1:2), who were not triune gods. Grammatically, this plural indicates excellence​—not number—​being used consistently with a singular verb.​—8/15, page 28.
□ In what sense is the word “heart” used by Bible writers?
In a few cases the literal heart is meant, such as at Exodus 28:30 and Psalm 45:5. But in almost a thousand other references, “heart” is used in a figurative sense to describe the emotional and moral qualities that go to make up the inner person.​—9/1, page 7.
□ What is a key idea that is highlighted throughout the book of Joshua?
The idea of being courageous is emphasized. Over half of the times that the words “courageous” and “strong” occur together in a Bible verse are in the book of Joshua or in comments about him. The book of Joshua, therefore, provides a powerful incentive for all Christians today to be courageous. (Joshua 24:14, 15, 29)​—9/15, pages 27, 31.
□ What is “the house” that Paul refers to in Hebrews 3:2, 6?
In each case “the house” that Paul refers to is basically God’s people, or congregation. In Heb 3 verse 2 “the house” was the congregation of fleshly Israel under the Law covenant. Moses was himself a part of that “house.” In Heb 3 verse 6 “the house” is the congregation of spiritual Israel. It is constructed by Christ Jesus, and he serves over it according to “a new covenant.” (Hebrews 8:7-13; Jeremiah 31:31-34)​—9/15, page 31.
□ What did Paul mean at 2 Timothy 3:1, 3 in saying that men would be “having no natural affection” in “the last days”?
The Greek word storgé has reference to family love of kindred. However, the word for “having no natural affection” is ástorgos, which means just the opposite​—a breakdown in the natural love that should exist between family members.​—10/1, page 6, footnote.
□ When, at Matthew 24:12, Jesus said that “the love of the greater number will cool off,” was he predicting this to happen to true worshipers now?
Jesus’ words were part of a prophecy about ‘the sign of his presence and of the conclusion of the system of things.’ (Matthew 24:3) These words found an application in the first century among Jews claiming to worship God. With their lack of love they did not heed Jesus’ warning, and they suffered the consequences when the Roman armies invaded Jerusalem. Comparably, among professing Christians today not only is neighbor love diminishing but so is love for God. This is the principal application of Jesus’ words, yet they should act as a warning for all true Christians as well.​—10/1, page 31.
□ What are three of the teaching aids used by Jesus that could well be cultivated by all Christian teachers of God’s Word?
Jesus used simplicity, illustrations and questions.​—11/1, pages 12, 13.
□ What two points should be kept in mind while reading the book of Judges?
One is that it is very easy to let your faith in God grow weak or to forget all that he has done for you. (Revelation 2:4) The other point is to remember that God can use you to accomplish outstanding things if you have strong faith. (Matthew 21:21)​—11/1, pages 27-8.
□ What is doubtless the greatest proof today that we are near the end of this system of things?
The greatest evidence is the worldwide preaching work now being done by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Never before has such a thing occurred. Today, in 205 lands more than 2,650,000 witnesses of Jehovah are proclaiming the message that Christ has been ruling in Kingdom power since 1914. (Matthew 24:14)​—11/15, page 23.
□ How only can a Medical Alert card be of real value to you in a time of emergency?
The Medical Alert card should be regularly carried and it should also be current and valid. The card is obtained from the elders in the congregation each year and should be filled in, dated and signed, and then countersigned by two witnesses. It is best for one of the witnesses to be your next of kin. (Proverbs 22:3)​—12/1, pages 25-6.

