Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING APRIL 28
Song 221
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry that apply locally. Encourage all to support field service activity on first Sunday of month. We have the new reduced-size Live Forever book for only $1.25. We should be able to do well with this new size and smaller contribution.
20 min: “Youths, Praise the Name of Jehovah.” Question-and-answer coverage. Have a young person with his parent demonstrate presentation suggested in paragraph 6. Interview two or three young people who are good examples. Ask how they are praising the name of Jehovah now and equipping themselves to continue doing so in the future.
15 min: Assist New and Inactive Ones. Secretary reviews with congregation the importance of aiding new persons who attended the Memorial and of assisting inactive ones. How can the elders assist those needing encouragement? What can congregation do to help? Highlight need for all to cooperate closely in encouraging inactive ones and in strengthening new ones. (Heb. 6:1-3) This is essential if we are to share in ‘fully accomplishing our ministry.’ (2 Tim. 4:5) Show how assistance can be given through the Congregation Book Study.
Song 113 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 5
Song 155
10 min: Local announcements and “New Daily Text and Yearbook Arrangement.” Discuss main points of article and explain how publishers can order copies needed.
15 min: Gaining an Approved Relationship With God. Talk based on the articles, “What Is Most Important in Your Life?” and “Happiness Through a Precious Relationship,” beginning on page 3 of the April 1, 1985, issue of The Watchtower. Emphasize the need to keep our lives simple and have a good schedule that allows time for added privileges, such as auxiliary or regular pioneer service.
15 min: “Keep Building One Another Up.” Questions and answers. Make local application of material.
 5 min: Highlight field service arrangements for the weekend. Consider talking points from Live Forever book.
Song 144 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 12
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Outline field service arrangements for the week.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—On the Street and in Business Territory.” Discussion of article. Demonstrate witnessing in business territory and on the street, using current magazines. Review with audience effectiveness of demonstrations.
15 min: How Many Can Auxiliary Pioneer This Summer? Chairman: Summer is an excellent time for auxiliary pioneer service. Vacation time and favorable weather make it easier to meet hour requirement. June may be a good month for you to auxiliary pioneer, and perhaps you could continue through August. What better way is there to enjoy the summer and reap lasting happy benefits? (Acts 20:35) Why not discuss as a family how many in your household can auxiliary pioneer one or more months during this summer? If some are not able to pioneer, can they assist other family members to do so? Many who have started auxiliary pioneering have gone right on into the regular pioneer service. Interview two or three publishers who have pioneered during school vacation or summer months. What blessings did they have? Did the joys make it worth the effort? Why can they recommend it to others? Encourage those who qualify to consider auxiliary pioneering this summer. With five weekends during June, your circumstances may permit you to serve as an auxiliary pioneer. If not, then demonstrate the pioneer spirit by making this summer a special time of activity by having as full a share as possible in the ministry.​—Rom. 12:11.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 19
Song 217
 5 min: Local announcements. Remind congregation to review April 15, 1985, Watchtower feature “Do You Remember?” and bring magazine to next Service Meeting.
23 min: “1985 ‘Integrity Keepers’ Convention.” Question-and-answer discussion of insert from beginning to section on “Christian Conduct” on page 4. Encourage all to be prepared to listen intently to entire program.
17 min: “Teaching When We Meet Objections.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. When considering paragraphs 4 through 6, have two or three brief demonstrations illustrating how to handle local objections. Remind all to share in magazine work on fourth Saturday of month.
Song 209 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 26
Song 108
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Do You Remember?” Watchtower Study conductor and Theocratic Ministry School overseer discuss material in this feature of April 15, 1985, issue of The Watchtower. Show how information can be of practical value to the congregation and in our individual lives.
25 min: “1985 ‘Integrity Keepers’ Convention.” Question-and-answer discussion of insert from “Christian Conduct” to end. Encourage all to set good example by following recommendations on conduct and the continued serious matter of saving seats. Conclude with encouragement for all to share in field service on first Sunday of June.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.

