New Daily Text and Yearbook Arrangement
1 Helpful changes are being made in connection with the daily text and Yearbook arrangement. Beginning with 1986 the Yearbook will just cover the theocratic history of two or three countries along with the year’s worldwide service report. The daily text material will appear in a separate 128-page booklet entitled “Examining the Scriptures Daily”​—1986.
2 This is another forward step in the Society’s program for publishing information simultaneously in many languages. Since early this year, simultaneous publication has made it possible for the vast majority of Jehovah’s Witnesses to study the same information in The Watchtower each week. Starting January 1, 1986, we will also be united worldwide in considering the daily text. How greatly this new arrangement will contribute to strengthening our Christian unity!​—Compare 1 Corinthians 1:10.
3 This new daily-text publication can be printed earlier than the Yearbook and distributed to the congregations around the world in time for everyone to start using it at the beginning of the calendar year. The small cost involved makes it possible for each one in the congregation to have a personal copy, thus facilitating family and other group discussions of the daily text. And it is of a convenient size for carrying along to meetings, work, school, or elsewhere.
4 Congregation orders for “Examining the Scriptures Daily”​—1986 should be sent to the Society on June 1 or as soon as possible thereafter, using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Only the total number actually requested by the publishers and other interested persons should be ordered. It will be available at first in Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Samoan, Spanish, and Swedish. These will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices until the booklet is available and shipments are made. Other languages will be announced as they become available. The cost for publishers and the public is 30 cents and the cost for pioneers is 20 cents.
5 The 1986 Yearbook, now to cost $1.00, should not be ordered until November 1.

