Presenting the Good News​—On the Street and in Business Territory
1 “We mustered up boldness by means of our God to speak to you the good news of God.” (1 Thess. 2:2) These words of the apostle Paul call to mind that boldness is necessary in presenting the good news. Especially is this the case for many when presenting the good news on the street and to business people.
2 One traveling overseer observed, “Many brothers and sisters, even those who have been in the truth for a number of years, have not done street work.” If you are in a city and have not shared in this feature of service, why not take the initiative now and experience the joys and blessings of street witnessing? However, in order for street work to be successful and enjoyable, it must be done in the proper way.​—Compare Proverbs 22:29.
APPROACHING PEOPLE ON THE STREET
3 Generally, approaching people is more effective than simply standing in one place or just walking along displaying the magazines. Since the objective of street witnessing is to speak with people about the good news, you will want to pick an area where there is considerable pedestrian traffic. One pioneer brother who regularly places 400 to 500 magazines a month works near shops and banks, which are very busy on Fridays and Saturdays. As you approach people, use an introduction that will catch their interest right away. But be discerning so as not to frighten or startle anyone. Be positive and friendly and walk along with the person when appropriate.
4 Before participating in street work, select the particular articles you will feature in The Watchtower or Awake! Think of interesting questions you might ask those you approach. A sister doing street witnessing asked a gentleman walking by, “Have you ever wondered why there are so many religions?” He just continued walking. Quickly, though kindly, she added, “It is a good question, isn’t it?” The man stopped and said, “Yes, it is.” He turned around, came back, and took the magazines. Her brief, direct questions yielded results.
IN BUSINESS TERRITORY
5 Business territory provides a fine opportunity to reach people we do not normally find at home. However, reports indicate that very few publishers share in working business territory. Perhaps due to lack of experience, many tend to shy away from this activity. Is this an area where you need to ‘muster up boldness?’
6 Over the years the Society has given practical suggestions for working businesses: Dress neatly; call when the establishment is not crowded; approach the manager; be brief and concise. (See Our Kingdom Ministry for July 1984 and January 1985.) If you have not used these suggestions, why not try them?
7 Does your congregation have business territory? If you have not worked from store to store and desire to do so, approach the service overseer. He can arrange for an experienced brother or sister to work with you. Practice sessions are helpful. Being prepared and having your presentation well in mind will give you the confidence and poise you need in order to be successful in working business territory. Pray for Jehovah’s blessings on your efforts.
8 We can be confident that Jehovah will bless our conscientious efforts to reach people with his lifesaving message. The need for thorough witnessing is urgent. Since it is often hard to find people at home, we should take advantage of opportunities to speak with people on the street and at their place of business. While we may find street witnessing and working business territory challenging, we can be successful if ‘we muster up boldness to speak the good news of God.’

