Youths, Praise the Name of Jehovah
1 On his second missionary journey Paul met Timothy who “was well reported on by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium.” He invited Timothy to accompany him in the missionary work. (Acts 16:1-3) Years later Paul wrote about Timothy, “For I have no one else of a disposition like his who will genuinely care for the things pertaining to you.” (Phil. 2:20) The Bible also tells us about Samuel who while still very young was found to be well pleasing both to men and to Jehovah. (1 Sam. 2:26) Fine Christian youths today would like to have similar reports made about them.
2 Both Samuel and Timothy owed much of their spiritual advancement to the godly training given them by devoted parents. (1 Sam. 1:26-28; 2 Tim. 3:15) Today, also, for a young person to establish a good relationship with Jehovah, he must respond favorably to the counsel and training of his Christian parents.​—Prov. 6:20; Eph. 6:1-4.
OBTAINING ASSISTANCE
3 No doubt both Samuel and Timothy also received much spiritual encouragement and assistance from the elders and others who reported favorably on their conduct. Many of our ministerial servants are young adults who have made fine spiritual advancement. They can help you to build an appreciation for the field service. Why not work in the field ministry with them? Eagerly seeking the aid of these brothers will help to make your spiritual advancement manifest.​—1 Tim. 4:15.
4 Your parents, the elders, and the ministerial servants are all interested in your spiritual advancement. They should have reason to report favorably on your conduct both inside and outside the congregation. No doubt you are impressed with the special attention the Society has given to young people. Your sincere response will help you to praise the name of Jehovah.
SCRIPTURAL PRESENTATION
5 During May we will be offering the Live Forever book. The new Topic for Conversation is one that young publishers should find easy to use. So even if you do not as yet have much experience in the field, we encourage you to have a positive attitude. You may use the following presentation or something similar.
6 After greeting the householder and identifying yourself, ask: “Do you believe that there is a bright future for mankind?” Whether the householder’s response is positive or negative, you could then say, “The Bible shows that mankind has a very bright future with the prospect of living forever in peace.” Then read Psalm 37:29, 37. You may comment briefly on these verses and then say, “This same psalm tells us how it is possible to cope with these present distressing times and be confident of a bright future.” Now read Ps 37 verse 39. Depending on the interest shown, you may wish to read and comment on Ps 37 verse 40 also. Open the Live Forever book and call attention to the contrast between what is depicted on page 9 and the happy condition of the people pictured on pages 11-13. Conclude by telling the householder that if he really would like to live forever and enjoy a bright future in a paradise earth, he will need to learn more about it. Then offer the Live Forever book. So with just a little effort and preparation on your part, you can give an effective presentation.
7 You young people who are being directed in the way of the truth today are most privileged indeed. Your whole life can be used to praise the name of Jehovah if you really want to do Jehovah’s will and take advantage of the help he provides. Make it your goal to serve Jehovah all your days.

