From Our Readers
Children in Crisis  I wish to express my appreciation for the series in the April 8, 1999, issue, “Children in Crisis—Who Will Protect Them?” I think that the dramatic subject of child abuse should be a constant spur to awaken public opinion. It is our duty to protect the world of our children. May you keep on in your good work.
P. P., Councillor’s Office for Children, City of Rome, Italy
It is shocking to think that at the threshold of the 21st century, many children are still working as slaves and being used to kill others. Even harder to accept is the fact that most of them have little prospect of a better life. Once again, Awake! has accurately portrayed the plight of the world’s children.
S. R. B., Brazil
I am now divorced, after 36 years of marriage. I learned that my husband had molested my own dear daughters for years. (He was not a Christian.) I was thrown completely off balance when I learned of this. No one seemed to understand the gravity of sexual abuse or the unspeakable pain innocent ones suffer. So I thank Jehovah that you have written about this epidemic.
N. M., United States
Care for Elderly  I really appreciated the item “Show That You Care.” (April 8, 1999) Many older ones in nursing homes are forgotten by their families. But a couple of months ago, a few of us decided to discuss the Bible with some people in a nearby nursing home. Afterward, we played music for them on the piano and talked to them. We plan to visit them regularly now.
C. V., United States
African Storm  I am 12 years old, and I want to thank you for the article “After the Storm, Christianity Prevailed.” (March 8, 1999) I thought the brothers who helped those in trouble were great! It reminded me of the way our brothers helped others after the great Hanshin earthquake in Japan. The article encouraged me to be courageous and to do good things for others.
R. K., Japan
Sleeping Infants  Thank you for the article “How Should a Baby Sleep?” (March 22, 1999) I lost my first child of two and a half months to sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). If only I had had this information! Despite having two other splendid children, I still feel an immense and indescribable pain.
A. D., Italy
A number of significant risk factors exist for SIDS. (See “Watching the World” in the January 22, 1997, issue of “Awake!”) Still, in many ways SIDS continues to be a medical mystery. Parents who have lost a child to SIDS should therefore not hold themselves responsible for that tragedy. The in-depth discussion of SIDS in our January 22, 1988, issue has proved comforting to many grieving parents.—ED.
Celiac Disease  We received the article “Coping With Celiac Disease” (March 22, 1999) three months after we learned that our six-year-old has it. In Russia this sickness is practically unknown even among doctors. How nice it is that our Christian brothers and sisters will understand why our daughter is on a special diet! This article has strengthened us and assured us that Jehovah always cares for the needs of his people.
V. P. and L. P., Russia
Wanting Things You Cannot Have  I just finished reading the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Can’t I Have the Things I Want?” (March 22, 1999) I would like to thank you for this article because it made me realize that I can’t have everything I want. But as the article said, Jehovah knows our needs, and I’m very happy that I have a simple life.
C. K., Canada

