The Truth About Angels
AS WE have seen, popular ideas and stories about angels do not always agree with what the Bible teaches. Does it matter that there is disagreement? Is there any harm in accepting popular beliefs concerning angels? Most definitely.
Consider, for example, the attitudes encouraged by “the new spirituality.” Modern angel books encourage childlike passivity, not the exercising of thinking ability. Seldom are readers encouraged to work out their problems or to seek an understanding of the Bible and the knowledge of God. Angel books assure us that we walk through life with a gentle and loving angel at our side and that there is no cause for alarm, since we live in a happy cosmos where everything is as it should be. When a problem arises, we need only to wait for angelic intervention. If this is so, however, why does the Bible tell us to “put up a hard fight for the faith”?—Jude 3.
Many angel books pander to human pride and vanity. Their focus is on self. According to such sources, modern-day angels want us to know how beautiful and radiant we are. Though it is good to have a positive view of ourselves, a major theme of “the new spirituality” is to love ourselves unconditionally. One author says that the first and greatest commandment is to “love your Lord Self.” How this conflicts with the words of Jesus! He said: “You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind. This is the greatest and first commandment.” (Matthew 22:36-39) We will be happiest in life if we seek God’s interests ahead of our own.
Placing angels at center stage runs counter to true Christianity. The apostle Paul condemned the worship of angels. (Colossians 2:18) To worship means “to honor or reverence as a divine being or supernatural power.” Yet, honoring and reverencing angels is precisely what many popular angel books encourage readers to do. Recall, though, what happened when Satan asked Jesus to offer him a single act of worship. Jesus replied: “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.” (Luke 4:8) Later, when the apostle John fell down before an angel, the angel said to him: “Be careful! Do not do that! All I am is a fellow slave of you and of your brothers who have the work of witnessing to Jesus. Worship God.”—Revelation 19:10.
How Angels Can Help You
The one to approach for guidance and help is God, not the angels. He is willing and happy to shower love upon all who conform to his righteous requirements. The apostle John wrote to fellow Christians: “This is the confidence that we have toward him, that, no matter what it is that we ask according to his will, he hears us. Further, if we know he hears us respecting whatever we are asking, we know we are to have the things asked since we have asked them of him.”—1 John 5:14, 15.
There are many things we do not know about God’s faithful angels. We do know, however, that they are in God’s service, working in harmony with his purpose and direction. They are eager to promote the truth about God. (Revelation 14:6, 7) They do not desire our worship. Since we cannot see them, we do not know to what extent God uses them in helping his people in everyday matters. But we do know that Jehovah God protects and directs his people as a group.
What a fine example faithful angels set for us! They glorify and praise God. (Psalm 148:2) Though they possess great mental and spiritual power, they show deep respect for Jehovah’s sovereignty. (Jude 9) They are keenly interested in the outworking of God’s purposes. (1 Peter 1:11, 12) It is in God’s Word, the Bible, that we learn these things. Yes, the Bible is the book that tells us the truth about angels.
[Blurb on page 10]
Angels are eager to promote the truth about God
[Picture on page 8, 9]
When the apostle John tried to worship an angel, the angel said: “Do not do that!”

