We Learned to Rely on God Through Adversity
AS TOLD BY ROSIE MAJOR
I was five months pregnant with my first child when my mother-in-law noticed that my legs looked unusually swollen. On that day in March 1992, my husband, Joey, and I had no way of knowing that what we were about to experience would put our reliance on Jehovah to the test.
ONE week later my obstetrician discovered that my blood pressure was extremely high. When she recommended that I be hospitalized for tests and observation, I was naturally concerned. The tests indicated that I had developed preeclampsia, a potentially fatal complication of pregnancy.a
The doctor in the hospital strongly recommended inducing labor immediately to protect me and the baby. My husband and I were stunned. “But the baby is barely 24 weeks old!” I gasped. “How could our baby possibly survive outside the womb?” “Well, I’ll try to buy some time,” the doctor kindly replied. “However, if your condition deteriorates, I will have to deliver it.” Thirteen days passed, but my condition worsened rapidly. The doctor called my husband in, and we made the difficult decision to go ahead with the delivery.
The Delivery
The night before the delivery, Dr. McNeil, a pediatrician, met with us to explain what we could be facing with a very premature baby—possible brain damage, lungs that might be too immature to function properly, and a host of other potential complications. I prayed for “the peace of God that excels all thought” and for the strength to accept and cope with whatever happened. (Philippians 4:7) The following morning our baby was delivered by cesarean section. She weighed a mere one pound and ten ounces [700 g]. We named her JoAnn Shelley.
Five days later I went home empty-handed. My little daughter remained in the hospital’s special infant care unit, fighting for her life. After two weeks JoAnn developed pneumonia. We were thankful when she stabilized, but only days later she developed a bowel infection and had to be moved to the intensive care area of the unit. Within another six days, JoAnn recovered somewhat and even began putting on some weight. We were jubilant! But our joy was short-lived. Dr. McNeil informed us that JoAnn was anemic. He suggested trying to obtain the synthetic hormone erythropoietin (EPO) to stimulate JoAnn’s red blood cell production. The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses here in the Bahamas contacted representatives of Hospital Information Services in Brooklyn, New York. They quickly provided Dr. McNeil with the latest data on the availability and use of EPO, and he began treatment with it.
Problems Ahead
Several anxious weeks passed. JoAnn was by now battling an infection in her bowels, seizures causing occasional apnea (periods without breathing), a low hemoglobin count, and bronchial pneumonia. We feared that any of these problems might be the proverbial straw that would break the camel’s back. But JoAnn slowly gained ground. At three months of age, she was still in the hospital and weighed only three pounds [1.4 kg]. But for the first time in her life, she was breathing on her own without supplementary oxygen. Her hemoglobin was rising to a normal level. The doctor said that if she put on one more pound [another 500 grams], we could take her home.
Three weeks later JoAnn suffered a serious apnea attack. Tests failed to reveal the cause. The apnea attacks became persistent and always came in association with feeding. Finally, it was found that JoAnn had gastroesophageal reflux. Her esophagus was not closing after she ate, so the contents of her stomach came back into her throat. When this occurred, it choked her and stopped her breathing.
In early October, JoAnn contracted a virus in the baby unit. Many of the premature babies there were dying from it. In that weakened state, JoAnn suffered what seemed to be the longest apnea attack she had ever had. All attempts at reviving her failed. The pediatrician was at the point of giving her up for dead, when unexplainably she began breathing—only to start having seizures immediately. Once again she was put on the ventilator, and we were certain that this was the finale for JoAnn. But she pulled through, and we were grateful to Jehovah.
Learning Greater Trust in Jehovah
The problems we faced before JoAnn was born could be compared to falling off a boat near the dock, where we could just swim to shore. Now it seemed as if we had fallen off a boat in mid ocean, with no land in sight. Looking back, we realize that before her birth we had sometimes relied too much on ourselves. But through our experiences with JoAnn, we have learned to trust in Jehovah in situations that have no human solution. We learned to do as Jesus advised—to deal with one day at a time. (Matthew 6:34) We learned to lean on Jehovah, although at times we did not even know exactly what to pray for. We now thank Jehovah for the Biblical wisdom and “the power beyond what is normal,” which make it possible for us to cope with such severe difficulties.—2 Corinthians 4:7.
In times of crisis, I often found it difficult to maintain my emotional balance. I could think of nothing but JoAnn. My husband, Joey, was invaluable in providing spiritual balance. I am so grateful to him for this.
JoAnn Comes Home
JoAnn’s health gradually improved. One day she literally pulled the ventilator tube out of her mouth. Dr. McNeil now felt that JoAnn could come home. We were ecstatic! In preparation for her homecoming, we learned how to tube-feed her. We also set up an oxygen supply, rented a heart-and-breathing monitor, and took a course in emergency resuscitation. Finally, on October 30, 1992, JoAnn was discharged from the hospital. She had spent 212 days in the special infant care unit, and so had we.
From the beginning, family members and members of the local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses proved to be a real gift from Jehovah. They came and cleaned the house and yard, cooked meals, helped us to get to the hospital, and watched JoAnn so that I could get some sleep. In the process we came to see beautiful facets of their personalities that we had not known. For example, some shared spiritual thoughts that had helped them through difficulties of their own.
Our Life Today
We have worked hard to provide the best medical attention available for JoAnn’s many problems. When she was 19 months of age, we learned that JoAnn has cerebral palsy—a result of brain damage. Then, in September 1994, she underwent major surgery for the gastroesophageal reflux. In 1997, JoAnn began to experience life-threatening seizures. Happily, with adjustments in her diet, the seizures ceased. JoAnn’s health problems have delayed her physical development. But she now attends a special school and is doing well. She cannot walk, and her speech is very limited, but she accompanies us to all our Christian meetings and in our house-to-house ministry. She seems happy.
Jehovah has provided us with much comfort during these trialsome times. Our determination is to continue to rely on and “exult in Jehovah” despite unexpected difficulties. (Habakkuk 3:17, 18; Ecclesiastes 9:11) We keenly anticipate God’s promised Paradise earth, where our darling JoAnn will enjoy perfect health.—Isaiah 33:24.
[Footnote]
Preeclampsia involves a restriction of a pregnant woman’s blood vessels, resulting in poor blood flow to her organs as well as to the placenta and the developing fetus. Although the cause is unknown, there is some evidence to suggest that the disease is inherited.
[Picture on page 18]
Our daughter JoAnn
[Picture on page 20]
Despite her limitations, JoAnn is a happy child

