





A Student’s Dilemma

Peter shifts uneasily in his chair, a knot forming in his stomach. His teacher, a woman he respects, has just finished describing how Charles Darwin and his theory of evolution advanced scientific understanding and liberated mankind from superstitious beliefs. Now she has invited her students to express their opinions on this topic.
Peter faces a dilemma. His parents have taught him that God created the earth and all life on it. They say that the Bible’s account of creation is trustworthy and that evolution is simply a theory​—one not supported by the evidence. Peter’s teacher and his parents all mean well. But whom should Peter believe?




Each school year, scenarios like the above play out in thousands of classrooms around the globe. What should Peter and students like him do? Would you not agree that they really need to make up their own minds on this matter? They need to examine the evidence for evolution and for creation and then decide for themselves which they will believe.
In fact, the Bible warns against blindly believing what others teach. “Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word,” states one Bible writer, “but the shrewd one considers his steps.” (Proverbs 14:15) The Bible encourages Christians to use their “power of reason” and to prove to themselves the things they are taught.​—Romans 12:1, 2.
This brochure is not designed to support the efforts of religious groups who want to have creation taught in schools. The purpose of this brochure is to examine claims made by those who teach that life appeared spontaneously and assert that the Bible’s account of creation is a myth.
We will focus on the cell because that is the most basic unit of life. You will be able to review some amazing facts about how cells are built. You will also be asked to analyze the assumptions that underpin the theory of evolution.
Sooner or later, all of us need to confront the question, Was life created, or did it evolve? You likely have already given this topic serious thought. This brochure will present just some of the evidence that has led many to believe that life was created.



