





COVER SUBJECT | GOD’S KINGDOM—WHAT CAN IT MEAN FOR YOU?
God’s Kingdom—What Will It Mean for You?




You likely gathered from the preceding articles that God’s Kingdom means a lot to Jehovah’s Witnesses. And perhaps you were intrigued by some of the future blessings of God’s Kingdom that were discussed. At the same time, you may wonder if such promises are too good to be true.
You are wise to be cautious instead of believing everything you hear. (Proverbs 14:15) In some ways, your caution could be compared to that of the ancient Beroeans.a When they were first told about the good news of the Kingdom, the Beroeans accepted what they heard, but not simply because they wanted it to be true. Rather, they carefully examined the Scriptures “to see whether these things were so.” (Acts 17:11) In other words, the Beroeans compared the good news that they heard with what the Scriptures say. In time, they became convinced that the good news was in fact solidly based on God’s Word.
Jehovah’s Witnesses warmly invite you to do the same. By means of our free Bible study program, we offer you the opportunity to compare what Jehovah’s Witnesses believe about God’s Kingdom with what the Bible teaches.
In addition to your learning about God’s Kingdom, your study of the Bible can help you to find answers to some of life’s biggest questions.
           Where did we come from?

            What is the purpose of life?

            Why does God allow suffering?

            What happens when we die?

            Will the earth be destroyed?

            What is the key to a happy family life?


Above all, studying the Bible will help you to “draw close to God.” (James 4:8) In turn, the closer you draw to God, the more you will see how God’s Kingdom can mean good things for you—not just now but forever. Jesus himself said in prayer to his Father: “This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.



Jehovah’s Witnesses can use this publication to study the Bible with you.
To request a free personal Bible study, ask any one of Jehovah’s Witnesses or fill in the form at www.jw.org. (See REQUEST A BIBLE STUDY on the home page)

Beroea was a city in ancient Macedonia.

What God’s Kingdom Means to Her





Recently, a ten-year-old girl named Folake was assigned to write an essay for school on the subject “What I Love Most in This World.” Folake chose to write about why she loves telling others about God’s Kingdom.
  “God’s Kingdom is a real government,” Folake explained. “But it’s invisible, so you can’t see it—even if you wear glasses!”
  Folake went on to write about blessings of the Kingdom that she especially looks forward to. Mentioning some of the problems that the Kingdom will solve, she wrote, “I am sad when I see homeless people living on the streets” as well as “kids starving to death in all different parts of the world.” She added, “I’m happy again when I read Isaiah 65:21.” Regarding humans who will live under the rulership of God’s Kingdom, that verse promises: “They will build houses and live in them, and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.”
  Folake said that she also looks forward to the time when God, by means of his Kingdom, will do away with all sickness. In her essay, she quoted Revelation 21:4, which says that God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” She concluded by stating again that speaking about Jehovah and his Kingdom is what she loves most in this world. Clearly, God’s Kingdom has a special place in the heart of this young girl!


