From Our Readers
Fifty Years Ago  I just finished reading the series “1945-1995—What Have We Learned?” (September 8, 1995) I was impressed by the way you put all those details of history in such a limited space. I learned a lot; it was better than reading a history book.
M. V., Philippines
Prayer  I am unemployed and am in the process of moving. I was quite anxious—until I read the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Your Role in Your Prayers.” (September 8, 1995) Thank you for publishing this article. I will do my utmost to prove that I am eager to have my prayers answered by living in harmony with them.
D. C., United States
Gambling  I recently prayed for an article on gambling, as my relatives are in desperate need of help in this area. They are on the verge of filing for bankruptcy. I hope the series “Gambling—A Growing Addiction” (September 22, 1995) will help them. They suffer so much because of their addiction. We used to play poker as a family for 6 to 12 hours at a time! I’m so glad that I now have Jehovah in my life.
L. D., United States
You described my 20 years of marriage to a husband who is addicted to gambling. I have drawn much encouragement from the magazines in the past, but this time I received something for which I have been longing for 20 years!
F. E., Japan
Self-Defense  I greatly appreciated the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Learn Self-Defense?” (September 22, 1995) Here in Ukraine we get only one issue of Awake! each month, and “Young People Ask . . .” is missing. Since I read English, I was able to read the article. It helped me to know God’s point of view.
V. L., Ukraine
I am 12 years old, and I want to thank you for the articles you publish. I found the article on self-defense to be particularly useful. It made me better understand how to behave when my schoolmates persecute me.
D. C., Italy
African School  I am an Akan who has benefited from both the traditional African school and Western schools, and I enjoyed your article “The African School—What Did It Teach?” (September 22, 1995) I was touched by the respect and dignity you accorded the African school. There are those who think your faith holds African tradition in contempt. This article makes it clear that this is not the case.
S. N., Ghana
Life Story  I thank you very much for publishing the story of Karen Malone, “My Long, Hard Fight to Find True Faith.” (September 22, 1995) It brought tears of joy to my eyes.
J. S., Czech Republic
I’m the oldest child in my family. I used to feel bad because I couldn’t have many of the things I wanted. Sometimes we hardly had enough money to buy food. But thanks to Karen, I now realize that our service to God is more important than material things.
T. T., Greece
I have read the article four times so far, and each time I have been moved to tears. I could relate to her determination to serve Jehovah in the face of family opposition and hardship. Soon, I hope to start serving as a regular pioneer, a full-time evangelizer, and this article has really strengthened me.
D. F., Australia

