Youths Turn to Religion​—Why?
“A STRANGE phenomenon indeed,” many people are saying. They refer to the recent turning toward religion on the part of an increasing number of young people throughout the world. In the Western world, youths by the thousands have become involved in what has been called “the Jesus revolution.” Various “gurus” and cults have drawn converts from all walks of life. In the Orient, it is quite common to see youths carrying their Bibles to church on Sunday rather than going on outings. In Hong Kong, many small independent youth groups have formed simply to fellowship together, discussing the Bible and perhaps passing out tracts printed by Bible societies.
What has generated this surge of religious fervor? It could not be religious schools, for, reportedly, the lessons on religion are usually boring and without substance. Rather, it seems to be the fact that, world wide, youths can see that materialism, human governments and schemes have led only to greed, selfishness, wars, misery and general futility. Many have tried drugs, sex and alcohol, but found no answers. So they hopefully turn to religion, but often not the religion of their family.
This sudden conversion to religion and the change in the way of life frequently cause great concern to parents or other family members. This is not without just cause at times, for some religious groups lead young converts to forsake family and friends, to turn all their money over to the group, and then to isolate themselves by living in a commune away from the rest of the world. In the Orient, parents prefer to see their children pursuing something with material benefits, such as more education and higher paying jobs.
If you are a youth, how should you feel and react when suddenly some members of your family oppose your religious beliefs? Does difference in religion or even opposition necessarily mean that a serious breach must exist in relationships between family members? No. But to answer those questions properly, you first must have the right religion, and have the facts to prove it. This is because only the right religion, the religion of the Bible, makes better children and shows one how to have a closer relationship with parents and other family members. In the Bible, the originator of families, mankind’s Creator, Jehovah, gives detailed instruction on how to have truly united and happy families.

