Fulfilling Our Responsibility to Preach
1 “This good news of the kingdom will be preached.” (Matt. 24:14) There was no doubt in Jesus’ mind about this being done and that it would be accomplished in all the inhabited earth before the end came. Jesus had confidence, knowing that there would be many willing ones of his disciples who would respond to the leadings of Jehovah’s spirit. (Ps. 110:3) Thanks to Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, the end, while near, has not yet come. How will we use the remaining time?
2 The closer we get to the “great tribulation,” the less time we have to help sincere ones to flee from the doomed old system of things. We are offering to men of all nations their only hope for salvation. Wisely, then, in the little time that remains, we will be on guard so that we do not lose the sense of urgency that is associated with our work of helping to mark honest-hearted ones before it is too late.
3 While we have a fuller understanding of the “variety of ministries,” it does not mean that the need to preach has diminished. A balanced view of the activities that make up the Christian ministry includes appreciation of our part in fulfilling Matthew 24:14 and Mt 28:19, 20. Hence, in view of the great urgency to preach and to make disciples, let us continue to widen out our opportunities.
4 Looking at the work done by all of you in declaring the good news and in feeding Jehovah’s “sheep” in the United States, it is evident that much good work is being done. Each month, on the average, about six million hours are spent in the preaching and teaching activity. Every year more are sharing in the marking work too, for which thanks and praise go to Jehovah, who brings the increase. In looking over the reports you have submitted, however, we do observe a trend that bears mentioning, as far as each one of us individually is concerned. We note that while there has been a steady fine increase in the number of new praisers of Jehovah for much of this year, the total hours, placements, return visits and studies have shown general decreases in comparison with the same months last year. For example, the total hours in April 1971 amounted to 8,197,565 in contrast to 7,157,116 in April of 1972, or over one million fewer hours spent in the field service during April this year than last year, and yet there were 14,390 more publishers this year. We call this to your attention with confidence that, if you can arrange to spend more time in the preaching work, you will do so. We want to take good care of all of our various ministries, including our preaching privileges.
5 During August most congregations will be advised of the appointment of elders and ministerial servants. These brothers are very much concerned with the fulfillment of our responsibility to preach, in addition to their other important duties in looking after the flock. They recognize the need personally to take the lead in the field ministry. These mature brothers and other experienced publishers, both brothers and sisters, will be happy to render assistance to any needing a helping hand in the field ministry. A little assistance in getting started or in preparing something effective to say when going to the doors is often very much appreciated. Reviewing the field service arrangements in effect in the congregation, the elders may find ways to make these more practical and convenient or to stimulate participation. Wherever possible, a capable brother should be on hand to take the lead. It is important to have the best arrangements possible on weekends and throughout each week for group witnessing, so that, regardless of each one’s individual circumstances, he will be able to share regularly in the field service.
6 After completing the marking of those to be spared, the “man clothed with the linen” returned and reported to Jehovah with the words: “I have done just as you have commanded me.” (Ezek. 9:11) The faithful remnant of the Lord’s anointed, pictured by the ‘man in linen,’ will also be able to say this by the time the “great tribulation” is to begin. Individually, how will we be able to answer? This will depend upon how well we fulfill our responsibility to preach the good news of the Kingdom NOW!
[Blurb on page 1]
Let the tested quality of faith win praise from God.
[Blurb on page 4]
Preach the good news​—thoroughly and effectively!

