The Great Teacher
1 Jesus is the Great Teacher. Not only did he have accurate knowledge, but he also knew how to instruct in a way that really benefited his listeners. As disciples or “learners” of Jesus, we want to copy him.
2 Jesus loved people. He took his listeners into consideration when he taught, and he spoke in a way that reached their hearts. By the skillful use of illustrations, as well as questions, he made his presentations effective and interesting to both young and old.
3 During August we will be showing a love like that of Jesus as we acquaint others with the Great Teacher and his heavenly Father. One way we will do this is by featuring the Great Teacher book in our field ministry. This publication contains many of the very illustrations that Jesus so skillfully used to instruct his listeners in righteous principles, and is it not true that such instruction is needed more today than ever before? Many parents now see the need to teach their children about God to counteract the godlessness that surrounds their little loved ones. They will readily welcome the Great Teacher book, as did a mother who, after reading the invitation on the back of the June 15, 1972, Watchtower, wrote: “Gentlemen, would you please send me a copy of Listening to the Great Teacher. I have a five-year-old son, and as yet I have not taken him to church. I hope this book will help me explain about God and help me give him the right kind of guidance.”
4 Many, many parents are of that same frame of mind; they recognize that the churches of Christendom have failed as teachers of righteous principles and that if their children are going to be taught properly in religious and moral matters, such teaching must come from a source other than the churches. But from where? Many do not know. What joy we can have, then, in aiding concerned parents to see how the Great Teacher book is designed for parents and children to read together.
5 Has the Great Teacher book really proved effective among young ones? Yes! A letter at hand reads: “Thank you for the Great Teacher book. My eight-year-old and five-year-old are able to understand the more important things. My eight-year-old son Russell is conducting a Bible study with a schoolmate in the Great Teacher book, and the five-year-old amazes us with her good thoughts and deeds.”
6 One young publisher, eight years of age, in a short time placed twenty-one copies of the Great Teacher book with schoolmates. One day ten children asked her for a copy. Perhaps the basis of that young sister’s success was her simplicity in demonstrating the book to her schoolmates. We can use the same simplicity in offering the Great Teacher book. For example, we could draw attention to the illustration on page 16 and say: “Have you ever noticed how young persons are fascinated by the natural creation? Have you thought of using this as an opportunity to instill in these little ones an appreciation for the One who made all things? No doubt this could be done by asking [read from book]: ‘So when we see beautiful flowers, whom are we going to thank for them? . . .’”
7 When speaking with parents, be sure to offer to demonstrate the ease with which the book can be used in teaching children. For example, many parents would like to know how they can teach their children to pray and learn the benefits of prayer. The illustration on page 49 can be used very effectively, as can the surrounding information, starting with the paragraph: “Jesus’ disciples once asked him to teach them how to pray. . . .” If time permits, as the paragraph is read, do as suggested, namely, invite the householder to get his Bible. If he is not familiar with the Bible, kindly show him how the listing of the Bible books in the front of his Bible can be used to look up Matthew chapter six and all other scriptures. Doing so will put the parent in position to do the same with his children when reading the Great Teacher book with them.
8 Many parents will want to get a copy of the Great Teacher book for each of their children, in addition to one for themselves, so have along a good supply. Too, it would be good to have some Truth and Evolution books with you for adults who may wish additional reading for themselves. Incidentally, at times we meet people who express that they have had limited education and find it difficult to grasp more weighty Scriptural things. Do not hesitate to study with such ones in the Great Teacher book in order to lay a foundation upon which the weightier matters of God’s Word can be built later.
9 As we engage in street-magazine activity or store-to-store magazine work, it would be good to have copies of the Great Teacher book with us. Too, we will want to make it available to our relatives and friends who have children. If you do not live near them, it may be you would like to mail a gift copy personally and separately send a letter encouraging them to read it. A copy of the Great Teacher book can be mailed anywhere in the United States for 14 cents, if marked “book” on the wrapper and no letter is enclosed.
10 Among the things Jesus learned from his Father was love for people. (John 3:16) While on earth Jesus unselfishly manifested love for others, giving of himself in every way to help others to learn about Jehovah. We anticipate many joys and pleasures during the month of August, as we help others to learn about the Great Teacher and his Father, Jehovah God.

