More than Just a Song
“I HAVE written a song about it!” Those were surprising words to a minister of Jehovah’s witnesses in New Jersey as she was calling on people at their homes and sharing with them a message about the Bible.
As an introduction to her brief sermon, she had asked a young man whether he had ever wondered why there is so much confusion today about religion. His reply was: “I have not only wondered about it, I have written a song about it! Would you like to hear it?” Without waiting for a reply, he got his guitar and proceeded to sing the song he had written about the hypocrisy he had seen in religion. Afterward, the minister spoke with him about the Bible and left some Christian literature for him to read.
Later she called back at the home and met his wife, whose outlook was quite another thing. The wife was not interested in anybody’s religion. She had been raised a Roman Catholic but was disgusted, feeling that one religion was just as big a hoax as the next one. While still a teen-ager, she had experimented with marijuana and heroin. But in time she married, and she and her husband saw the futility of the “hippie movement,” realizing that the “hippies” had no solution to offer for the problems of this generation.
Following a number of Bible discussions, this young couple agreed to have a free study of the Bible in their home each week. Before long, they wanted to study with Jehovah’s witnesses at least twice a week, finding great joy in the sure hope for the future held out in God’s Word. They began to see the vast difference between the religious hypocrisy they had once sung about and the true form of worship taught in the Bible. Quickly they disposed of their books on occult teachings and even threw away the supply of marijuana that was buried in a jar in their backyard.
After regularly attending the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses at the Kingdom Hall for some time, they expressed the desire to share in the house-to-house ministry along with the Witnesses. But they still had some changes to make, for their dress hardly reflected the clean modesty of Christian ministers.
They were willing to make the needed changes. The minister who studied the Bible with them writes: “I’ll never forget the morning I picked him up for his first day in the field ministry. I had never seen him in a shirt, tie, suit coat and regular shoes. But more than that, neither had his wife. She exclaimed: ‘I didn’t think he could look so good dressed up like this.’” She was delighted with the progress she, her husband and children had made in the five months since they were contacted by the minister of Jehovah’s witnesses.
Now these two young people are doing something much more worth while than merely singing songs about the hypocrisy in religion. They are helping their neighbors to know and practice true religion, which meets God’s approval.

