What Canada’s Official Records Now Reveal
CANADA is considered to be one of the freest lands in the world. Its civil liberties are protected by law, and its form of government is democratic.
Canada has long had such a reputation among the nations of the world. But what is not as well known is how both government officials and ordinary citizens have had to struggle at times to keep it that way.
On two occasions in the past, there were controversies raised over the issue of religious freedom. This involved the right of Jehovah’s witnesses to carry on their peaceful work as Christian ministers. The settling of this issue has resulted in some fine constitutional decisions by the Supreme Court of Canada. These have made an important contribution toward protecting the freedoms that Canadians now enjoy.
But who was responsible for challenging the rights that are today treasured as part of Canada’s freedoms? From what source did the pressures come to try to deny these Christians their freedoms?
The two occasions were in 1918 and 1940, during times of war. But since that is past history, why does the matter arise now, in 1973? Because recently the official records of the Canadian government have been opened for public inspection at the Public Archives Library in the capital city, Ottawa. Now, the real story of why religious freedom was challenged is available for the first time from the government’s own files!
Suppression Demanded by Clergy
The first act of suppression against Jehovah’s witnesses (then called International Bible Students) came toward the end of World War I, in 1918.
At that time, the Canada Gazette, an official journal of the government, carried an order outlawing certain publications of Jehovah’s witnesses. These were the book The Finished Mystery, and certain issues of The Bible Students Monthly. The mere possession of this literature could bring a fine of $5,000 and imprisonment for five years!
When it was suggested that the clergy had triggered this censorship order, this was denied. However, the recent opening of the official archives reveals that at that very time, Chief Censor Col. Ernest Chambers had in his file a letter from the First Congregational Church in Vancouver, British Columbia. The author of the letter was the church’s minister, “Rev.” A. E. Cooke. Clergyman Cooke had written the following to the censor:
“I have been instructed by the General Ministerial Association of Vancouver to bring to your attention a matter which seems to us to be of considerable public importance at this time. As you are aware the followers of the late ‘Pastor’ Russell . . . call themselves ‘International Bible Students’ . . .
“Would it not also be well to prohibit the propagandist literature of this body which is published in the United States and sent to Canada for distribution by these people?”
The chief censor, Col. Chambers, wrote back. In his letter, which was marked “Confidential,” he said to clergyman Cooke:
“Reverend and Dear Sir: . . . your communication conveying as it did the views of such an influential body as The General Ministerial Association of Vancouver, proved very useful in securing action in this very important matter. . . .
“I consider that the bitter attacks in these publications upon the Churches of all denominations, without distinction, are noteworthy, even if the statements embodied in these attacks cannot be described as ‘militarily objectionable.’”
Thus, these confidential documents of the past, now finally opened to public examination, reveal that the clergy did indeed trigger the 1918 action against this minority of truly serious Christians. Jehovah’s witnesses were denied freedoms because they dared, as did Jesus Christ, to speak the Word of God without fear, exposing the hypocrisy of the clergy.
But why were the churches so fearful of what Jehovah’s witnesses said about them?
Churches Abandon Christ
They had abandoned their duty to preach the Word of God and follow the Prince of Peace, Jesus Christ. Instead, the clergy in all lands had ‘turned to the all-out service of the god of war. They had tried to paint World War I as a “holy” war instead of what it was, a brutal struggle for world political domination.
The warmongering attitude of the clergy made many thoughtful persons sick at heart. They realized that promoting war was not the proper function of those claiming to represent the Prince of Peace. In October 1914, after the war’s outbreak, Rabbi Wise of New York made this comment on the course that the churches had taken:
“The failure of the churches and synagogues to maintain leadership over the people was the cause of the present war. They have enthroned a war devil in place of God. They are satisfied to be a mere item of social organization and to defend their countries and rulers, just or unjust.”
A well-known Canadian who objected to what the churches were doing was J. S. Woodsworth. He was an ordained Methodist minister, and later became a Member of Parliament. In a letter to his wife, Lucy, published in his biography later, he told of attending a Sunday evening church service in Montreal in October 1915:
“In the evening I went to St. James Methodist Church to a recruiting meeting. Really, Lucy, if I weren’t on principle opposed to spectacular methods, I would have gotten up and denounced the whole performance as a perversion​—a damnable perversion, if you like—​of the teachings of Jesus, and a profanation of the day and the house set apart for Divine Worship. . . .
“The climax was reached when the pastor in an impassioned appeal stated that if any young man could go [to war] and did not go he was neither a Christian nor a patriot. No! The climax was the announcement that recruiting sergeants were stationed at the doors of the church and that any man of spirit​—any lover of his country—​any follower of Jesus​—should make his decision then and there!”
Woodsworth said to his wife in conclusion: “I felt like doing something desperate​—forswearing church attendance—​repudiating my connection with the Church.” Later, in 1918, he did just that! He resigned from the church, declaring:
“For me, the teachings and spirit of Jesus are absolutely irreconcilable with the advocacy of war. . . . The churches have been turned into very effective recruiting agencies. A minister’s success appears to be judged by the number of recruits in his church rather than by the number of converts.”
When World War I ended, the same Methodist Church (by then known as the United Church) publicly confessed that its wartime course had been unchristian! In February 1924, its official journal, The Christian Guardian, stated:
“There is surely not an intelligent, civilized man left in all the world who thinks that there is any virtue or goodness or saving grace in war. And most of us have been driven far beyond that negative position to the very positive and inescapable belief that war is, for our day and time, a hideous, utterly unchristian, unforgivable crime.
“And in so far as we did not quite feel that way about it just a few short years ago, some of us​—many of us—​are ready to acknowledge our fault in truest humility, and seek pardon for our ignorance and our lack of the Spirit of our Master.”
The Position of Jehovah’s Witnesses
However, what position had Jehovah’s witnesses taken on this issue? Not after the war was over, when a profession of peace would be easy, but at a time when it took courage to speak out, Jehovah’s witnesses publicly made known the truth about the matter.
For example, note what The Bible Students Monthly, published by Jehovah’s witnesses, had said in September of 1917:
“The clergy have stood by the kings and said, in substance, ‘Push on your work of destruction; God is with you, and we will pray His blessings upon your army.’ In Germany the Clergy pray God that He will bless their armies and enable them to destroy the English; in Great Britain the Clergy pray God for a blessing upon the British armies, that they may be enabled to wipe the Germans off the face of the earth. Which class of the clergy does He hear? . . .
“The Scriptures point out that both the kings and the clergy are responsible for this war, but that the clergy are even more reprehensible, because it was their duty to know God’s Plan and to tell it to the people. But they have refused to learn it and failed to tell it to others.”
It was this course of Jehovah’s witnesses, who outspokenly made known the truth, that was intolerable to the clergy. So they attempted to stamp out the truth. But did they succeed?
CANADA’S CLERGY FAIL TO HALT SPREAD OF TRUTH
The attempt by Canada’s clergy to sweep back the flow of truth was as futile as trying to sweep back the surging ocean. True, they found it easy to get certain literature of Jehovah’s witnesses outlawed. But trying to prevent the spread of truth was another matter.
For one thing, the publicity given this controversy in the Canadian press helped to spread the message, instead of hindering it. The press censor for the western part of Canada, J. F. B. Livesay, wrote concerning the ban:
“This propaganda is getting today more advertising free in Canadian daily papers than could be achieved by the most lavish outpouring of money in the advertising columns.”
Also, a western newspaper, The Chinook, remarked editorially about the ban on the book The Finished Mystery:
“When the Canadian government put the ban on this book, it did a great deal to advertise it, and arouse the curiosity of the people as to its contents. As a result of the government’s actions, thousands of extra copies of the book will likely get into circulation and hundreds of new converts may be made for the International Bible Students. . . .
“The regular ministers called down all manner of condemnation on the head of Russell [first president of the Watch Tower Society] and the result was that inquisitive church members secured some of the Russell literature, liked it, and joined the movement. Now that the Canadian Government is getting after the Russellites, you may look out for a rapid spread of the movement.”
Other Publications Produced
Also, while some publications of the Witnesses had been outlawed, this did not prevent them from producing others. One proposed publication entitled “The Morning Messenger” was submitted for approval to the government’s western press censor in Winnipeg, J. F. B. Livesay. He approved it, since it dealt with purely religious topics.
This publication was then printed and sent to different centers throughout Canada. On June 10, 1918, it was given a quick, massive distribution by Jehovah’s witnesses in each city, all on the same day.
While this publication did not discuss matters pertaining to the government, it was critical of the churches. As expected, the clergy reacted violently.
But why had Mr. Livesay approved The Morning Messenger? He explained this in a letter he wrote to the chief censor:
“I read the thing through very carefully . . . and as it had no bearing . . . on the prosecution of the war, I could not see that it could be prohibited on the ground that it was an attack on religion, that not being, to my idea, the business of the Press Censorship.”
The chief censor, Col. Chambers, himself said: “As to the matter itself, it is true, there is nothing anti-British, anti-Ally or Pacifist in it.”
Hence, the government files now open to the public in Ottawa make it abundantly clear that the religious publications in question were not “the business of the Press Censorship.” It is also clear that the chief censor had departed from the proper business of his office because of the interference of the clergy in government.
Prosecutions Fail
Trying to stop the flow of truth proved very frustrating to the clergy. When efforts were made to prosecute the Witnesses for having banned literature in their possession, the chief censor often could not get the courts to take him seriously! He reported his problems to the Canadian secretary of state:
“Many of these individuals are peaceable people living clean lives and generally with good reputations for honesty, etc., in the communities in which they live. . . .
“The action of some magistrates in Manitoba in so lightly dismissing clear cases against these people has, according to the statements made to me by military officials, made something of a laughing-stock of the war censorship.”
Imagine trying to jail “peaceable people living clean lives . . . with good reputations for honesty”! What guilt the clergy have for pressuring an official to brand decent, honorable Christians as criminals and for trying to send them to prison! King Solomon of ancient times, an administrator of great ability, had a word for the clergy. He said:
“Anyone pronouncing the wicked one righteous and anyone pronouncing the righteous one wicked​—even both of them are something detestable to Jehovah.”​—Prov. 17:15.
The official records of Canada also reveal that the plot by the clergy against the Witnesses did not stop with censorship and prosecution. A spy was also sent to their religious services. Her name was Mrs. Jeckel. What did she find? Some deep conspiracy to overthrow the government? The report of her spying at the Christian services of these true believers states this:
“I hear they have planned something to take place at Easter, they speak of this in their meetings, but I have not been able to catch on to what it is, for, at their meetings they speak in symbolic language.”
Even children know that in the churches of Christendom ‘something is planned to take place at Easter.’ While Jehovah’s witnesses do not hold an Easter celebration, they do commemorate the death of Jesus Christ, using the emblems of bread and wine, the “symbolic language” representing the body and blood of Christ. What kind of mentality would try to make a sinister plot out of such a universally recognized and Biblical practice?
A Christian Reply
While all the pressures were being applied against Jehovah’s witnesses, representations were made from their headquarters located in Brooklyn, New York. An open letter was sent to the Canadian secretary of state. This letter, also in the official archives, said in part:
“You are too busy in your official affairs at this time to give these publications careful reading and you have depended upon someone else to advise you as to their contents. Whether you know it or not, a certain class of clergymen of Canada are the men who are conducting this campaign of slander and libel against the above publications. . . .
“When Jesus was unjustly condemned before Pilate, that ruler did not believe Jesus guilty, but was influenced in his action of condemning him by the clergy of that day. History is in a measure repeating itself. . . .
“The great majority of the clergy, imbued with the desire for popularity and approval amongst men, seemingly have entirely neglected the duties of the high office which they assume. Instead of aiding in the work of properly enlightening the people concerning the teachings of the Bible they are binding more fetters upon mankind and further keeping them in ignorance.”
Another letter was written from the headquarters of Jehovah’s witnesses a few weeks later. This one was sent to the chief censor. It pointed out to him the injustice of condemning publications without observing the elementary right of a hearing for the accused. The letter stated:
“In fairness, before a publication devoted entirely to discussion of Bible questions is placed under the ban the parties responsible for its circulation should have notice and a hearing, and be permitted to bring to the attention of Government officials the real motive back of it.”
This letter demonstrated the true Christian attitude of total confidence in the Great Judge, Jehovah God, for it also said:
“Humbly we bring the message which the Lord has provided in His Word, and call the people’s attention to it; and if those in authority see fit to exclude it from the people, they must bear the responsibility, and this responsibility is to God, not to man. And God, in His perfect wisdom, will deal with them in His own good way.”
Christians Victorious
History shows how the issue was finally resolved. After the war ended in November of 1918, the ban against these Christians was lifted, to the dismay of the clergy. Their meddling in government affairs was overruled by officials of the Canadian government who valued freedom and conscientiously worked to preserve it for all Canadians, including religious minorities.
The view of Jehovah’s witnesses that “God, in His perfect wisdom, will deal with them in His own good way” was amply justified. With renewed freedom to preach, the work of Jehovah’s witnesses spread rapidly in Canada after that time. Their firm stand for Bible principles became a byword in the land, gaining the respect of many thoughtful citizens, including government officials. Their public ministry announcing the kingdom of God as man’s only hope brought huge blessings and resulted in many other Canadians joining them in their work.
This spiritual prosperity and activity began to be noted in contrast to the condition of the clergy and the churches. The churches again looked for a means to have the Witnesses suppressed. The archives in Ottawa lay bare their role. Just what took place then?
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES BANNED
The summer of 1940 was a dark time for the Western nations supporting the Allied cause in World War II. Hitler’s armies had overrun most of Europe. France fell in a matter of weeks.
The collapse of Allied power in Europe sent shock waves across Canada. Excitement, fear, and suspicion gripped the people.
In this atmosphere of tension Canadian Minister of Justice Ernest Lapointe, a Roman Catholic from Quebec City, rose in the House of Commons on July 4, 1940, to announce:
“I desire to lay on the table of the house an order-in-council declaring illegal the organization known as Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
Wave of Persecution Begins
The ban immediately triggered a wave of persecution against these innocent Christians. The very next day the Mounted Police began raiding their private homes and halls. Jehovah’s witnesses were arrested and imprisoned for merely having in their possession Bible literature that had been part of their personal libraries for many years!
In some areas, the persecution turned into a veritable witch hunt. A meeting for celebrating the Lord’s Supper (what the churches call “holy communion”) was broken up in Quebec City. Children were expelled from school and taken away from their God-fearing parents. Many Witnesses were prosecuted and jailed.
But in all this persecution, these Christians were not charged with any wrongdoing. They were penalized merely for being Jehovah’s witnesses!
John Diefenbaker, a Member of Parliament from Saskatchewan, brought this to the attention of the House of Commons, saying:
“I believe there have been some five hundred prosecutions of Jehovah’s Witnesses, none of which had to do with subversive activities, the entire offence being that of belonging to an organization banned under the defence of Canada regulations.”
The ban aroused much bitter criticism on the part of the public. It was obvious to many Canadian citizens, including high government officials, that the vicious campaign against these humble Christians was totally unjust. Angus MacInnis, Member of Parliament from Vancouver, told the House:
“I wish to say with all the earnestness I possess that the prosecution and persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses under the defence of Canada regulations is a standing disgrace to this country, to the Department of Justice and to the Canadian people.
“I have in my files a letter reporting an incident that happened in Montreal at a religious meeting where these people gathered for the purpose of performing the rite of holy communion. The place was raided by ten members of the mounted police. . . .
“Suppose such a thing had happened when the Roman Catholic church was holding a celebration on the streets of Ottawa not so long ago. How we would make the [heavens] ring with protests!
“Any right that is granted to any one religious organization in the country must be granted to all; otherwise we have no religious freedom in Canada. I do not know; I cannot understand, why there should be this continual persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
Another Member of Parliament, Mr. A. W. Neill from British Columbia, also spoke from his own knowledge of Jehovah’s witnesses:
“I know a number of these people, I live not far from them, and I have never known of any disloyalty among them, nor do I know anyone else who had any charge of that kind to make against Jehovah’s Witnesses. They happen to have peculiar religious beliefs with which I do not agree, but that does not make them harmful or subversive. . . .
“So far as my considerable knowledge of these people goes, I can say that there are a number of them in the district I represent and that they are decent, respectable people. Whatever their religious beliefs may be, that is beside the point.”
Despite the efforts to stamp out Jehovah’s Witnesses, they continued to carry out their God-given ministry. Deprived of Bible literature, they preached from house to house using the Bible, reading scriptures to comfort people with the grand hope of God’s new order. They continued to hold meetings, but in private homes instead of public halls.
Also, despite the oppression, arrests and abuse, many thoughtful people throughout Canada were able to see past the sham of opposition. They saw that here were faithful Christians standing strong for God’s laws. As a result, the number of Jehovah’s witnesses in Canada increased more rapidly than before!
Government Committee Speaks Out
The ban had been imposed by the Roman Catholic Minister of Justice, Lapointe, in a most arbitrary manner. The Witnesses were not given any notice, hearing or opportunity to defend themselves.
Lapointe acted as prosecutor, judge and jury. Although a committee of Members of Parliament had been appointed to recommend changes in the Defence of Canada Regulations, Lapointe bypassed the committee and caused the ban to be imposed on July 4, 1940.
But in 1942 a Select Committee of the House of Commons held hearings to review what was being done under the Defence of Canada Regulations. After a fair hearing, the Committee on July 23, 1942, unanimously recommended lifting the ban. Here are some comments of the Committee as taken directly from the official debates of the Canadian House of Commons:
“No evidence was put before the committee by the Department of Justice which indicated that at any time Jehovah’s Witnesses should have been declared an illegal organization.”
“It is a disgrace to the Dominion of Canada that people should be prosecuted for their religious convictions in the way in which these poor people have been prosecuted.”
Delay Increases Anger
The unanimous recommendation was made to the Canadian government in July 1942. But the minister of justice ignored it!
True, the department by this time had a new minister of justice, Louis S. St. Laurent. He had entered the department earlier, in December of 1941. But St. Laurent was also a Roman Catholic, from Quebec City. And he adamantly refused to lift the ban!
The members of the Select Committee whose recommendations were being ignored were incensed. They were loud in their protests when the subject came up again for debate in the House. The official record carries the following statement by Member of Parliament Angus MacInnis:
“This fact still remains; that is, that no evidence has been placed before this committee that would justify the declaring of the Jehovah’s Witnesses an illegal organization. In my opinion it is clear, pure religious prejudice that is maintaining the ban.”
Mr. Victor Quelch, a Member of Parliament from Acadia, added his observations:
“It does make one wonder whether the action against Jehovah’s Witnesses is largely on account of their attitude toward the Roman Catholics, instead of their attitude of a subversive nature. . . .
“That question is being asked all over this country. I am asked it from one end of Canada to the other.”
These comments were getting close to the truth. And soon a ground swell of accusations formed. These accusations were to the effect that Jehovah’s witnesses were being persecuted at the demand of the Roman Catholic Church.
The mask was wearing thin. But the Church could not afford to have its political meddling come out in the open. So Minister of Justice St. Laurent felt that he had to move to cover over the matter. Thus, on October 14, 1943, at the height of World War II, the ban was lifted!
Such a reversal of position at that crucial period in history was truly astonishing. It was really an admission that there were no grounds at all for measures that had been taken against the Witnesses.
But would the lifting of the ban hide the truth of what really went on behind the scenes? No, it would not.
Now, the opening of Canada’s official archives reveals what really happened. And what was the real reason for all the persecution?
THE REAL REASON COMES TO LIGHT
What was the real reason for the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses in Canada during World War II? What was actually going on in the background? Why had both ministers of justice maneuvered the government into such an embarrassing position?
It will be recalled that both of these ministers of justice, Ernest Lapointe and Louis St. Laurent, were Roman Catholics who came from the city of Quebec. And a well-known Canadian author, Hugh MacLennan, remarked of power in Quebec:
“The true power was not in the legislative assembly but the Catholic church.”
The man who could really dictate policy was Roman Catholic Cardinal Rodrigue Villeneuve. When Ernest Lapointe became Canadian minister of justice, knowledgeable people recognized that he was primarily the representative of the Catholic Church.
Government Archives Reveal Truth
The government archives, now made public, reveal the truth. They show that before the war even started, Lapointe was being peppered with demands from Catholic organizations to stop Jehovah’s witnesses. The war provided a convenient camouflage behind which the minister of justice hoped to conceal the intrigues of the Roman Catholic Church.
The key point was reached when the following letter, in French, was sent from the cardinal’s palace to the private secretary of Lapointe. It was written on June 27, 1940, by Paul Bernier, chancellor of the archdiocese of Quebec:
“Dear Sir:
“His Eminence the Cardinal would be happy if you would draw the attention of the Right Honorable Mr. Ernest Lapointe, Minister of Justice, to the enclosed leading editorial of Quebec, concerning the publications of the Watch Tower or Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“Certain books and pamphlets again recently addressed through the mail, and in particular the periodical Consolation, are all that which is the most demoralizing and most destructive of the spiritual strength of the country.
“Thanking you in advance, dear Sir, for your kind attention to this letter, I remain
Yours very truly,
Paul Bernier, Chancellor”
The “leading editorial” that the cardinal’s office enclosed with their letter was from the newspaper L’Action Catholique. This paper was the official voice of the Quebec hierarchy. The editorial stated:
“A lot is being said about sabotage.
“With good reason a careful watch is kept on those who could blow up ships under construction, explosive works, etc., etc. But there are still more dangerous agents of sabotage; those are people who prepare the mind and heart for subversive activity by sowing revolutionary ideas and kindling feelings of revolt.
“Among these public enemies, there are none more hypocritical and more harmful than Jehovah’s Witnesses and their agents.
“Any time of day, in one parish or another, in country or in town, this dangerous sect gives out its poisonous booklets . . .
“Whatever the case, we declare with no hesitation that the authorities should be doing more to protect the public in this domain.”
This editorial, and the accompanying letter sent to Lapointe’s private secretary, were in reality a demand from the cardinal that Lapointe have Jehovah’s witnesses declared illegal. Lapointe knew that his power depended on the cardinal. He was therefore quick to respond.
Quick Answer
The next item in this drama of secrecy and intrigue is the following letter sent to the cardinal’s palace one week later, on July 4, 1940. It was from the private secretary of the minister of justice, Lapointe. Addressed to the chancellor, Paul Bernier, it said:
“Mr. Chancellor:
“Upon receipt of your letter of June 27, I look it upon myself to fulfill His Eminence the Cardinal’s desire to direct the attention of the Minister to your representations as well as to the editorial published by L’Action Catholique with regard to the Watch Tower, Jehovah’s Witnesses and Consolation.
“Mr. Lapointe gave me permission to let you know by telephone the confidential information that the said organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses would be declared illegal as of today, with the request that His Eminence, the Cardinal, be informed of this.
“This letter is to confirm that which I just told you over the telephone.
“I understand that His Eminence the Cardinal will be duly informed of the departmental order regarding Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“Please accept, Mr. Chancellor, my expression of thanks and my warmest regards.”
The letter was signed by Lapointe’s private secretary. So from the time of the cardinal’s demand, it had taken just seven days to get the ban on Jehovah’s witnesses imposed!
Thus, from the government’s own official records, the truth is now revealed. The ban against Jehovah’s witnesses was engineered directly from the palace of the Roman Catholic cardinal in Quebec City.
What a shameful record the clergy built up in this matter! There were false accusations from religious enemies, secret files, hidden influence, no opportunity to reply, and arbitrary decrees designed to destroy freedom of worship to God. Those were all the hateful and evil practices of the ill-famed Inquisition used in modern times by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in Canada to damage innocent people who dared to proclaim the truths of God’s Word!
What Can Be Learned?
All the foregoing information, now revealed from Canada’s own archives, shows how persecution of completely innocent people can occur. No government that is conscious of its basic duty to do justice would want to be responsible for such wrongdoing under the cloak of law. Injustice toward a minority brings both law and government into disrepute.
It is to the credit of public-spirited men in Parliament that they realized the error and checked the abuse of official power. The firmness of those who spoke out for justice is to be commended. Regrettably, it came too late to prevent many of the shameful injustices that resulted from the ban.
These events point up the fact that it is not the function of human government to choose between religions. Faith cannot be legislated or decreed. Thus, when public officials are pressured to interfere with freedom of worship, they should exercise restraint. They should adopt the spirit of the philosophic Mr. Justice Holmes, who said, “The best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market.”
That is similar to the wisdom contained in the counsel of a much earlier judge, Gamaliel, who sat to hear charges against the apostles of Jesus Christ. Gamaliel said to associate members of the court:
“Do not meddle with these men, but let them alone; (because, if this scheme or this work is from men, it will be overthrown; but if it is from God, you will not be able to overthrow them;) otherwise, you may perhaps be found fighters actually against God.”​—Acts 5:38, 39.
And that is just what has happened in Canada​—church leaders have indeed fought against a work commissioned by God and, hence, against God. Any who fight against God must lose. Proof of this can be seen in the fact that today the churches in Canada, especially the Roman Catholic Church, are in a state of swift decline. Priests, nuns, ministers, seminary students and common people alike are quitting the churches in huge numbers. Time and again church leaders howl and cry over the deterioration taking place. They express deep concern that the churches, and clergy, may before long become extinct.
The question confronting many Canadians now is this: Are they going to continue to support these religions and thus endorse their crimes against freedom, yes, against people who are seeking to do the will of God? Large numbers of people want to be free from such guilt.
Today the work of Jehovah’s witnesses in Canada prospers as never before! Never have they had so many people joining with them at their meetings. Why? Because they have become well known as the people who really study and teach what is in the Bible and sincerely apply its principles in their lives.

