Is Real Protection Possible?
ESSAYIST Ralph Waldo Emerson once declared: “Shallow men believe in luck . . . Strong men believe in cause and effect.” Yes, a person who puts faith in the power of magical amulets and good-luck charms surrenders the control of his life to unseen forces. He throws logic and reason to the wind and bows to irrational, superstitious fears.
The Bible, however, can free one from such fears. It shows that amulets and charms are impotent, powerless. How so? Well, according to The New Encyclopædia Britannica, “amulets are thought to derive power from their connection with [among other things] natural forces.” These forces may be ‘the spirits of the dead’ or ‘the power of luck.’ But the Bible clearly shows that the dead “are conscious of nothing at all.” (Ecclesiastes 9:5) Thus, there are no spirits of the dead that can help or hurt the living; nor is there any invisible force like luck that can work in your behalf.
In Bible times, God condemned those leaving him, those forgetting his holy mountain, “those setting in order a table for the god of Good Luck and those filling up mixed wine for the god of Destiny.” Rather than gaining protection, those advocates of luck were consigned to destruction. “I will destine you men to the sword,” said Jehovah God.​—Isaiah 65:11, 12.
By practicing the magical arts, the ancient nation of Babylon likewise put faith in the protection of mysterious powers. But Babylon suffered calamity nonetheless. “Persist in your spells and your monstrous sorceries,” challenged the prophet Isaiah. “Maybe you can get help from them . . . But no! in spite of your many wiles you are powerless.” (Isaiah 47:12, 13, The New English Bible) In time that nation ceased to exist altogether. Faith in the occult had proved vain. Similarly, no magical amulet, charm, or talisman can do anything to help or protect you.
A Form of Idolatry
Still, some may see no harm in carrying a crystal, a rabbit’s foot, or a religious medal. Are these not little more than harmless trinkets? Not according to the Bible. It says that occult paraphernalia is anything but harmless.
The use of amulets is a form of idolatry​—something clearly condemned in God’s Word. (Exodus 20:4, 5) True, a person may not feel that he is directly worshiping an amulet or a talisman. But does it not manifest a reverent, worshipful attitude toward unseen occult powers if one merely owns one? And is it not true that worshipful attention (such as kissing) is often given the charms themselves? Yet the Bible, at 1 John 5:21, counsels Christians: “Guard yourselves from idols.” Would this not include items viewed as charms or amulets?
The Snare of the Occult
Through the use of amulets, many also become ensnared by the occult. True, some may carry a crystal or a magical potion more out of custom than out of conviction. But just as flirting with a prostitute may lead to contracting AIDS, flirting with the occult may also have disastrous consequences. It was with good reason that God prohibited the Israelites from practicing magic, divination, and fortune-telling. “Everybody doing these things is something detestable to Jehovah,” warns the Bible.​—Deuteronomy 18:10-14.
Why this stern prohibition? Because the unseen forces behind such practices are neither the spirits of the dead nor the power of luck but are Satan the Devil and his demons.a And the use of amulets is directly linked with demon worship. Says Vine’s Expository Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words: “In sorcery, the use of drugs, whether simple or potent, was generally accompanied by incantations and appeals to occult powers, with the provision of various charms, amulets, etc.”
One possessing an occult charm is therefore dabbling in spiritism. He risks being brought under the sinister influence and control of “the god of this system of things”​—Satan the Devil. (2 Corinthians 4:4) With good reason, then, does the Bible command us to avoid all forms of spiritism.​—Galatians 5:19-21.
Breaking the Chains of Superstition
The World Book Encyclopedia nonetheless observes: “Superstitions will probably have a part in life as long as people fear each other and have uncertainties about the future.” But Jehovah’s Witnesses are helping many to free themselves from harmful superstitions. A South African woman recalls: “I was troubled by evil spirits, and my house was full of muti to protect me against them.” Jehovah’s Witnesses helped her to see the dangers of toying with the occult. Her response? “I started to throw away everything that I possessed that was connected with demonism,” she says. “My health improved. I dedicated my life to serve Jehovah and was baptized.” She is now free from superstition and spiritism.
Consider, too, the Nigerian herbalist who mixed spiritism with his healing arts. Often using threats and curses, he would customarily drive Jehovah’s Witnesses away from his home when they would call. Once he even prepared a special potion, uttered some incantations over it, and blew it in the face of a Witness! “In seven days you will be dead!” he screamed. Seven days later the Witness returned, causing the herbalist to rush out, believing that he had seen a ghost! His magic now exposed as worthless, he consented to a Bible study and eventually became a Witness himself.
You too can be freed from the shackles of fear and superstition. Admittedly, this may not be easy. Perhaps you have grown up in a culture where the use of amulets and charms is commonplace. Christians in ancient Ephesus faced such a challenge. They lived in a culture heavily influenced by spiritism. What did they do when they learned the truth of God’s Word? The Bible says: “Quite a number of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them up before everybody. And they calculated together the prices of them and found them worth fifty thousand pieces of silver.”​—Acts 19:19.
Gaining God’s Protection
If you rid yourself of all vestiges of the occult, will you not be left without protection? On the contrary, “God is for us a refuge and strength, a help that is readily to be found during distresses.” (Psalm 46:1) God’s protection will be particularly manifest when he destroys this wicked system of things. “Jehovah knows how to deliver people of godly devotion out of trial, but to reserve unrighteous people for the day of judgment to be cut off.”​—2 Peter 2:9; compare Psalm 37:40.
Meanwhile, ‘time and unforeseen occurrence befall us all.’ (Ecclesiastes 9:11) God does not promise that his servants will lead a “charmed” life or that he will shield them from all personal harm. Nevertheless, he does promise to protect our spirituality and our relationship with him. (Psalm 91:1-9) How? For one thing, he gives us laws and principles that can benefit us and protect us from Satan’s corrupting influence. (Isaiah 48:17) By our gaining a knowledge of Jehovah’s ways, ‘thinking ability itself will keep guard over us, discernment itself will safeguard us’​—for example, from unprofitable or harmful activities.​—Proverbs 2:11.
Another way God protects us is by providing “the power beyond what is normal” in times of trial. (2 Corinthians 4:7) And when circumstances threaten to overwhelm a Christian, He gives “the peace of God that excels all thought” to guard the heart and mental powers. (Philippians 4:7) Yes, the Christian is equipped to “stand firm against the machinations of the Devil.”​—Ephesians 6:11-13.
How can you acquire such protection? Begin by taking in knowledge of Jehovah and of his Son, Jesus Christ. (John 17:3) Jehovah’s Witnesses can do much to help you along these lines. As you cultivate a warm relationship with Jehovah, you will begin to experience his kindly protection. God says, as we read at Psalm 91:14: “Because on me he has set his affection, I shall also provide him with escape. I shall protect him because he has come to know my name.”
Indeed, if you are faithful to him, God will eventually bless you with everlasting life in the coming new world. Jehovah guarantees concerning those living at that time: “There will be no one making them tremble; for the very mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken it.” (Micah 4:4) Disease and death will be no more. (Revelation 21:4) Even now, though, you can enjoy a measure of safety​—if you cultivate a close relationship with Jehovah. Like the psalmist, you will be able to say: “My help is from Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth.”​—Psalm 121:2.
[Footnotes]
For further information, see the brochure Spirits of the Dead​—Can They Help You or Harm You? Do They Really Exist? published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture on page 6]
Christians in Ephesus got rid of everything related to occultism
[Picture on page 7]
Under God’s Kingdom, fear will be no more

