Keep Speaking God’s Word With Boldness
1 As Christian ministers, we know that not all will welcome our preaching. (Matt. 10:14) However, we do not allow the negative response of some to cause us to hold back from making known the good news. (Prov. 29:25) What helps us to keep speaking God’s word with boldness?
2 The apostle Paul appreciated “the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus.” This moved him to speak with “strong conviction.” (Phil. 3:8; 1 Thess. 1:5) Although some viewed the message he preached as weak and foolish, he knew that it was “God’s power for salvation to everyone having faith.” (Rom. 1:16) Therefore, even when facing opposition, he kept “speaking with boldness by the authority of Jehovah.”​—Acts 14:1-7; 20:18-21, 24.
3 Our Source of Strength: It was not in his own strength that Paul was able to give a bold witness. Speaking of himself and Silas, Paul wrote: “After we had first suffered and been insolently treated . . . in Philippi, we mustered up boldness by means of our God to speak to you the good news of God with a great deal of struggling.” (1 Thess. 2:2; Acts 16:12, 37) Further, while imprisoned in Rome, Paul requested that others pray in his behalf in order that he might continue to make known the good news ‘with boldness as he ought to speak.’ (Eph. 6:18-20) By relying on Jehovah rather than himself, Paul was able to keep speaking God’s word with boldness.​—2 Cor. 4:7; Phil. 4:13.
4 The same is true today. A brother who found it very difficult to identify himself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses at his workplace and to witness informally prayed about the matter and started to witness. A workmate initially rejected his efforts, but mention of the resurrection hope led to a Bible study. From then on, the brother seized every opportunity to give a witness. At his next place of employment, he helped 34 persons to baptism over a period of 14 years. We can be confident that Jehovah will likewise strengthen us ‘to keep speaking his word with all boldness.’​—Acts 4:29.

