Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting October 10
Song 17
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the October 15 Watchtower and the October 22 Awake! After each demonstration, highlight some good aspects of the presentation. In addition, draw attention to secondary articles that may appeal to people in the local territory.
15 min: Do You Have Good Reading Habits? Audience discussion based on selected portions of the Ministry School book, pages 21-6. What can be included in our reading program? (p. 21, box) Why is it important for us to read the publications that are provided? (p. 23, par. 2) What is the key to maintaining a good reading program? (p. 26, pars. 3-4) How do you set aside time to read the Watchtower and Awake! magazines? How has this benefited you?
20 min: “Keep Speaking God’s Word With Boldness.”a Invite the audience to comment on situations in which it can be a challenge to muster up the boldness needed to give a witness. What has helped them to do so?
Song 78 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 17
Song 36
10 min: Local announcements. Using part 3 of the September 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, review one or two points on how to make effective use of the Scriptures when conducting Bible studies.
15 min: Avoid the Dangers of the Internet. A talk by an elder based on the December 8, 2004, Awake! pages 18-21.
20 min: “Show Personal Interest​—By Being Kind.”b Invite the audience to comment on how we can show kindness to others when sharing in the field ministry. Other aspects of showing personal interest in those to whom we preach will be considered in future issues of Our Kingdom Ministry.
Song 2 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 24
Song 68
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using one of the suggested presentations in the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert or another approach that is appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to present the literature offer for November.​—See the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 8, par. 5.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Reflecting God’s Standards in Our Dress and Grooming. Talk and audience discussion to be handled by an elder based on the August 1, 2002, Watchtower, pages 17-19. Invite the audience to comment on how our exemplary appearance can open the way to give a witness.
Song 153 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 31
Song 209
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for October. Using the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present the November 1 Watchtower and the November 8 Awake! In one of the presentations, lay the groundwork for the next visit by drawing attention to the box “In Our Next Issue.”​—See the October 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 8, pars. 7-8.
15 min: Use a Magazine Route to Cultivate Interest. Talk and audience discussion based on the May 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8. How can we start a magazine route? (par. 1) How can we prepare a series of one-scripture discussions? (par. 3) Why do we need to do more than just read the selected scripture? (par. 4) How can a magazine-route call become a Bible study? (par. 5) Include a demonstration of a publisher having a one-scripture discussion with someone on his magazine route.
20 min: Youths Who Are Resolute yet Respectful. Talk by an elder based on the September 15, 2002, Watchtower, pages 23-4, under the subheading “Refrain Respectfully.” Arrange in advance for one or two youths to comment on the challenges they have faced at school and what has helped them to deal with these successfully.
Song 222 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 7
Song 39
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: Improve Your Concentration at Meetings. Talk and audience discussion based on the September 15, 2002, Watchtower, pages 12-14, paragraphs 11-14. Review the suggestions provided, and invite the audience to comment on what has helped them to get the most benefit from congregation meetings.
20 min: “Develop Skill in Reasoning With Others.”c Invite selected publishers to relate how they have been able to reason with people of various backgrounds in the local territory.
Song 50 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

