Vision of the “Time of the End”
 1. How long is the “time of the end”, and why the command to “seal the book” until then?
“FOR the vision belongeth to the time of the end.” (Dan. 8:17, AS) This “time of the end” covers a period of many years, those of a generation, and it can come into effect only when the Gentile times expire and when the kingdom of the Messiah is ready to take over the rulership of the earth. A time certain was decreed in which to bring about the complete end of the great nations now ruling on earth, and this time began A.D. 1914 and will terminate with the mighty battle of Armageddon. “Seal the record until the fixed period.” (F. Fenton) Yes, the time for this period is fixed but as yet Jehovah has not revealed the actual day or year of its end to his faithful people, but he knows. During this fixed period, the length of a generation, tremendous wonders will happen. Indeed the whole course of human events will change, insofar as the system of things, rulerships over the nations, and modes of living, are concerned. New systems of things will be introduced, leading eventually to peace, joy, health and everlasting life. Jehovah shall be known to his people and his ‘praises sung from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof’. Deliverance in the fullest sense will be the blessed lot of those who worship and bless the God of Daniel. Jehovah the Judge of all the earth and heaven will bring to pass his good pleasure.
 2. Why is this the most eventful time in all history, and with what effect in heaven and in earth?
2 Daniel’s prophecy reveals how during the “time of the end” the sovereignty would be taken from the present ruling powers, invisible and visible, and be given to the Messiah Prince, who is the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the saints of the Most High God. The time for this transfer of authority has really come and the name of Jehovah must now be exalted. There could not be a more eventful time in the history of the world. It is truly thrilling to be alive and witness the passing away with great noise of the old system of things and the inauguration of new and better systems of things. Yes, it is earth’s greatest event, for the time has come at last for the kingdom of Jehovah God to be ruled over by Christ the King of all kings. The pinnacle of the ages is here, the grandest, the most glorious day has dawned. Heaven rejoices, the earth is glad, and multitudes of people are singing aloud for sheer joy, praising Jehovah the Creator, who is worthy. “And they are singing the song of Moses the slave of God and the song of the Lamb, saying: ‘Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, King of eternity. Who will not really fear you, Jehovah, and glorify your name, because you alone are one of loving-kindness?’”—Rev. 15:3, 4, NW.
TIME FOR RELEASE TO BEGIN
 3, 4. What will help us to really appreciate Daniel’s prophecy? and what is the outstanding reason for globe-encircling praise?
3 The time for the release of the children of God’s organization Zion from Babylonish captivity is when Jehovah God commences to rule as King. And we must connect the Kingdom rule with this great deliverance to really appreciate Daniel’s prophecy which clearly marks the time for us. It is a time of great jubilation, the prisoners freed, the dispersed of spiritual children returning to spiritual Zion, their real home-coming. And why should it not be a time for much rejoicing! Do not even worldly nations sing aloud and clap their hands and almost cause the very atmosphere to shout happiness when their armies return from war, and when the prisoners of war return to their land, cities, homes and loved ones? Then how much more should Zion rejoice when her conquering Commander marches forth victoriously, and when the captives are freed and the Signal raised on high leading them back to God’s city, to their “home”. The day of all days is here. The psalmist directed by God’s holy spirit voiced many expressions of exultation concerning the time when Jehovah would rule as King. “In that day” all things living would rejoice. In this connection it is worth our time to read many of these psalms, particularly Psalms 93 to 100. A few expressions are here quoted: “Jehovah reigneth; he is clothed with majesty; Jehovah is clothed with strength; he hath girded himself therewith: The world also is established, that it cannot be moved.” “Oh come, let us sing unto Jehovah; let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving; . . . Jehovah is a great God, and a great King above all gods.” “Yahweh hath become king. Let the peoples tremble, he is enthroned on the cherubim, let the earth shake. Yahweh in Zion is great, and high is he over all the peoples. Let them thank his Name—great and reverend.”—Ps. 93:1 and Ps 95:1-3, AS; Ps. 99:1-3, Ro.
4 The whole universe displays Jehovah’s majesty, but this is particularly so in the sanctuary of Zion. The English language seems to exhaust itself in joyous expressions of jubilation. It is as though the psalmist were saying, ‘Break forth into song and music!’ To get the sense, the import, the joy, the purpose behind those inspired prophetic utterances, they cannot be read in monotone, or as one would read a newspaper. No, for they vibrate with life, intensity, gratitude and warmth in the realization that the long-promised day of deliverance from all wickedness and wicked persons has come, for ‘Jehovah has become King’.
 5. To God’s people in Daniel’s day what were the pressing questions of the hour as indicated by Daniel’s prayer?
5 During the prophetic career of Daniel God’s people were in the 70-year period of Jerusalem’s desolation, and the visions, wonders and prophecies were received by him in the land of exile. He yearned and longed for the return to Jerusalem where Jehovah would be King and the children of Zion could worship him in purity and without the defiling Babylonish influences and bondage. When would it come? and how? were the great questions. Daniel sought Jehovah in prayer and supplication to find out the answers, and for this reason he was greatly beloved. “Now therefore, O our God, hearken unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord’s sake. O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great mercies’ sake. O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for thine own sake, O my God, because thy city and thy people are called by thy name.”—Dan. 9:17-19, AS.
 6. What marvelous means of communication between heaven and earth are to be noted in the miniature fulfillment of the deliverance?
6 In a miniature way many prophecies received partial fulfillment when Israel returned after the 70-year desolation. Thousands made their long journey back over the rough roads from Babylon to Jerusalem, and amidst very troublous times they rebuilt the city and temple and repaired the walls which had fallen down. Jehovah directed and blessed that return. He even disclosed information for the comfort of Daniel by one of his angels. “At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment went forth, and I am come to tell thee; for thou art greatly beloved: therefore consider the matter, and understand the vision.” (Dan. 9:23, AS) It is thrilling to learn how Jehovah uses some of his angels. “And I heard a man’s voice between the banks of the Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.” (Dan. 8:16, AS) This same Gabriel was appointed to express Jehovah’s purpose concerning the birth of the Son of God to Mary. “In her sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent forth from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth, to a virgin promised in marriage to a man named Joseph of David’s house; and the name of the virgin was Mary.” (Luke 1:26, 27, NW) Truly this use of angelic messengers to connect earth and heaven constituted a marvelous means of communication.
 7. Why can it be said that today also there is in operation such a marvelous method of communication?
7 It is also a fact that in these last days the angels are used invisibly to care for the same sacred service. “For he will give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.” (Ps. 91:11, AS) How beautifully this is portrayed for us in the dream given to Jacob the chosen servant of God! “And he dreamed; and, behold, a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven; and, behold, the angels of God ascending and descending on it. And, behold, Jehovah stood above it, and said, I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed.” (Gen. 28:12, 13, AS) And the Lord Jesus promised Nathaniel he would see a like thing. “He further said to him: ‘Most truly I say to you men, You will see heaven opened up and the angels of God ascending and descending to the Son of man.’” (John 1:51, NW) Yes, Jehovah commissioned angels to attend to the King’s commands in those days, and so, too, now: “But when he again brings his Firstborn into the inhabited earth, he says: ‘And let all God’s angels worship him.’ Also with reference to the angels he says: ‘And he makes his angels spirits, and his public servants a flame of fire.’”—Heb. 1:6, 7, NW.
GENTILE TIMES ENDED
 8. How do we determine the time of the complete fulfillment of the vision?
8 The great deliverance promised for thousands of years begins when the ‘times of the Gentiles’ run out, which is A.D. 1914. Powerful Gentile kingdoms have ruled on earth and over God’s people since 607 B.C., as was indicated to Israel’s king: “And thou, O deadly wounded wicked one, the prince of Israel, whose day is come, in the time of the iniquity of the end, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Remove the mitre, and take off the crown; this shall be no more the same; exalt that which is low, and abase that which is high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it: this also shall be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.” (Ezek. 21:25-27, AS) This period of time stretches for 2,520 years, from 607 B.C. to A.D. 1914. Throughout those many centuries God’s nation never had a king of David’s line ruling on the throne, for the crown was reserved for him whose right it is, namely, God’s anointed King, Christ Jesus. “Yet I have set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. I will tell of the decree: Jehovah said unto me, Thou art my son; this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.”—Ps. 2:6-8 and Psalm 110, AS.
 9. What Scriptural proof is there to show that the coronation of the King of kings could not take place until these “last days”?
9 The coronation was not to take place at the first advent of Christ Jesus, but at the second. He was not to be King over just one small part of this earth, but King of all. He is “King of kings”. “For this very reason also God exalted him to a superior position and kindly gave him the name that is above every other name, so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground, and every tongue should openly confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.” (Phil. 2:9-11, NW) “Next, the accomplished end, when he hands over the kingdom to his God and Father, when he has destroyed all government and all authority and power. For he must rule as king until God has put all enemies under his feet.” (1 Cor. 15:24, 25, NW) When the Gentile times expire then every power will be broken to pieces. (Ps. 110:5, 6) “Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” (Ps. 2:9, AS) No, a literal city will not be the seat of this majestic, glorious, mighty King, but heaven itself. It is with these sacred truths that we get the setting for the proper understanding of the 12th chapter of Daniel, and see Jehovah’s faithful ones in these last days earnestly inquiring of God the meaning of the present-day events and seeking for an understanding of the vision of Jehovah’s promises to comfort his people.—Isa. 40:1, 2; 44:2, 8; 45:1-4, AS.
MICHAEL ‘STANDS UP’ AND TIME OF TROUBLE
10. How do we identify “Michael”, and in what way does he “stand up”?
10 Daniel 12:1 (AS) reads: “And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince who standeth for the children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.” The name of this angel, “Michael,” is most significant. It means “Who is as, or like, God?” Christ Jesus is “the image of God”. (2 Cor. 4:4, NW) He is the “reflection of his glory and the exact representation of his very being”. (Heb. 1:3, NW) “He is the image of the invisible God, . . . by means of him all other things were created in the heavens and upon the earth, the things visible and the things invisible.” (Col. 1:15-17, NW) He is Jehovah’s appointed Ruler, seated at his right hand. Therefore the text would read, according to the meaning of the name Michael, “Then he, who is as, or like, God, will stand up.” For a long time Christ has been waiting for the time to stand up for the children of God’s people. At last the day comes. “Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” (Ps. 110:2, AS) He is the “great prince”, the foremost one. At last he comes. And why does he come? The obvious answer is, to aid and to defend his people and to destroy their enemies. It is a time for judgment, and God’s judge is Christ Jesus. The day for deliverance arrives when the Lord Jesus Christ stands up for the children of God’s people.—Ps. 50:1-6, AS.
11. What is indicated in Jesus’ prophecies as to the duration of the “time of trouble”?
11 Though the statement pertaining to the time of trouble is brief, we should not understand that to indicate it is a very short time. For we are bound to take into account the many other prophecies in the book of Daniel, and elsewhere, in order to grasp how much is involved. Christ Jesus groups many such prophecies and enlarges on them when explaining to his disciples some of the things which must come to pass in the last days. (See Matthew 24.) He shows the beginning of this time and how the troubles increase, and mentions some of the sorrows to fall on the world, during the time of trouble. The length of time is indicated by him when he said, “Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.” (Matt. 24:34, NW) The actual meaning of these words is, beyond question, that which takes a “generation” in the ordinary sense, as at Mark 8:12 and Acts 13:36, or for those who are living at the given period. So it was on “this generation” that the accumulated judgments were to fall. (Matt. 23:36) This therefore means that from 1914 a generation shall not pass till all is fulfilled, and amidst a great time of trouble.
DELIVERANCE
12. Who are “thy people”, and how do other prophecies point to the fact that they “shall be delivered”?
12 “And at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.” (Dan. 12:1, AS) This grand promise, therefore, shall be kept. Zion’s spiritual children are to be called from wherever they are dispersed. “Fear not; for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west; I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back; bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the end of the earth.” (Isa. 43:5, 6, AS) “Saying to them that are bound, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Show yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and on all bare heights shall be their pasture. Lo, these shall come from far; and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim. Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for Jehovah hath comforted his people, and will have compassion upon his afflicted. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith Jehovah, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all as with an ornament, and gird thyself with them, like a bride.”—Isa. 49:9, 12, 13, 18; Ps. 87:2, 5, 6, AS.
13. How are many awakened from their dustlike condition, with what differing results, and why can we be sure God will “gather” them?
13 The time has come for Zion to rise and shine, for her light has indeed come. (Isa. 60:1-3 and Isa 52:1, 2, AS) Zion’s children have been brought out from mystic Babylon. Freedom has come, and Babylon’s end is here. The erstwhile conqueror now is conquered. The glory of that great city is ended, and her mighty ruler, Satan, is laid low and despised. Some who move along with the released captives become lawless, wicked and contemptible, and it is to their everlasting shame. They came out of Babylon’s “dust” (Dan. 12:2), but do not live in Zion. They die. (Matt. 24:48-51) The setting free of the prisoners goes on, for just as it would take time in the days when Israel was in literal Babylon for the word to reach through the length and breadth of the land, so it is today. It is taking years to reach all the Lord’s “other sheep”, but they will all hear, for it is the determination of the Great King to bring them all together. It is difficult to find them, for they are so widely scattered. But, thanks to Jehovah God, they will be gathered and our work will not have been done until they are found. But, “As Jehovah liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the countries whither he had driven them. And I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers. Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith Jehovah, and they shall fish them up; and afterward I will send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the clefts of the rocks.” (Jer. 16:15, 16, AS) This great gathering is primarily God’s, given into the hands of Christ Jesus, and we, God’s people on earth, are kindly permitted to share in their grand work. Never let us conclude that it is our work and take to ourselves the credit for bringing some to Zion, as though they were our sheep. No, they are not ours; they belong to God; but oh the joy of sharing in this gathering work and being used to help others know the way out of captivity and into God’s organization!
“WISE SHALL SHINE”
14. What Scriptural corroboration have we of the fact that we are now in the time for the “wise” to “shine”?
14 “And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.” (Dan. 12:3, AS) Jesus said, “The harvest is a consummation of a system of things, and the reapers are angels. . . . and they [the angels] will collect out from his kingdom . . . persons who are doing lawlessness, and they will pitch them into the fiery furnace. There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be. At that time the righteous ones will shine as brightly as the sun in the kingdom of their Father.” (Matt. 13:39-43, NW) Note how similar these words are to those of Daniel, chapter 12. Now we are in the time of gathering, the harvesting of God’s royal children, before the winter storms of Armageddon’s battle come on for the destruction of this system of things. For many years God has caused his angelic messengers to care for the interests of his gathered people. For their sake, and so they might be preserved, many wicked persons have been gathered out, and such purifying work still goes on. Anyone hurting God’s children or walking lawlessly will not remain in the assembly of the righteous. But those humble, faithful devoted ones who take heed to Jehovah’s Word and commands are marvelously blessed. But how can they “shine as brightly as the sun in the kingdom”?
15, 16. How can they “shine as brightly as the sun in the kingdom”?
15 It is interesting to note Psalm 19:4, 5:“For the sun hath he set up a tent therein; and he is like a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, he rejoiceth as a hero to run a race.” (Ro) “See, there is the sun’s pavilion pitched! He glows like a bridegroom leaving his chamber, exults like a hero to run his course.” (Mo) No gradual dawning and emerging over the distant horizon this, but a sudden breaking forth, unheralded, unannounced, even as the sun leaps forth in all its splendor in the Mediterranean latitudes. “So perish all thine enemies, O Yahweh, but be they who love him as the going forth of the sun in his might!”—Judg. 5:31, Ro.
16 So shall the wise saints of God be in the Kingdom service in these last days—full of vigor, vitality and energy by reason of Kingdom joy. Leaping for sheer delight they zealously run the race. Before them is their work, and it will be accomplished according to the King’s schedule. No time have they to dally along the road; no holding back. Brighter shines the Kingdom light. Just as the powerful sun scatters the darkness of the night and causes it to disappear and irresistibly moves on from brightness to greater brightness, so the holy servants of Jehovah increase and expand their efforts. Were all the inhabitants of the world to object and fight against it, they could not stop or delay for one second the sun’s rising and shining. So Jehovah’s people shall shine in the Kingdom as brightly as the sun. All the terrible forces of Satan’s world cannot stop the light of truth from shining through for even one second. Let us therefore be confident in God’s power, for “God is with us”. Yes, let those who try to stop us perish.
17. What special comfort may we take from the illustration of the “sun”, and so why do we do well to be “wise”?
17 Let us not forget that, because of storm clouds, the brilliance of the sun is not immediately seen. Temporarily the brightness of the shining may be obscured; but the sun is still there, and shortly appears in all its glory. So with the shining forth of the wise in the Kingdom. Sometimes persecution, bans and prohibitions interfere for a short time with the shining forth and the light is partially obscured. But remember, the Kingdom is here and Christ Jesus is King, and he determines that the righteous shall so shine. If you are of those faithful ones who are being circumscribed and limited in your worship of Jehovah by worldly powers, take comfort and rejoice that God’s day is here and the night for Jehovah’s people is over, and you will yet be brought forth from the difficulties and proscriptions you are enduring and you will yet shine forth more brilliantly. Yes, upon the horizon are the black clouds presaging a great storm; but be of good cheer, for the great day has dawned and the sun of righteousness has risen never again to set. Be wise, therefore, by obeying Jehovah’s Word.
18. Who are those that derive blessing from the shining forth of the wise? How so?
18 The shining forth causes multitudes to see the way to go, for it is a light dispelling their darkness. “The people sitting in darkness saw a great light, and as for those sitting in a region of the shadow of death light dawned upon them.” (Matt. 4:14-16, NW; Isa. 9:1-4) Yes, the way out of Babylon’s darkness is made clear, for the Kingdom sun shines upon it. The faithful therefore declare the Kingdom truths with boldness, without fear of man or conditions, for they know whom they serve and why they serve, and where they are going. Shine forth then, you people of Jehovah, so that the returning multitudes will not lose their way or stumble as they eagerly make for the holy city. Those who shine forth are the wise ones, and shall be rewarded by Jehovah forevermore. Blessed privileges now and everlasting praise in the new world will be your portion.
AUTHORITY OVER THE WATERS, AND BREAKING OF POWER
19-21. Who is represented by the “one clothed in linen” standing above the waters, and what is signified by the question asked?
19 Daniel 12:5-7 continues: “Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two, the one on this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the river. And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that it shall be for a time, times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.” The one clothed in linen here foreshadows Jesus Christ, and this is easily understood by the aid of other scriptures. “I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, a man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with pure gold of Uphaz: his body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as flaming torches, and his arms and his feet like unto burnished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.” (Dan. 10:5, 6, AS) “I saw in the night-visions, and, behold, there came with the clouds of heaven one like unto a son of man, and he came even to the ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.” (Dan. 7:13, AS) Christ Jesus is the one appointed by Jehovah over the waters, which are peoples, nations and tongues.
20 Inquiry is made, “How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?” This pictures Jehovah’s people in these last days asking, “How long will these things continue?” The angel standing above the waters with hand upraised as though in an attitude of swearing to God is similar to the vision recorded at Revelation 10:5-7, which is also for these last days: “And the angel that I saw standing on the sea and on the earth raised his right hand to heaven, and by the One who lives for ever and ever, who created the heaven and the things in it and the earth and the things in it and the sea and the things in it, he swore: ‘There will be no delay any longer; but in the days of the blast of the seventh angel, when he is destined to blow his trumpet, the sacred secret of God according to the good news which he declared to his own slaves the prophets is indeed brought to a finish.’”—NW.
21 The Lord Jesus Christ has the sovereignty over all peoples and nations from one extremity to the other; the expanse of waters is encompassed in his mighty rule. “And the seventh angel blew his trumpet. And loud voices occurred in heaven saying: ‘The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king for ever and ever.’ . . . ‘We thank you, Jehovah God, the Almighty, the one who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and begun ruling as king.’” (Rev. 11:15, 17, NW) Before this, mystic Babylon with its god, Satan, had been ruling. (Rev. 17:15, 18; 19:6) “Jehovah reigneth; he is clothed with majesty; Jehovah is clothed with strength; he hath girded himself therewith: the world also is established, that it cannot be moved. The floods have lifted up, O Jehovah, the floods have lifted up their voice; the floods lift up their waves.” (Ps. 93:1, 3, AS) How very pointed and definite is the Word of God! how clearly it shows that when Jehovah rules as King all the floods (multitudes) lift up their voices!
22. How do other translations assist in getting at the proper answer given by “the one clothed in linen”?
22 Therefore it is at this time Christ Jesus answers the inquiry of his people, “How long will it be?” by saying, “It shall be for a time, times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.” (Dan. 12:7) The correct thought here is not readily grasped if one confines his reading to the King James Version. Other translations help: “When the dispersion of a part of the holy people is brought to an end then shall come to an end all these things.” (Ro) The marginal footnote reads: “‘When the power of the disperser of the holy people shall come to an end.’ (Oxford Gesenius)” “And when they have made an end of breaking in pieces the power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.” (AS) “When the power of him who shattered the sacred people should be over, then the end of all should arrive.” (Mo; AT) From these renderings it is plainly to be understood that the “dispersing”, the “scattering” of God’s people is ended, that they will now be gathered together, for the power of him who scattered them is broken. Now listen to the word of Christ Jesus: “And he will send forth his angels with a great trumpet-sound and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity.” (Matt. 24:31, NW) For the evil power which dispersed them is broken. They will go through much tribulation but never will they be scattered again.
23. When and how is the power of the scatterer broken?
23 Satan is the scatterer of God’s people. He is the roaring lion trying to devour. (1 Pet. 5:8) To bring about the shattering of his power the very heavens will be shaken; and such acts could come only from the Almighty God and his King, Christ Jesus. “And the powers of the heavens will be shaken. And then the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven.” (Matt. 24:29, 30, NW) This is one of the long-promised purposes of Jehovah. “For thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, . . . and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms; and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother.” (Hag. 2:6, 22, AS) “‘Yet once more I will set not only the earth but also the heaven in commotion.’ Now the expression ‘Yet once more’ signifies the removal of the things being shaken as things that have been made, in order that the things not being shaken may remain.” (Heb. 12:26, 27, NW) “While men become faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth; for the powers of the heavens will be shaken. And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. But as these things start to occur, raise yourselves erect and lift your heads up, because your deliverance is getting near.” (Luke 21:26-28, NW) It is therefore very evident that the shaking of the powers in the heavens will not of itself bring immediate and complete deliverance. Something has been set in motion, however, and it is the Lord Jesus Christ as earth’s rightful Ruler opening his campaign against the enemy.
24. Describe the events that come to pass within the period of three and a half times.
24 God’s anointed King, Christ Jesus, takes over rule in heaven in 1914. The former ruler, Satan the Devil, refuses to vacate, and resists the new king, and a fight results in heaven. The 12th chapter of Revelation describes what happens. The Kingdom is born and Satan the “dragon” stands by waiting to devour and destroy it. War breaks out, Michael battles it out with the Devil and his angels, resulting in a glorious victory for Michael, while Satan and his demon host are thrown out of heaven. The Devil’s seat of authority is gone, his power is broken, but to bring it about the very heavens had to be shaken. He is not at this time destroyed, but is permitted to wage war against the saints of God on earth, to try to wear them out. However, his uninterrupted world rule has ended. This all happens in the period ‘time, times and half a time’, according to Daniel 12:1, 7.

