
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Responding to an Irate Householder




Why Important: Many that we meet in the ministry are polite. However, Jesus prophesied that some people will hate us. (John 17:14) Therefore, it should not surprise us if we encounter an irate householder. When this occurs, we want to respond in a way that pleases the one whom we represent, Jehovah. (Rom. 12:17-21; 1 Pet. 3:15) Doing so will likely prevent the situation from escalating. It will also give a witness to the householder and any observers, making them more inclined to listen the next time Jehovah’s Witnesses visit.—2 Cor. 6:3.



How to Do It:
           Maintain a calm and friendly demeanor. This will help defuse the situation. Do not take the householder’s reaction personally. (Eccl. 7:9) He may be upset because of personal problems or because you happened to call at the wrong time. Even if he is irritated by our message, often this is because he has been misled.—2 Cor. 4:4.

            Reply with mild and gracious words. (Prov. 15:1) Did you wake him up or interrupt him? Although we do not apologize for our work, you could humbly apologize for calling at an inopportune time. Is he angry because of an untrue rumor that he has heard about us? If so, you might say: “I can understand why that would upset you. However, it seems that what you have heard about us is not accurate. May I explain?” Does he object to one of our beliefs, perhaps regarding disfellowshipping or blood? You could say: “I understand. Others have expressed the same concerns. May I show you from the Bible the basis for that teaching?”

            If the person is highly agitated, it may be best to take your leave without trying to reply. If he asks that Jehovah’s Witnesses not visit him again, you can assure him that his wishes will be honored.




Try This During the Month:
            Have practice sessions during your family worship.

            After leaving an irate householder, discuss with your partner how you might have responded in a better way.





