
Keep Progressing as a Minister




 1. What examples from the first century indicate that we should progress as ministers?
1 Christians should progress as ministers. That is why Jesus gave his followers progressive training in the preaching work. (Luke 9:1-5; 10:1-11) It is also why Aquila and Priscilla took Apollos into their company and “explained the way of God more accurately to him.” (Acts 18:24-26) For the same reason, Paul encouraged the experienced evangelizer Timothy to continue applying himself to his teaching, so that his advancement would be “plainly seen by all people.” (1 Tim. 4:13-15) No matter how long we have been slaving for the Lord as publishers of the good news, we need to continue sharpening our preaching skills.
 2. How can we learn from others?
2 Learn From Others: One way to hone our skills is to learn from others. (Prov. 27:17) Therefore, pay attention when fellow publishers give their presentation. Ask for specific suggestions from effective preachers, and listen carefully to what they say. (Prov. 1:5) Are you unsure about how to make a return visit, start a Bible study, or engage in some other aspect of the ministry? Take the initiative, and ask your group overseer or an experienced publisher for training. Remember, too, that Jehovah’s holy spirit can enhance our abilities, so ask for it regularly in prayer.—Luke 11:13.
 3. How should we react if we receive a suggestion, perhaps unsolicited?
3 Do not get offended if you receive a suggestion for improvement, even if it is unsolicited. (Eccl. 7:9) Like Apollos, accept the help with humility and gratitude. Doing so shows wisdom.—Prov. 12:15.
 4. What powerful reason did Jesus give for progressing as an evangelizer?
4 Progress Glorifies God: By way of illustration, Jesus encouraged his followers to progress as ministers. He compared himself to a vine and his anointed followers to branches. He said that the Father cleans every branch bearing fruit “so that it may bear more fruit.” (John 15:2) Just as the owner of a vineyard desires the branches of his grapevines to be more productive, Jehovah wants us to continue growing in our ability to produce “the fruit of our lips.” (Heb. 13:15) What is the satisfying result when we make progress as an evangelizer? Jesus gives us the answer: “My Father is glorified in this, that you keep bearing much fruit.”—John 15:8.




