From Our Readers
About Dating
Thank you for your article “Young People Ask . . . Is Dating Really for Me?” (June 22, 1982) With the help of that article and prayers to Jehovah, I was able to clear up a situation in school.
S. H., Illinois
Ulcer Treatment
In your article “So You Think You Have an Ulcer?” (September 8, 1982) you make persistent use of the brand name Tagamet, and this might bias readers’ preference toward a specific commercial designation of a substance available under other brand names that are equally effective. Tagamet is very expensive and not without ill effects. I think this recommendation was a serious mistake.
J. M., M.D., Portugal
Tagamet was not especially recommended but only mentioned as one of the current forms of treatment that was having a greater measure of success in some cases than antacids. In any article that we publish dealing with matters of health or medicine, we try to be careful not to recommend any particular treatment but rather to inform our readers as to what is available and how the treatment or medicine is supposed to work. Further information on the use of cimetidine products was published in our issue of June 22, 1983, page 28.​—ED.
Marmots
I enjoyed your article on marmots (September 8, 1984), but you say that the beaver is the largest rodent, with the marmot next. I understand that the capybara, of Central and South America, is the largest living rodent.
E. G., South Africa
“Awake!” erred. The beaver can be 2.5 feet (76 cm) from the base of the tail to the end of the nose and weigh about 60 pounds (27 kg). The capybara can reach a length of four feet (1.2 m) and a weight of 110 pounds (50 kg).​—ED.
Child Molesting
I read your issue on child molesting. (January 22, 1985) I was unaware of the dangers. I am a young mother, and the threat of child molesting never crossed my mind. Now I am aware of all the dangers and some of the things I can do to prevent it from happening. I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart.
J. M., New York
Meal-in-One Pancake
We really enjoyed your “cabbage pancake” article. (November 8, 1984) We did ours with bacon, green onions, and mushrooms, and it made a delicious supper. We also took the same variation to a potluck get-together, and it made a hit there too. Then we tried a delicious breakfast pancake, using the basic batter with sliced apples and breakfast sausage, good as is or with maple syrup. Just one thing​—for us “foreigners.” What is white cabbage? The closest I could get, after consulting the supermarket produce man was napa, or Chinese, cabbage. Anyway, thanks for the delightful recipe!
J. W., Colorado
Chinese cabbage is correct.​—ED.

