VOL. XXIX JULY 1 No. 13 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the "Watch Tower" 195 

See Things Coming 195 

Methodists Want Creed Restated 195 

Giving Life to the Image 196 

The Choice of a King 197 

"Little in Thine Own Eyes" 198 

God's Choice of Saul Indicated 198 

The Sin of Ingratitude 200 

God's Love for Them Not Quenched 201 

"Forbid That I Should Sin Against The Lord". ..202 

The Lord Hath Done Great Things for Us 203 

The London (Eng.), Convention 204 

"She Hath Done What She Could"-(Poem) 205 

Some Interesting Letters 205 

Letters Commending the "Vow" 206 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 207 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 



FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION-- AUG. 29-SEPT. 6 

Arrangements have been made for the Convention to be 
held in Put-in-Bay Island (Lake Erie), Ohio; headquarters 
at Hotel Victory, where exceptionally low rates for rooms and 
meals have been arranged. The prospects are that this will 
be the largest and best convention we have ever held. 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY 5 

Immersion service 10 a.m., at Bible House Chapel, N.S., 
610 Arch St. Friends desiring to be immersed would confer 
a favor by signifying their intention. Afternoon session in 
Alvin Theatre, Sixth St., Pittsburgh: Subject, "Where are 
the Dead?" Evening session, Question Meeting, 7:30 o'clock, 
Bible House Chapel, N.S. 

OLEAN, N.Y., JULY 26 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS WEEKLY 



Clubbing arrangements permit us to supply friends as 
follows: 

In Canada with the Toronto World, daily, for $1.50 per year; 
except in Toronto and Hamilton. Send subscriptions to us. 

In Great Britain and foreign countries we can supply the 
weekly sermons hereafter for $1.00 (4 shillings) per year. 

In the United States the Cincinnati Enquirer, weekly, 50c; 
The Ft. Wayne News weekly, 75c; The Pittsburg Dispatch, daily, 
$3.00 is still advised— it is a $6.00 paper. 



R4195 :page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
SEES THINGS COMING 
"GIGANTIC STRUGGLE BETWEEN LABOR AND CAPITAL" 



SECRETARY Taft made an address before the 
Order of Railway Conductors in which he 



said:— 

"Men who control capital, as well as men who work for 
wages, must combine," said Secretary Taft to the conductors. 
"Combinations of capital within the bounds of the law are 
necessary for business expediency and for cost reduction. And 
because of these combinations among employers, the laboring 
men must combine also in order to obtain that independence 
to which they are entitled. 

LOOKS FOR GIANTS' STRUGGLE 

"Every man who understands welcomes the lawful combination 
of capital and the combinations of the laboring men. 
Yet there is no denying the fact that we must look forward 
to a gigantic controversy between labor and capital, hoping 
and trusting that it will be settled peaceably. That controversy, 
when it comes, will decide once for all how capital and 
labor shall share the joint-profits which they create. 

"For the past three years we have been doing some house-cleaning 
We needed it. President Roosevelt was the chief 
of those who called a halt and convinced the people that no one 
in this country is above the law. I do not say that all rich men 
are wicked. We take pride in those who by energy, intelligence, 
and honesty have accumulated wealth. But there are men in 
this country who by means devious and contrary to law have 
become multi-millionaires. These must be made to know that 
their lawless methods cannot be successful in the future." 



How evidently our Lord's teachings and those of 
his apostles were not to the world, but to "the called 
according to his purpose." To those he said, "Ye are 
not of the world, for I have chosen you out of the 
world." 

The purpose of their call is also made clear: That 
they should be holy, and, as his consecrated "little 
flock," learn important lessons and be developed to the 
full in love and loyalty to God and to each other and 
to all the principles of righteousness to the intent 
that being thus qualified for the service they may be 
made members of the Royal Family, the Kingdom 
class, which shall rule the nations with a rod of iron, 
wielded by a hand of love, during the Millennium. 

Surely no other explanation fits the facts of history 
and the records of the Bible. Blessed are the eyes 
of all who see these things and still more blessed are 
those whose hearts respond fully and who thus by the 
Lord's assisting grace make their calling and election 
sure to a place in that Kingdom. 

LONDON GONE MAD OVER OCCULTISM 



The London correspondent of the Toronto Globe says: 



"Mayfair's great army of clairvoyants, soothsayers, table-rappers 
and seventh-day sisters have been greatly encouraged by Sir 
Oliver Lodge's declarations concerning communications received 
from beyond the grave by the Psychical Research Society. 
The police prosecutions of a few years ago caused a 
genuine stampede from the luxuriously-appointed temples of 
mystery in the fashionable streets of the West End, but most 
of those who ran away have returned or are returning— bolder 
and more mysterious than ever. 

"It is declared on good authority that dabblers in the occult 
among fashionable society are numerically greater than 
ever before, and this statement is borne out by the rushing 
business being done by the men and women of mystery. In 
Oxford Circus and Piccadilly are daily to be seen sandwich 
men in large numbers bearing advertisement boards telling of 
the wonderfully accurate predictions made by Mme. X., and 
how Mme. Z., by timely warning to a lady of high title, prevented 
a dreadful domestic catastrophe. 

"Quite a separate division of the futurity-reading industry 
is that of the sporting 'prophets,' who are doing so well 
financially that they are able to spend large sums for advertisements 
in the newspapers. A special crusade against this 
form of clairvoyance has been started by the Bishop of Hereford. 
He has used his influence to have a committee of the 
Upper House of the Convocation of Canterbury appointed to 
deal with the subject, and wholesale prosecutions, both of 
newspapers printing the advertisements and of those placing 
them, are threatened." 

METHODISTS WANT CREED RESTATED 



Presbyterians are having great comfort from their 
restatement of their Faith for the public. They 
claim that it is just the same in meaning as their 
Westminster Confession. The new creed states so 
little and so vaguely that it mates well with the "new 
theology," which denies the Atonement, the pre-existence 

R4195 :page 196 

of Jesus, etc. But now Methodists are feeling 

their need of a similarly colorless creed, as is shown by 

the following from the Portland Evening Telegram: 

At the meeting of the Methodist Episcopal ministers 
today at Taylor Street Church, Rev. C. E. Cline read a paper 
on "Restating the Articles of Our Religion," which was in 
line with the general movement of that Church to restate the 
present articles, which were originally taken from the Episcopal 
creed. 

Rev. Clarence True Wilson, D.D., said he found the 
articles needed restating, as he had often been embarrassed 
by the inadequacy of the present Discipline. 

"Why, the other day," he said, "a Unitarian wrote me 
for information about our belief, and do you think I could 



send our Discipline? No, indeed not. Had I done so every 
minister present today would have criticised me. I happened 
to meet a Presbyterian minister who was in receipt of a letter 
from this same Unitarian and I asked him what he was going 
to do about it. 'Why, send him our Articles,' said he. I 
then said, 'Sign my name to it, too.' 

"We don't believe in the idea of Christ's atonement, yet 
we have it in our Discipline, and several other things, such as 
Original Sin being inherited. There can be no such thing, and 
no minister of our Church believes there is." 

A CANDID CONFESSION TRULY, FROM A PROMINENT MAN 



The Rev. Dr. Day, Chancellor of the Syracuse 
University, recently, in an address to the Y.M.C.A., 
is reported by the public press to have voiced sentiments 

R4196 : page 196 

which we have reason to believe are shared by 

vast numbers of humanity, though seldom expressed. 

We quote from the New York Press: 

"Wouldn't you rather live in America than in heaven? 
I would. I'd like to go to heaven when I can't be here. In 
fact, I think I'd be rather discontented in heaven till I got 
adjusted. You can get anything you want here. You can 
live under forty odd governments, meet all the nations of the 
world, eat all the fruits of the world and get any kind of 
climate that you choose. So America is the best place to live; 
but I think when a man can't stay here any longer he ought 
to steer for heaven. 

"For my part, I've never been much fascinated with the 
idea of corner-lots and mansions in the skies, and songs and 
harps and such things. I like a place because it's busy, and the 
more business there is the better I like it. Give me lots of 
work and lots of people to oppose me and then I'm happy. 

"The business of the country isn't going to stagnate, or 
wither. It is going on. There's too much wealth in the interior, 
too much property on the surface, too much harvest 
on its broad acres, too many factories, too much money that's 
got to be invested to be safe for us to halt long. We've had a 
little scare, it's true, but nothing more." 



Such a truthful expression will doubtless do good. 
Hypocrisy is never advantageous nor commendable. 
If all spoke out their true sentiments, Christianity 
would be rudely shaken and surprised, but the result 
would be good; the few really energized by the 
heavenly promises would be manifested and separated 
from the nominal mass to their great advantage. 

The Apostle Paul spoke of such as "loved the 
present world" (2 Tim. 4:10), as thus giving evidence 



that they had departed from the faith and departed 
from all relationship to Christ as his disciples. We 
remember also the inspired Word, "Love not the world, 
neither the things of the world. If any man love the 
world, the love of the Father is not in him."— 
I John 2:15. 

Those who have really "tasted of the heavenly 
gift and the powers of the world (age) to come, and 
been made partakers of the holy Spirit," possessing 
this illumination of the eyes of their understanding, 
can never be satisfied with present conditions under 
the rule of the Prince of Darkness, can never 
be satisfied by the present "reign of sin and 
death," under which "the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain." 

Dissatisfied with all that the present evil world 
can offer, they are content, nevertheless, because of 
their faith in God's promises of future blessings to the 
Church and the world; content because of God's assurance 
that the present evils will ultimately work out 
blessings under divine guidance— helpful both to the 
Church and the world. We will be satisfied when our 
polishing as the Lord's jewels is completed— when we 
awake in his likeness in the resurrection. And the 
groaning creation— the poor as well as the rich— will 
be satisfied when the Millennium shall have blessed 
and uplifted all from sin and degradation and selfishness 
and shall have established amongst men equity and 
love, the fulfilling of the divine law. And all not then 
satisfied will be utterly destroyed.— Acts 3:23. 

GIVING LIFE TO THE IMAGE 



Many of our readers know that for years we have 
been waiting for a fulfilment of the symbolic statement 
about the two-horned beast of Revelation 13:15. 
Our expectation has been that the Church of England, 
represented in the two-horned beast, would give life to 
the Protestant Image of Papacy, viz., the Protestant 
Evangelical Alliance. Just what we have been waiting 
for may yet occur— Episcopal ordination may be 
granted to the "clergy" of other denominations; but 
possibly the action of the Episcopal House of Bishops 
some months ago is all that we should expect. By 
opening Episcopal pulpits to other Orthodox Protestant 
ministers it tacitly acknowledged their ordination 
and thus gave them sanction, acknowledgment, 
validity— life. This, at least, is the view taken by 
some of their own "clergy," as the following will 
show:— 

FOUR EPISCOPAL MINISTERS QUIT AND DENOUNCE 
THE OPEN PULPIT 



Dramatic scenes marked the departure of the Rev. William 
McGarvey and his three assistants from St. Elizabeth's 
Episcopal Church, Philadelphia. 

The four clergymen of the Church decided they could no 
longer remain in the Episcopal Church when the "open pulpit" 
canon was adopted. 

THEY EXPLAIN ACTION 

They distributed a circular letter in part as follows:— 
"It is due to you that we should tell you plainly why we 
are leaving you and going forth to begin our lives anew. 
When we were ordained we were persuaded that the Catholic 
religion in its fulness was the faith of the Episcopal Church. 
Animated by this persuasion, we gave ourselves freely to her 
ministry and would gladly have laid down our lives in her 
service. Misgivings with regard to the legitimacy of our position 
were first aroused when certain of the bishops a year 
or two ago began to invite non-Episcopal ministers into the 
pulpits. 

"Such action was not, of course, the action of the Episcopal 
Church, although its proceeding from bishops gives it a 
serious import. But when the whole house of bishops, without 
a dissenting vote, indorsed this practice by incorporating 

R4196 : page 197 

into the discipline of the Episcopal Church explicit provision 
for an open pulpit, it was manifest that either the non-Episcopal 
ministers had already the same ministerial status as ministers 
of the word with those ordained by bishops of the 
Episcopal Church, or that the Episcopal Church had by her 
enactment of the open pulpit canon seriously compromised the 
doctrine of holy order which we had supposed that she held in 
its integrity. 

"Had such a canon been enacted prior to our ordination 
our consciences would never for a moment have allowed us to 
receive ordination in the Episcopal Church. And now that 
the canon was enacted it was plain that we must, as honest 
men, reconsider our whole position. We set a time for prayer 
and thought that we might know God's will and might do 
nothing hastily. 

"That time has now expired, and it has been made abundantly 
clear to us that the Episcopal Church, in making possible 
the admission of all sorts of Protestant ministers as teachers 
of her people, has rightly interpreted her own essential 
spirit. She now stands forth before the world in the character 
which belongs to her, and by which she desires to be 
known. She is as she calls herself, as in the last general convention 
she has demonstrated herself to be, and as most of her 
members regard her— a Protestant Church." 

"SUNDAY SCHOOL TIMES" TELLS THE TRUTH 



"Sheol and Hades are respectively the Old and the New 
Testament words for the place of the dead— all dead, whether 
saved or lost. Gehenna is the name of the place of the dead 
who are lost."— Issue May 2, 1908, p. 214. 

THE DESTRUCTION OF SODOM 



"A streak of fire passing rapidly through the air would 
precipitate nitric acid. So would a bolt of lightning. A bolt 
of lightning moving for a distance of 200 feet without the zigzag 
breaks in its course would throw down nitric acid out of 
the air, for a territory a mile in diameter. 

"Now, suppose a bolt of lightning did dart through the air 
in the immediate vicinity of what is now the Dead Sea. Suppose 
that bolt to have traversed a long distance, with its course 
unbroken by a common zigzag movement of lightning. Enough 
nitric acid would be thrown down to change all the surface 
of the earth for miles around to nitrates. And, in my opinion, 
that is exactly what did happen, causing not only the 
transformation of Lot's wife into a pillar of salt, but also 
causing the Dead Sea to become 'dead.'"— Lyell M. Rider, 
professor of chemistry. 

SOCIALISM VS. ANARCHISM 



BERLIN— The police today discovered guns, ammunition 
and other material supposed to belong to Russian Terrorists 
in the house of the Socialist Municipal Councilor (member of 
the city council), Kerfien. 

There were many pistols with so called dumdum bullets, 
and an electric apparatus for the igniting of explosives at a 
distance, double shirt bosoms for the smuggling of forbidden 
literature into Russia, etc. A whole dray load of such articles 
was being removed.— Translated from the German. 

GATHERING NATURAL ISRAEL 



The correspondent of the Jewish Daily News reports that 
the Hungarian Minister of the Interior ordered a thorough 
investigation of the status of Russian Jews who live in Budapest. 
Those who are unable to show that they have certain 
means of livelihood should be expelled from the capital. This 
order affects the fate of nearly 10,000 Jews, for the Galician 
Jews living in Budapest will be included in that edict, and 
most of these belong to the poorest classes. A cable dispatch 
received by the above journal announces that 1500 Jews have 
already been expelled from Budapest. 



R4197 :page 197 

THE CHOICE OF A KING 

--ISAM. 10:1-27.~JULY 12.- 

Golden Text:— "He that ruleth over men must be 
just, ruling in the fear of God."— 2 Sam. 23:3. 

SAMUEL informed Israel that God acceded to their request 
for a change in the form of their government; 
that they might have a king like the nations round 
about them. This lesson details the process by which God's 
choosing of a king was indicated. Viewed from the standpoint 
of faith it contains lessons for us daily, indicating how 
divine supervision takes cognizance of human reason and 
operates in harmony therewith. 

A well-to-do farmer named Kish, residing not far from 
the present site of Jerusalem, had a son named Saul; tall, 
manly, well-balanced mentally, but not specially religious. 
This son was God's choice for Israel's king. In the carrying 
out of the divine programme, a herd of asses, under Saul's 
care, was lost, and, after vainly searching for them, he finally 
bethought him to consult God's prophet, Samuel, who 
lived not a great distance away. We can see how this lesson 
itself would be helpful to the young man— drawing out 
his thought to the fact that all things are known to God, and 
that the prophet was God's special representative. Samuel's 
ability to locate the asses gave Saul an increased faith in 
him as a man of God, and in the message which he gave him, 
when later the prophet told Saul that he was God's choice 
for king over Israel, and poured upon him the oil anointing 
him to that office. It was, doubtless, in harmony with the 
prophet's advice, that Saul kept the matter of his anointing 
secret, and went about his business until such time as the 
Lord's providence should make him known to Israel as the 
divinely chosen king. 

Saul was well suited to the office in various respects. 
First, he belonged to the small tribe of Benjamin, whose territory 
lay between that of the two principal tribes, Judah and 
Ephraim; he would, consequently, be more likely to have the 
sympathy and cooperation of the people of the most influential 
tribes, who would have been more likely to have feelings 
of opposition and jealousy toward any man from an important 
tribe. We read that he stood head and shoulders 
above his fellows, and the intimation is that he was quite 
muscular. In olden times, when physical force had so much 
to do with military fighting, we can readily see that such a 
type of man appealed strongly to the sentiments of the 
people. 

Various Scripture lessons convey to us the thought that 
God's foreknowledge has much to do with many things that 
to men may appear accidental. Thus, for instance, with 
Saul of Tarsus, who became the Apostle Paul. The Scriptures 
inform us that he was chosen of God to be a special vessel, 
or servant, from his mother's womb, implying a divine supervision 



of the prenatal conditions, which affected the general 
caliber and balance both of his mind and of his body. We 
think it not unreasonable to assume similarly in respect to 
King Saul; that his noble stature and physique may have 
been the result of divine foreordination. However, this divine 
foreordination and interposition did not affect the free agency 
of either of these men, of the same name and the same tribe 
and born more than a thousand years apart. With the conditions 
favorable in both cases, the free will, free agency 

R4197 : page 198 

was untrammeled; as, for instance, King Saul, later in life, 
chose an evil way and was not hindered by the Lord from 
taking it; while Saul of Tarsus, when shown the right way, 
manifested his loyalty of heart most remarkably. The latter 
states, however, that notwithstanding the blessing conferred 
upon him from his mother's womb and the honor that later 
came to him as an Apostle, he might still, by rejecting the 
Lord, become a castaway as respects a share in the coming 
Kingdom. 

Another suggestion that may appeal to all the Lord's 
people is that, while known unto the Lord are all his works 
from the foundation of the world, these are not known to us, 
and hence all of us should reverence the Lord and recognize 
his supervision in the affairs of his consecrated people; 
specially should they be on the lookout for divine providences 
and be prompt to follow them. A constant temptation 
is to view matters from the worldly standpoint and to 
conclude that our destiny is entirely in our own hands and 
to forget divine providence in our affairs. Every day this 
lesson should become more deeply impressed upon us. With 
each year of Christian experience we should learn to look 
into the facts and circumstances of life from the standpoint 
of faith, seeking to note the will of the Lord concerning us 
in things small as well as great. True, the Lord is not now 
selecting from amongst his saints a king for Israel, but he is 
making selections for the Body of the Great King, the Messiah, 
whose Head is the Lord Jesus Christ and whose members 
are the "more than conquerors" of this Gospel Age. 

"LITTLE IN THINE OWN EYES" 

Although Saul was tall and athletic, a wonderful man in 
his way, he was humble withal, as the Lord testified: "Thou 
wast little in thine own sight." (1 Sam. 15:17.) This is 
another characteristic which belongs to those whom the Lord 
is now choosing to be kings and priests unto God under their 
Lord in the Millennium. They must really be taller than 
their fellows in respect to character as New Creatures, even 
if not according to the flesh; but they must be humble, "little 
in their own sight." They must realize that they are not 
worthy of such honor, that it is only of God's grace, and 
that the honor thus conferred upon them is not merely for 
themselves, but that they may be used of the Lord in connection 
with the blessing which he intends to confer upon 



humanity in and through the Kingdom of his dear Son. 

Respecting Saul's homeward journey we read: "And it 
was so that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, 
God gave him another heart, and the Spirit of the Lord came 
upon him." (1 Sam. 10:9,10.) Verse 6 declares that he 
"was turned into another man." Forthwith he joined 
himself to one of the schools of the prophets, which Samuel 
had established, through which the better education of Israel 
might be accomplished, especially with respect to religious 
truths and influences. We may be in doubt as to just what 
is meant by this statement of Saul's change, but we can have 
no doubt that it would not signify that God's holy Spirit 
came upon him as it came upon the Church at Pentecost and 
as it is with all of the consecrated from that time to the 
present; because this Pentecostal blessing is a seal of sonship 
and grants an enlightenment of the mind respecting the deep 
things of God's Word and plan, such as was not granted to 
any previous to our Lord's anointing with the Spirit. Respecting 
this Pentecostal sealing we are informed that the 
holy Spirit was not yet given, even to the disciples, because 
Jesus was not yet glorified. Not until Jesus' glorification 
was the holy Spirit sent forth, because the penalty for sin 
being upon the race none could be fully accepted of God to 
the begetting of the holy Spirit to the heavenly nature until 
after the ransom price for sinners had been paid by our 
Lord's sacrifice. 

The Spirit of God upon Saul was more physical in its 
manifestation, controlling his words and actions rather than 
enlightening his mind in respect to the deep things of God. 
This was true of all the prophets who spake and wrote as 
they were moved by the holy Spirit, but who did not understand 
in full degree the things which they uttered.— 1 Pet. 1:10; 
2 Pet. 1:21. 

Saul's experience gave him practical demonstration of 
a divine power outside of himself, and thus tended to fix his 
mind upon the more sober things of life and God's relationship 
to these. The result was that, returning to his duties 
as a farmer, he was thereafter a changed man, or had a new 
heart, a new purpose. The experiences through which he 
had passed led his mind out into new channels, new ambitions. 
The sports of life in which he had previously spent 
considerable time were unworthy of his attention now, because 
he had been lifted to a higher plane and had his mind 
full of conjectures and resolutions respecting the Kingdom; 
wondering, perhaps, how the Lord would bring it to pass 
that one so obscure as himself should come to a place of such 
political prominence in the nation. 

Similarly we may suggest that those who believe God's 
message and accept the anointing of the holy Spirit, typified 
by the oil poured upon Saul, also find new aims, new impulses, 
new hopes, new desires, and are also disposed to join 
themselves to a school of the prophets, to associate with those 
who are studying the divine Word and will. And similarly 
these in all of life's affairs are changed men. Yet not similarly 
either, because the change to these is much greater and 
of a different kind, as we have already suggested. The 



Scriptures explain to us that the Lord's people, now being 
selected for joint-heirship in his Millennial Kingdom, are 
changed in a most remarkable manner. All things become 
new to them, and things which they once loved now they hate, 
and things which once they hated now they love. The ambitions 
of these are too high to permit of waste of time and 
energy in the follies of life, which engage the attention of 
the worldly. The thoughts of the Kingdom fill their hearts 
and they study to make their calling and their election sure, 
requiring their time and attention to such a degree that previous 
pleasures are dead and unsatisfactory in comparison. 

R4198 : page 198 

GOD'S CHOICE OF SAUL INDICATED 

When we read that Samuel called all the people together 
at Mizpeh, we should understand that it signifies that 
according to their national organization all the people were 
represented, not only as twelve tribes, but by persons representing 
the different tribes proportionate to the number of 
persons in the tribe. The proper persons to represent the 
tribes, we are informed, were chosen by lot; but no matter 
how, all the tribes were represented, and not all the people 
were expected to go to Mizpeh. 

At the proper time the prophet Samuel stood forth and 
explained to the people afresh, that they had not done wisely 
in appealing for a king instead of continuing the Lord's 
arrangement, but that the Lord was willing to give them an 
experience along the line which they had preferred, and that 
they were now come together to ascertain from the Lord who 
of the hosts of Israel should occupy the important position of 
king. Accordingly they first inquired of the Lord respecting 
the tribe in which was the person of his choice. The testing 
of the twelve rods, representing the twelve tribes, gave 
the answer that the expected one should be from the tribe of 

R4198 : page 199 

Benjamin. Next the testing as to the different families of 
the chosen tribe, and next as to which member of the 
chosen family, the choice falling upon Saul, the son of 
Kish, as Samuel already knew it would, and as Saul also 
knew because of Samuel's words and the anointing oil. Thus 
the Lord dealt with the minds of the people to show them 
his choice and to teach them to look for divine direction in 
their various interests. 

There is a lesson here for the Lord's people in respect 
to the choosing of elders and deacons in the various ecclesias. 
Each of the consecrated should recognize that in doing his 
part in the election he should merely act as the Lord's agent 
and that the Lord's will should be done fully, completely. 
Personal preference should be ignored, wire-pulling and attempting 
to influence the minds of those who would vote 
should be merely along Scriptural lines in respect to character, 
and nothing should be done for strife or vain-glory, but 



all to the glory of God. Earthly relationships should have 
no influence in this question, as his people should speak as 
the oracles of God, recognizing that the matter is in their 
hands to be decided according to the directions of the holy 
Word and Spirit. 

The record shows that when the announcement was 
made that Saul, the son of Kish, was to be the king, there 
was a general search and none knew his whereabouts. Inquiry 
of the Lord revealed the fact that he was hidden 
amongst the stuff, the baggage of these tribes. The modesty 
of Saul is commendable. He knew that he would be the 
choice on this occasion, for the Lord had indicated this by 
his anointing, but he modestly withdrew. As much modesty 
of heart, even though differently expressed, should be found 
amongst all the Lord's dear people, specially amongst those 
who are chosen to serve the Lord's flock in any capacity. 
The man should be hiding himself rather than aspiring to 
the position of service, however much he may appreciate the 
honor of being a servant of the Lord and of his flock. 

Saul's modesty is further evidenced by the fact that 
after being chosen he did not assume a dictatorial spirit and 
authority, but reasonably, properly went to his own farm to 
attend to its interest until such time as the Lord would indicate 
some forward movement on his part— until the Lord 
would bless him with the kingdom. And it is so with us; 
we are to do as the Apostle tells us: "Let every man abide 
in the same calling wherein he was called," not necessarily 
forever, but until such time as the Lord's providence should 
open the door and call him forth to service for the Lord and 
his people. If the matter is of the Lord at all, he will give 
the opportunity and the wisdom to use it properly. If it is 
not of the Lord, the service would better never be entered 
upon in any degree. 

"WHOSE HEARTS GOD HAD TOUCHED" 

Verse 26 tells us that a band of men accompanied Saul 
to his home— men whose hearts God had touched. And on 
the other hand the following verse tells us that there were 
other "sons of Belial," who despised him, brought him no 
present, but said: "How shall this man save us?" Apparently 
the latter class were more numerous than the band who 
accompanied Saul. The whole account reminds us of our 
Lord after his anointing, when a band of the people were 
drawn to him, "Those whose hearts God had touched." 
These became his disciples and followers, and the Apostle 
tells us that the number of them was about five hundred. 
There were certain sons of Belial who withstood Jesus, of 
whom the prophet tells us saying, "We hid, as it were, our 
faces from him; there was no beauty that we should desire 
him." They said in effect, "How can this man save us?" 
There was nothing desirable in him in their estimation. 

The same thing is true of the Lord's people and cause 
ever since, and particularly true of those who occupy any 
place of prominence in his service. Some approve God's 
dealings, recognizing his providences, and act in harmony 



with their faith. These are the ones whose hearts God has 

touched. God's directings and touchings in the present time 

are mainly through the truth, "Thy Word is truth;" "Sanctify 

them through thy truth." The sanctified are looking for 

the Lord's leadings, and they are assisted in discerning them. 

On the other hand, as there were in Saul's day and in our 

Lord's time, so there have been since, sons of Belial, contentious, 

unwilling to be guided by the Lord's providences and 

the words of his prophet. These sons of strife are not always 

dissolute either; as, for instance, in our Lord's time 

they included scribes, Pharisees and doctors of the Law, who 

were moved, we are told, with envy and jealousy; those 

Satanic qualities which trouble the entire human family so 

much. The lesson to us is that we should never forget the 

Lord in our personal affairs, and specially in the affairs of 

his Kingdom. And the recognition of this should make us 

very careful respecting every step we take "Lest haply we be 

found even to fight against God."— Acts 5:39. 

PROMPT TO USE OPPORTUNITIES 

In the Lord's providence an opportunity came to Saul, 
and his promptness in seizing it endeared him to the hearts 
of the majority of the people. An enemy, the Moabites, made 
an attack upon the city of Jabesh, overpowering it. They 
then sent a message to the people offering to spare their lives, 
but on condition that their eyes should be put out. Saul 
promptly sent a message to all of the tribes to come to the 
help of their brethren, and with the recruits thus gathered 
drove off the enemy and delivered the people. May we not 
draw an illustration from this also as respects those whom 
the Lord anointed with the holy Spirit, with a view to their 
becoming ultimately joint-heirs with Jesus in the Kingdom. 
After being anointed of the Spirit we should expect some 
opportunity for divine service, and should be on the lookout 
for the same, even while, as the Apostle urges, we abide in 
the same calling wherein we were called. We also know of 
an enemy who has blinded some of the Lord's people and 
who is threatening others with blindness. The circumstance 
should become to us a call, and we should go forth in the 
name and the strength of the Lord, and with all the assistance 
we can command in harmony with his arrangement for 
the delivering of our brethren from the power of the blinding 
forces. Whoever sees such an opportunity and fails to 
avail himself of it, gives evidence that he is not in a proper 
condition of heart for one of the royal priesthood; he needs 
more love for God and for his people. 

APPLYING OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

After Saul had been indicated as the king the prophet 
"Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and 
wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the Lord"— probably 
in the ark. The book probably set forth the rights and 
prerogatives of the king and the rights and duties of the 
people with a view to having each recognize the responsibility. 



Nevertheless, this was merely a statement of how 
matters should be; and, as a matter of fact, we find that 
neither Saul's kingdom nor any other kingdom was free from 
imperfection. God, however, in his book, the Bible, has set 
before us the laws of his kingdom, the laws which will be in 
force when the Millennial Kingdom shall be established and 

R4198 : page 200 

which, when rightly enforced, will bless all the families of 
the earth, instructing and uplifting them. 

Our Golden Text is in harmony with this thought, declaring 
that "he that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in 
the fear of God." This is the meaning of the Lord's careful 
selection and instruction, and disciplining and judging and 
proving his people whom he is now calling to a position 
in the Millennial Kingdom. They must judge justly and 
they must rule in the fear of the Lord, and none will be 
selected or elected who are of a different disposition. The 
Lord makes this clear when he tells us through the Apostle 
that all of these who will have a share in the Kingdom must 
be copies of God's dear Son.— Rom. 8:29; Col. 1:13. 

However, while justice will be the rule of the Kingdom 
it is not the rule of those who are under instruction and preparation 
for the Kingdom. Justice is not the Lord's rule for 
his people in the present time when they themselves are 
weak and imperfect and when their judgment of others 
would necessarily be imperfect also. He therefore tells us 
to "Judge no man before the time." The time will come 
when we shall judge the world (1 Cor. 6:2), but by that time 
we shall be qualified by our glorious First Resurrection change, 
which will make us like our dear Redeemer and Lord. On 

R4199 : page 200 

the other hand, we must remember that the force of this 

Scripture is that we must do no judging in the present time; 

instead of seeking to execute judgment upon others we may 

strive to exercise it upon ourselves; but toward others we 

must exercise love, sympathy, compassion. This is one of 

the great lessons to be learned and whoever fails to learn it 

will fail to get into the Kingdom. Whoever does learn this 

lesson may understand that in proportion as he himself is 

forgiving in that measure shall he be forgiven, for, "If ye 

from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses," 

"Neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." 

As we prove every matter of doctrine by the touchstone of 

the ransom, so let us learn to prove every word and act and 

thought by the touchstone of love. Whatsoever is not of 

love is sin; will prove injurious to ourselves and possibly to 

others. 



R4199 : page 200 



THE SIN OF INGRATITUDE 

--ISAM. 12:1-25. -JULY 19.- 

Golden Text:— "Only fear the Lord, and serve 
him in truth with all your heart; for consider 
how great things he hath done for you." 

AFTER Saul had been duly anointed, accepted and installed 

in office came the time for his coronation. 

This is in full line with the custom of the present 

time. The present king of England was not crowned for 

nearly a year after he had assumed his office. The interim had 

given time for the development of an appreciation for their 

king on the part of the people by reason of his prompt action 

and good success in dealing with the situation at Jabesh, referred 

to in our last lesson. The people rejoiced much more 

in the coronation of their king than they would have done 

immediately after his choice under divine direction. If we 

carry out this thought and its application to the Christ, the 

lesson would be that the influence of the Church in the 

present time under the divine anointing and before the coronation, 

after the first recognition, will have a helpful influence 

upon the world. Mankind will then discover that the Adversary's 

blinding influences upon them would have been still 

greater, still more pernicious, had it not been for the intervention 

of the Royal Priesthood, who laid down their lives 

in the service of the truth under the guidance of their Head. 

Concerning the attitude of the world toward the new 
Kingdom of Messiah when established, we remember the declaration 
of the Scriptures, "Many people shall go and say, 
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to 
the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his 
ways, and we will walk in his paths." "The desire of all 
nations shall come." (Micah 4:2; Hag. 2:7.) All nations 
have been desiring the very blessing that God has in store 
for them during the Millennium; but the enemies of truth 
and righteousness have deceived them, putting light for darkness 
and darkness for light. When once they see clearly out 
of obscurity, the effects will be magical. Eventually every 
knee shall bow and every tongue confess Immanuel. 

Samuel chose the occasion of Saul's coronation for a 
public rendering up of his own accounts. As God's servant, 
he had occupied the place of a Chief Justice to the nation, 
but the choice of a king relieved the prophet of political influence 
and responsibility. He called upon them as a whole 
people to declare whether or not he had ever taken from 
them aught that could be construed as a bribe, aught that 
in any sense of the word could be said to influence 
his judgment or decision of their matters. With one voice, 
the people declared that he had been faithful; and he in 
turn called upon the king and upon the Almighty Sovereign 
to witness this declaration of the people as a safeguard 
against anything that could ever be said against him in the 
future. 

The statesmanship of Moses and Samuel stand out upon 



the pages of history as noble examples of courage and 
faithfulness to God and to the people. While it is true that 
few if any of the saints of God of this Gospel Age have occupied 
or are occupying positions of special political influence, 
nevertheless, the principle here set forth should be appreciated 
by all of God's saints under all conditions. Similar 
principles apply in the home, in the family. Every father 
ought to be able to make a similar appeal to his family as 
respects his nobility of purpose and honorableness in dealing 
with them. They should be able to witness that he had not 
been self-seeking in any sense of the word; that he had been 
faithful to his responsibility as a husband and as a father, 
seeking to use wisely the opportunities and responsibilities 
which were his by divine arrangement, caring for those under 
his charge, spending his life in considerable degree in their 
interest and certainly never against their interests. Every 
mother, every son, every daughter, in the family ought similarly 
to be able to call the fellow-members of the family to 
witness their faithfulness, their loyalty. The person who 
would be loyal in the family would be loyal to his nation, 
which is merely a larger family. Although Samuel had sons, 
he had not sought to put them forward for political preferment. 
His faithfulness to the interests of Israel meant primarily 
his faithfulness to God. So it is always with God's 
people. They are not to trust in their own judgment merely 
in serving their family. They are to seek the wisdom from 
above; and this implies prayer and the study of the teachings 
of the Scriptures. 

A SEVERE ARRAIGNMENT 

In verses 6-12, the prophet recounted God's faithfulness 
to the people of Israel, and their ingratitude in return. He 
reminded them that Moses and Aaron, those noble characters 

R4199 : page 201 

who had served them so faithfully, were of divine appointment; 
and that their success was because of their faithfulness 
to the Lord. He said, "Now, therefore, stand still, that 
I may reason with you before the Lord of all the righteous 
acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to your fathers." 
He rehearsed to them their sins of idolatry, forgetfulness of 
the Lord's favor, and reminded them that chastisements were 
sent upon them not in anger, but in love, because the Lord 
desired to have them as his people, and because the chastisements 
were necessary for their good. He mentioned the 
names of a number of the prominent judges under whom the 
Lord had blessed them in recovering them from the power of 
their enemies. This is in full accord with the subsequent 
statements of the Lord on this subject. Through Isaiah the 
prophet, the Lord reminds the people that he used these 
enemies as "The rod of his anger" (Isa. 10:5); and through 
the Psalmist he reminds them of how he had cleansed them 
from their defilements and brought them back to himself, 
saying, "Moab is my washpot." (Psa. 108:9.) Thus for 



several centuries Israel had been under divine supervision, 
blessed according to the Covenant which God had made with 
them through Moses, when between the mountains of Ebal 
and Gerizim he caused to be pronounced upon them the 
blessing that would be theirs if they would be faithful to 
him, and the evil that would befall them if they forsook the 
Lord— evil that would be not only retributive but also purgative, 
intended to retrieve them from their evil tendencies. 

The Israelites had not been rightly appreciative of the 
favor they enjoyed, rather they forgot, ignored the Lord in 
their affairs; and taking worldly wisdom on the subject, 
they concluded that their disasters had not been punishments 
from the Lord and blessings in disguise, but merely 
the result of their failure to be organized as a kingdom under 
an earthly head. This, Samuel related to them, saying, 
"When ye saw that Nahash, the king of the children of Ammon, 
came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king 
shall reign over us; when the Lord your God was your King." 

Fallen human nature is considerably the same at all 
times and in all places; and so we find that amongst those 
who have named the name of the Lord during this Gospel 
Age, there have been similar tendencies to overlook the Lord 
as the great Head of the Church, the great protector of its 
interests, the great Governor of its affairs. Two centuries of 
the Gospel Age had not passed when the worldly spirit called 
out for more organization than the Lord had established 
through Jesus and the apostles. First it was the partizan 
spirit, whereby the people in various parts sought headship 
for their bishops, contrary to the arrangement which the 
Lord had made for them. This was the very spirit which 
the Apostle had reproved, saying, While ye say, I am of Paul, 
I am of Apollos, and I of Peter, are ye not carnal? Is not 
this sectarian spirit an evidence that you are not in the 
proper relationship to the Lord? Paul did not die for you; 
neither did Peter; neither did Apollos. (1 Cor. 1:11-13.) 
Your Redeemer is the only Head which should be recognized 
in this particular way. Though Paul and Apollos and Peter, 
and all of the Lord's faithful ones may be recognized and 
appreciated for their work's sake, it must be remembered 
that they are nothing more than the Lord's mouth-pieces and 
representatives, and that he alone is to be considered the 
Head of the Church. Such are to be appreciated only as 
they are faithful and loyal to him. Repeatedly during the 
last thirty years we have reminded the Lord's faithful of the 

R4200 : page 201 

experience of John on the Isle of Patmos. When receiving 

revelation of divine things, he fell down before the angel 

that showed him these things, to worship him. The Apostle 

John in a measure represented the faithful of the Lord's 

people in the end of this age. The more wonderful things 

of the divine plan are being revealed; and some might be 

in danger of worshiping the angel through whom the enlightenment 

was sent. It is well that all should remember 

the lesson given in that connection, in which the angel of the 



Lord rebuked anything that would be in the nature of personal 
idolatry, saying, "See thou do it not: I am thy fellow-servant, 
...worship God."— Rev. 19:10. 

This same spirit of forsaking God as the real ruler and 
protector of all the interests of his people was further emphasized 
in the third century, when the rivalry of the bishops 
became pronounced, ultimately leading to the recognition of 
one of these as Primate or Pope. The Lord did not interfere 
to hinder the establishment of the papal views in the 
Church, even as he did not interfere to hinder natural Israel 
from choosing a king. Although they had chosen unwisely 
and contrary to divine instruction, the Lord would still be 
gracious to such as would seek to keep his way even under 
the new arrangement. He would be faithful, even though 
his people were not faithful. He would still do them all 
the good possible, but they would find that those conditions 
which they had made for themselves were injurious to their 
better interests, and thus might ultimately learn a lesson as 
respects the wisdom of God and its superiority to the wisdom 
and desires of their own fallen judgment. 

In other words, as the Israelites were far better under 
such leaders as the Lord raised up from time to time— Moses, 
Aaron, Joshua, Jerubbaal, Bedan, Jephthah and Samuel— he 
would, nevertheless, bless them as much as would be possible 
according to their course under the new arrangement 
which they desired. He would overrule the further experiences 
they would have under their kings, so that they might 
from these learn a great lesson in respect to the wisdom of 
God. So, too, in Spiritual Israel, the Lord has not forsaken 
Israelites indeed, even in the midst of spiritual Babylon; but 
as related in the parable which foretold present conditions, 
the Lord said, Let both wheat and tares grow together until 
the harvest; in the time of harvest shall be the separating; 
so now the Lord, still mindful of his true saints in Babylon, 
sends forth the call, "Come out of her, my people, that ye 
be not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of her 
plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) Those desirous of being under the 
Lord's direction have constituted a little flock, for whose 
shepherding and care the Lord himself has always been responsible, 
sending assistance and messages from time to time 
through undershepherds who were never recognized by the 
great systems, but merely by those who had an ear to hear 
and the right condition of heart to appreciate the message 
of truth and grace. 

GOD'S LOVE FOR THEM NOT QUENCHED 

From verses 13-18, the Prophet reviews the present situation 
of the people. They had rejected the Lord from being 
their King, but he had not rejected them and would not do 
so. They had not chosen the best, but the Lord did not 
cross them in this matter. He, therefore, had anointed their 
king as his representative, and their future blessings would 
depend now upon how truly they and their king would remain 
in accord with the Lord. Under the new arrangement, 
the king of their choice represented them, and a sin on his 



part, a deflection from obedience to the Lord would mean a 
national sin, for which the people as well as the king would 
be punishable; whereas, before, under the judges whom the 
Lord had raised up, if the judge was faulty, he was the 
Lord's agent and was punished as such; and, if the people 

R4200 : page 202 

were faulty, the punishment was theirs. Thus they had run 
a great risk in choosing a representative, in placing power 
in his hands, because the weakness and selfishness of humanity 
is such that the one thus exalted would be the more liable 
to transgress the divine statutes. In harmony with this, note 
how the sin of David was esteemed a national sin and brought 
a national penalty.— 1 Chron. 21:12-27. 

In summing up by the Lord's direction, Samuel gave a 
sign to corroborate his declaration that their calling for a 
king was a rejection of the Lord as their king, and a sin on 
the part of the people. There should be a thunderstorm in 
the midst of their harvest-time, an occurrence said to be very 
rare in southern Palestine. Coming promptly as a fulfilment 
of Samuel's prediction, it appealed to the people, convincing 
them for the first time that their course was a reprehensible 
one and a sin of gross ingratitude. They said to 
Samuel, "Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that 
we die not; for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to 
ask us a king." 

THE SIN OF INGRATITUDE 

Of all crimes, ingratitude appears to be one of the most 
inexcusable, and has so been esteemed amongst all people 
and at all times. Lycurgus, the great law-giver and statesman 
of Greece, wrote, "I make no law, perhaps, punishing 
ingratitude; I leave that for the gods to punish." Amongst 
the Athenians, if a slave, being freed, was afterward convicted 
of ingratitude toward his liberator, he was sent back 
again into slavery. Someone has written, "Gratitude is the 
fairest blossom which springs from the soul; and the heart 
of man knoweth none more fragrant." Shakespeare wrote: 

"This was the most unkindest cut of all; 
For when the noble Caesar saw him stabbed, 
Ingratitude, more strong than traitor's arms, 
Quite vanquished him; then burst his mighty heart." 

Gratitude not only is a fragrant flower, but is indigenous 
to the soul of every true and noble heart. Accepting this 
standard, we are bound to conclude that comparatively few 
of the human family are noble in this respect. Even 
amongst the Lord's people the grateful seem to be comparatively 
few in number. This agrees well with the Apostle's 
statement that amongst the called are "not many noble"— 
chiefly the mean things of this world." (1 Cor. 1:26-29.) 
But this describes what we were when we were called. Who 
shall say that amongst those who have accepted the divine 



call and been made partakers of the divine favors granted to 
all the sons of God, begotten of the Spirit— who shall say 
that these will remain ungrateful? Who shall say that the 
grace of God would not have a transforming influence on 
their hearts, so that however ungrateful they might be by 
nature, they would be so changed by grace that gratitude 
would be one of the chief elements of their disposition? 

We believe that this is true; and that the Lord's people 
may in considerable degree measure their spiritual growth 
and development in this manner. If they find in themselves 
a spirit of murmuring and complaining against the Lord, it 
is a sure sign that they are ungrateful; for we know that he 
is faithful, and faith tells us that it is surely true that all 
the experiences of life permitted to come to us are working 
for our good. (Rom. 8:28.) Whoever has this faith can 
give thanks to the Lord and can rejoice even through his 
trial and sorrow. And if we have gratitude to God for his 
blessings and favors, if we cultivate the true nobility of heart 
which is impulsed by love and appreciation of divine care, 
it will make us appreciative of all the affairs of life and of 
all those with whom we have contact. We shall appreciate 
their good qualities, even if we cannot endorse all of their 
course; and whoever may do us kindness in the least degree 
must have our gratitude, our appreciation. Yea, with the 
Christian the standard must be still higher than this; for 
this should be the world's standard; as our Lord expressed it, 
"For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? 
for sinners also love those that love them. And if ye do 
good to them which do good to you, what thank have ye? 
for sinners also do even the same." (Luke 6:32.) The 
standard for the Lord's people is still higher than that of 
gratitude, though it must include this. Our standard is 
benevolence, a forgiveness of those who transgress against us, 
and who say all manner of evil against us falsely. Such as 
attain this degree of character-likeness to their Lord receive 
an extra blessing from him in proportion, and are bidden to 
rejoice and be exceeding glad, and to know that they will 
have a reward in heaven. 

Gratitude is therefore a keeping power in our hearts, 
there to repel the suggestions of the evil one, and to stop 
our imperfect fleshly mind if it attempts to assert itself. 
Gratitude is closely akin to love; and where they dwell together 
in the heart, there is little room for the Adversary to 
get in his work. On the contrary, ingratitude signifies a 
blindness of the mind in respect to justice. It speaks a low 
standard of character, in which the fruits of the Spirit of the 
Lord have not been well developed. Surely in any heart 
in which the love of God has been "shed abroad," ingratitude 
to him or anybody would be an impossibility. But 
where ingratitude gains a foothold, it admits its relatives- 
selfishness, pride, anger, malice, hatred, strife, evil surmisings, 
slander, backbitings and other qualities which the 
Apostle enumerates as "works of the flesh and the devil." 
The Lord's consecrated people should daily search their 
hearts for any manifestations of selfishness or ingratitude, 
and should look well to the growing development therein 



of love and thankfulness and appreciation toward the Giver 
of all good, toward the brethren of the Household of Faith, 
yea, toward all with whom we have to do. 

"FORBID, THAT I SHOULD SIN AGAINST THE LORD" 

After assuring the Israelites that they need not fear the 
Lord, that he is gracious, and that if they should follow him 

R4201 : page 202 

faithfully under a king or otherwise, he would surely never 
forsake them, the prophet proceeds to answer their query 
respecting his praying for them. He said, "As for me, God 
forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray 
for you." What a sublime character is thus brought to our 
view! It is the more remarkable when we note that 
Samuel did not belong to the Spirit dispensation; that he 
therefore had not all the advantages which we, the Lord's 
people of this Gospel Age since Pentecost, enjoy, and yet, alas! 
how few of the Spirit-begotten ones manifest this spirit, this 
same degree of likeness to the Lord's character and Spirit! 
In how many would the natural mind rise up and say, You 
have a king now, I have foretold you that it was a sin of ingratitude 
against the Almighty and against me, now go your 
way and see if what I have told you does not come true, and 
that you will be worse off. 

On the contrary, notice the prophet's words. They 
show that he felt that he had a duty toward the people of 
Israel as his brethren, whether they felt similarly toward him 
or not. Although they had rejected him after his faithful 
service of many years, he assured them that he would pray for 
them and consider their very highest welfare, and that he 
would consider the matter from the very best standpoint, 
viz.: that it was a part of his duty, if he would be in harmony 
with the Lord, and that he could do nothing less than 
pray for them and seek their every good. How is it with 
those who slight us? Has the new spirit, the new mind of 

R4201 : page 203 

Christ, gained sufficiency of foothold for us to say as Samuel 
did, "God forbid that I should sin against the Lord and 
cease to pray for you." Our Master's words instruct us even 
upon this, and say, "Love your enemies,... pray for 
them which despitefully use you; that ye may be the children 
of your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5:44,45.) Oh, 
yes! Those whose hearts are loving to their enemies, and 
loving to the Household of Faith, and above all, loving to 
the Lord, these would indeed be exceedingly sensitive if their 
hearts got into any attitude in which they would not be 
seeking the welfare of others, and praying for them. In 
such hearts there would be no room for anger, bitterness, 
strife, envying. In such hearts the love of God is shed 
abroad as represented by the holy anointing oil, the unction 
from the Holy One, which lubricates all of the sensibilities, 



smoothing not only the countenance, but also the tongue and 
the heart; for "out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh," and bitter water cannot come from a pure fountain. 
—Luke 6:45; James 3:11. 

"THE LORD HATH DONE GREAT THINGS FOR US" 

After assuring them of his prayers on their behalf, 
Samuel told that he would continue to instruct them in the 
good and right way, and that he would do all of his duty 
toward them so far as their attitude of heart would permit. 
Then he urges the words of our Golden Text, "Only fear the 
Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart; for consider 
how great things he hath done for you." It is well 
that we note the distinction between the outward service and 
that of the heart, the mind, the affections. Outward service 
that does not spring from the heart will soon wither away, 
whether under adversity or prosperity. Hence the Lord always 
appeals to our hearts, "Give me thine heart." (Prov. 23:26.) 
So long as our heart is loyal to the Lord, it will 
control all of the products of life, because it will lead us to 
seek to know the Lord's will in everything. This will take 
us to the Lord in prayer. It will take us to the Word for 
instruction, and it will assist us in understanding the Word, 
giving us more and more the spirit of a sound mind. 

The prophet gives us a lesson in the statement, "Consider 
how great things he hath done for you." Oh, yes! 
The difficulty generally is that consideration of these favors 
of God are crowded out of our hearts by other considerations, 
often selfish ones. The Israelites had passed through several 
centuries of divine guidance under the judges, and we have 
comparatively little knowledge of their progress during that 
time, the history of that period being much less ample than 
that which followed their organization as a kingdom; but we 
may be sure, nevertheless, that their spiritual interests were 
really forwarded more under the judges than under the kings. 
Centralization of government does not always mean greater 
blessing and progress. It usually means less in individuality 
and personal progress. A similar condition of things is 
noticed in the history of the Church. We have no history 
whatever of that period which followed the days of the 
apostles for more than a century, for the same reason that 
we have no history regarding the real Church, which 
is unrecognized of men. "The world knoweth us not." 
That the rule of the judges was superior to that of the kings 
is evident from the Lord's promise to Israel, "I will restore 
thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning 
(Isa. 1:26.) The lawgivers as at the first will be the 
greater than Moses— the Christ, Head and Body. The 
judges as at the beginning will be the Ancient Worthies, in 
full authority as the prophets or teachers and judges amongst 
men, under the supervision of Immanuel's heavenly Kingdom. 

Samuel appealed to fleshly Israel to remember the 
great things that God had done for them, as a ground for 
thankfulness and faithfulness— their delivery from Egypt, 
their guidance through the wilderness and their entrance into 



the land of Israel; but if we apply these words to Spiritual 
Israel, with what greater force do they come to us! The 
Lord has delivered us from Egyptian bondage, the bondage 
of sin and death. He has led us out of darkness into his 
marvelous light. He not only lifted our feet from the horrible 
pit and the miry clay, but he placed them upon the Rock, 
Christ Jesus; yea, more! he has put a new song into our 
mouths, even the loving kindness of our God. He not only 
forgave our sins, but accepted us in Jesus, and invited us to 
joint-heirship with Christ. He not only gave us exceeding 
great and precious promises to cheer our hearts in the wilderness 
journey, but has in reservation for us things exceeding 
great and precious, of which he has given us a glimpse or 
foretaste through the holy Spirit, an earnest of our 
inheritance. 

Who that has gratitude of heart to the Lord for these 
blessings, who that is appreciative and thankful, would not 
be indeed seeking to serve the Lord in truth with all his 
heart! Who that is of this attitude of mind would fail to 
remember the Lord's Word and to seek divine assistance in 
complying with its requirements, remembering the statement, 
"If ye love me, keep my commandments." To such daily 
the commandments of the Lord amplify, enlarge. Daily he 
sees new forces, new meanings in these commandments. If 
he be thankful, if he be appreciative of the Lord's providence 
toward him in the past, the depths of meaning to God's commands 
would not be grievous to him; but he will still rejoice 
to go on day by day in sympathy with our Lord's words, "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God; Thy law is written in my 
heart." So it will be with us. As the Apostle says, We 
shall do his commandments, and they will not be grievous 
unto us, and this will be the evidence to us that we love God 
and that we are loved of him, and being sealed, impressed 
more and more by his Spirit, the spirit of truth.— 1 John 5:2,3. 

"YE SHALL BE CONSUMED" 

Of course there is an alternative. Those who do not 
enter into the Lord's service of a truth, with all their heart, 
those who do not continually and repeatedly consider how 
great things God has done for them, those who lack appreciation 
of his kindness and are resentful of his arrangement and 
leading, will be esteemed of him as wicked and as unfit for 
the glorious things which he has in reservation for the faithful. 
The Lord has made provision for the forgiveness of all 
of our inherited imperfections and weaknesses, and he has 
also made provision for our growth in grace and knowledge 
and love. While he is willing to cover our blemishes from 
his sight through the merit of the precious blood, he insists 
that we under that covenant shall develop the character 
which he has delineated and exemplified, the character of 
which love is the essence, and he rejects those who refuse to 
come to this standard of perfect love, or refuse all the provisions 
of divine grace; for it is not the Father's proposition 
to associate with his Son in glory any except those who shall 
be copies of his character. This he has predestinated.— 



Rom. 8:29. 



R4201 : page 204 

THE LONDON, ENG., CONVENTION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Convention just closed has been one of the 
most helpful seasons of refreshing we have been permitted 
to enjoy. From the first meeting to the last there 
was a deep and calm feeling of sweet communion, and 
the consciousness that we were to meet with the Lord 
as we met with each other; and already there are many 
evidences that the windows of heaven have been opened 
and the abundant blessings received. Besides the 
quickening of those who have long been consecrated to 
the Lord, there has been in the hearts of several who 
attended a decision to consecration, and we rejoice in 
having new brothers and sisters walking with us in the 
Narrow Way. The Psalmist said, "O taste and see that 
the Lord is good," but here we have had such abundance 
out of the storehouse of heavenly grace, that we have 
been feasting at the Divinely provided table, and surely 
our Lord has been fulfilling Luke 12:37. We thought 
that your recent visit to the various centers might cause 
a diminution as to the attendance, but though we know 

R4202 : page 204 

some were prevented through local activities the Convention 

came up to the general average. Indeed, owing 

to growth of interest in London there was a rather better 

average attendance than last year— so, at least, it 

seemed to us. About 650 were in attendance, though 

some meetings had many more than that number. 

The Convention was opened by a word of welcome 
from Brother Hemery, representing the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. He expressed the hope that 
all would look out for one of the best times we could 
expect to have; that each should prepare his heart and 
mind to receive much from the Lord, and to be as ready 
to seek the good of each as he was to get good for himself. 
Brother F. W. Williamson also spoke briefly, 
carrying a message of love from yourself, and making 
us long for a renewal of the sweet fellowship we had 
with you so recently. Brothers Bull and Bilsbrough 
led us away into thoughts of the fulness of the Divine 
Plan— Brother Bull by a talk on the "Oneness" which 
is desired now and to which God is working, when all 
things shall be brought into subjection to Christ; 
Brother Bilsbrough by reminding us of the "Glory-Filled 
Earth" soon to be. In the evening Brother Hemery 
spoke on "Perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord," 
and surely the Lord helped us to see the need of the 



work yet to be done in each heart. Sunday was a happy 

day, spent in Testimony and Praise and meditation upon 

the Word. Brother Edgar gave a helpful address 

on "Humility," and in the evening Brother Williamson 

spoke to a crowded house on "Which is the True Gospel." 

On Monday there was an immersion service in a fine 

chapel kindly lent to us for the occasion. We rejoiced 

with 72 brothers and sisters who symbolized their consecration 

to the Lord, in this manner testifying to their 

death and resurrection as New Creatures in Christ 

Jesus. There were many wet eyes in the meeting, 

though the tears were mostly those which came from 

joy rather than sorrow; though we know tears were 

shed by some because they had not then given themselves 

to the Lord and could not share in the immersion. 

How gladly we would wipe these tears away by helping 

the weepers into the Kingdom, and into the joy of the 

Lord! 

After the baptismal service we had a long afternoon 
and evening; more testimonies were given. That was 
a short but particularly blessed part of the day, for we 
were just a large family talking of the common love for 
our Head. Profitable and helpful talks by Brother 
Guard and again by Brother Williamson brought the 
afternoon to a close. In the evening Brother Hemery 
talked on our present privilege of "Fellowship with 
God"— our fellowship is (now) with the Father and with 
the Son. We parted with a love-feast of hand-shaking, 
bidding one another "good-bye" and wishing each other 
a real "fare-well," of which, indeed, we are confident, 
since our Father's hand provides for us! and since we 
are under his special care. Some present had never 
before attended such meetings, and the loving interest 
which the brethren showed in each other's welfare, and 
the fulness of experience in the Lord which so many 
had, were sources of surprise; but these soon proved to 
be of the best helps of the Convention. 

We were very glad to have dear Brother F. W. Williamson 
and Sister Williamson with us, and they go on 
their visit to other friends with many prayers that they 
may be used of the Lord and that they may be fitted 
in all ways for the Master's use. 

This year we had only three days of Convention, 
but many of the visiting friends have spent some days 
in getting a closer acquaintance with the London 
brethren, and such times have been spent in helping 
each other to a closer walk with God. All the evidences 
seem to show that there is a great work for the Lord 
waiting to be done; many are asking after the Truth, 
and of this "Way." A Christian brother unknown by 
sight to us, writes asking how he and others with him 
can cooperate in the work of Harvest, for they are interested 
in this clearer knowledge of the Christian's 
hope. Since the beginning of May we have sent out 
from here over 700,000 of the 1908 Volunteer matter and 
already many inquiries are coming in. Surely there 



are thousands of hearts waiting for the cheer of the 
only "hopeful" message. Continue to pray for us, dear 
brother, as we pray for you, that we may be faithful to 
our calling and to our opportunities of service. 

With loving remembrances and good wishes, I am, 
dear brother, yours affectionately, in the Lord, 
J. HEMERY. 



As already expressed, we have great expectations 
respecting the harvest-work in Great Britain. The fact 
that the Colporteur work there is less successful than 
we had hoped must not deter us. We must look for 
other doors also. We rejoice to learn that the Volunteer 
Tract distribution progresses so well and is yielding 
results. This should lead to increasing zeal in that 
department of service. The Society is prepared to supply 
all the tracts you can use— FREE and freight paid. 
Let us by word and example double the output. 

We fancy that Sharp-shooting would do much good 
to all of the dear friends, as well as do much to spread 
the Truth. "Sharp-shooting" is the circulating of DAWNS 
and booklets amongst your friends and neighbors, accompanying 
the introduction with a word of testimony 
respecting their effect upon your own head, heart and 
daily living. The effect will be beneficial to yourself as 
well as to your friends.— EDITOR. 



R4203 : page 205 

"SHE HATH DONE WHAT SHE COULD" 

The Feast was spread at Simon's house, and as they sat at 

meat, 
A woman came and silent stood within the open door- 
Close pressed against her throbbing heart an alabaster box 
Of purest spikenard, costly, rare, she held. With modest fear, 
She dreaded to attract the curious gaze of those within, 
And yet her well-beloved Friend was there, her Master, Lord. 
With wondrous intuition she divined that this might be 
Her last, her only opportunity to show her love; 
She thought of all that he had done for her, the holy hours 
She spent enraptured at his feet, unmindful of all else, 
If only she might hear those words of Truth, those words of 

Life. 
She thought of that dark hour when Lazarus lay within the 

tomb 
And how he turned her night to day, her weeping into joy. 
Her fair face flushed, with deepening gratitude her pure eyes 

shone. 
With swift, light step she crossed the crowded room. She 

bravely met 
Those questioning eyes (for Love will find its way through 



paths where lions 
Fear to tread); with trembling hands she broke the seal and 

poured 
The precious contents of the box upon her Saviour's feet, 
And all the house was filled with fragrance wonderful and 

sweet. 
She could not speak, her heart's devotion was too deep, her 

tears 
Fell softly, while she took her chiefest ornament, her long 
And silken hair and wiped his sacred feet,— when suddenly 
A rude voice broke the golden silence with, "What waste! this 

might 
Have sold for much, to feed the poor!" She lower bent her head- 
To her it seemed so mean a gift for love so great to make! 
Again a voice re-echoed through the room, her blessed Lord's. 
(He half arose and gently laid his hand upon her hair)— 
And how it thrilled her fainting heart to hear him sweetly say, 
"Rebuke her not, for she hath wrought a good work, what 

she could; 
Aforehand, to anoint me for my burying she hath come, 
And this her deed of love throughout the ages shall be told!" 



How oft since first I read the story of this saint of old, 
My own poor heart has burned with fervent, longing, deep 

desire, 
That I might thus have ministered unto my Lord and King— 
"The chiefest of ten thousand, altogether lovely One." 
And now, to learn— Oh! precious thought, 'tis not too late, I still 
May pour Love's priceless ointment on "the members" of his 

Feet! 
Dear Lord, I pray, Oh! help me break with sacrificial hand 
The seal of Self, and pour the pent-up odors of my heart 
Upon thy "Feet!" Oh! let me spend my days and nights in 

toil, 
That I, perchance, may save from needless wandering, and 

help 
To keep them in the narrow way that leads to light and life. 
Oh! let me lay within their trembling hands a rose of love, 
A lily's pure and holy inspiration on their breast! 
Dear Master, let me kneel with them in dark Gethsemane; 
Oh! help me boldly stand and meekly bear the scoffs and jeers 
Of cruel, mocking tongues! Oh! may I count no cost, e'en 

life 
Itself, too great to serve, to bless, to comfort thy dear "Feet," 
And when the last drop of my heart's devotion has been shed, 
Oh! may I hear thy sweet voice say, 'She hath done what she 

could!" -G. W. Seibert. -April, 1908. 



page 205 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I had in mind for some time to unburden to you 
some of my experience with some of our friends in the 
Nominal Churches in dispensing Tracts, TOWERS and 
DAWNS to them; that we often meet with the remarks 
that they cannot observe any changes in the 
general conditions, everything going on as usual. We 
say to them, we agree with you in this; but how about 
the worship to God, and walking in his precepts; the 
faith in general of Jesus Christ, who said, "When the 
Son of Man cometh will he find faith on the earth?" and 
we call their attention back to about twenty years or 
more, when in the Christian home we would hear the 
singing of hymns or reading a Psalm, or expounding 
the Gospel or the apostles' letters; how the evening 
and the morning worship was regularly conducted, and 
how Saturday evening was the beginning of the rest 
day, to give thanks unto God for blessings received 
during the past week, and that this was a custom since 
Reformation times, to which books and periodicals attest. 
And further, a visit to the same homes now, and what do 
we observe in the majority of them? Is it not card playing, 
dancing, and beer drinking and other worldly affairs, 
of which the Christians in former years kept aloof? 

To these existing conditions all older people agree 
with me, that a very great change has taken place, that 
the sowing time is past, and the harvest far advanced. 
The churches receive almost anyone for membership, 
with almost any kind of baggage. Recently a Baptist 
minister returned from a heathen land, where he had 
been doing missionary work for over twenty years, and, 
preaching one of his old-fashioned sermons to a flock 
of his believers, he was requested to remain with 
them and start a new church, to which he assented, 
with the remark, that he had observed since coming 
back that they were more in need of the Gospel than 
were the heathen. 

Let us pray to the Lord to send more servants into 
the field, and give thanks for the Light we have received. 

I will close my few remarks, as my letter may become 
too lengthy, although much more could be said in 
regard to these changes. Yours, W. H. GRUHL,— Wis. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
I am sending herewith an order for WATCH TOWER 

and Diaglott for Mrs. , to whom I delivered a set of 

Studies in the Scriptures three weeks ago today. She 
has fairly devoured the first three volumes, and said to 
me last night on our way home from the meeting, "You 
cannot comprehend what those books have been to me, 
for I was utterly without faith of any kind, but now I 
have committed all to the Lord and am trusting him 
entirely and worry about nothing, for I possess nothing 
to worry about any more. All belongs to him." She 



had never professed Christianity but attended Christian 
Science meetings, and thought that belief more reasonable 
than anything she had ever heard, as her husband 
had been healed by it. She says she wonders now how 
she could ever have thought there was anything in 
Christian Science. 

My heart overflows with gratitude to our heavenly 
Father for having used me as his humble messenger to 
bring such joy into the life of this dear sister and I 
pray that I may prove faithful even unto death, that he 
may use me in like manner in the coming age to assist 
in bringing joy to the whole "groaning creation." 

Praying the Great Chief Reaper's richest blessing 
to continue to rest upon you, and asking your prayers 
that I may prove faithful, I am, your humble sister in 
our Redeemer, S. L. G. CHAPMAN,-Maine. 



R4202 : page 205 

A CORRECTION: --Several earnest friends of the Truth, 
residing in or near Birmingham, Eng., have written us 
that they think we were misinformed respecting Bro. B. 
C. Hughes; that in their opinion he was a most exemplary 
Elder. We are glad to make note of their testimony 
in his favor. However, nothing in our report was 
intended unkindly; we have always thought of him as 
conscientious.— EDITOR. 



R4202 : page 206 

LETTERS COMMENDING THE "VOW" 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am just in receipt of June 15th TOWER, and so 
far as read have been much edified by it. It is my 
pleasure to inform you promptly that the "Vow to the 
Lord" which you suggest, is very earnestly and readily 
made to him; in fact, it is but a renewal under different 
language of a vow very understandingly (on my part) 
made some years ago, and in which I have been very 
abundantly blessed. No doubt a fervent recalling and 
renewal will bring further blessing, and I am rejoiced 
at the opportunity of so doing and in a more open and 
public manner. I shall make a similar statement to our 
Waukesha and Milwaukee classes, to both of which I 
expect to minister the coming Sunday. 

Surely the article was very timely, and may it, and 
the blessed vow, be but "stepping-stones" to all. We 
know they will prove only so to the "very elect." The 
truth, and complete information as to how to serve it 
in detail, are always a "savor of life unto life, or death 
unto death." Those who "stumble at the Word, being 



disobedient," are "appointed thereunto," and while we 
for a time may be in sorrow through such and other 
"manifold" trials, we remember that they are for the 
testing of our faith, which is of much more value than 
gold that perisheth, even though it be tried by fire, and 
which will "be found unto praise, and honor and glory, 
at the appearing of Jesus Christ." So let us "endure 
hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ." 

Since the topic is up, the occasion seems to be appropriate 
for a suggestion that I want to make, knowing 
you will accept it in the spirit of love in which it is 
made, and use it so far as wisdom indicates to be 
proper. The dear Colporteurs are going out in groups 
of mixed sexes and unmarried. Owing to inexperience, 
ardentness of spirit, inherent fleshly defects, and unfeigned 
brotherly love, it is easy for these— in fact, almost 
impossible for them not to overstep the bounds of 
prudence in apparent or surface fleshly relations— which 
the sound judgment of the world on this subject has 
established— while every thought and word and deed is 
pure. To the pure all this will be pure; but the world 
is not pure, and readily speaks and imputes evil. Therefore, 
the Church of God must avoid all appearance of 
evil, and do nothing, make no arrangements that seem 
to abet evil. The point is, cannot these groups or 
camps when arranged, be wholly male and wholly 
female; no groups of both sexes being sent to the same 
places? 

A little incident occurred at Madison, Wis., at the 
time of your recent visit there which I believe will interest 
you. 

Sister Hanson, of Kansas City, writing Sister 
Rutherford, who is summering here, makes statement 
as follows: 

"I wrote my nephew, who was a student in Madison, 
about Brother Russell's being there; he attended both 
services and thought them fine. He believes the Truth. 
He tells me that some of the students that were there, 
and had intended to jeer and make fun, said that if the 
Bible is true, that is the truth." 

Knowing the quality of the students at the large 
Universities, and recognizing that they would be more 
or less stirred up to mischief by the title of your discourse, 
I had rather anticipated that a united attempt 
would be made to interrupt your address. It seems 
that the Great One who is overruling our affairs, is 
able also on occasions like this to overrule for benefits, 
and I know that you as well as we, who already 
know of this instance, will be cheered and edified by 
the outcome. 

I rejoice, dear brother, to attest again to you my 
full appreciation of your labor in the Lord, my fullest 
confidence and my earnest, warm and unfeigned brotherly 
love. I hope ere long to see you again face to face. 
Give all the Bible House household our warm love and 
greeting. Yours in him, W. E. PAGE,— Wis. 



[IN REPLY:— The Society has similarly advised the 
dear Colporteurs, and at the risk of being misunderstood, 
has adhered to its rule of not making mixed 
assignments. However, we consider that our duty on 
this subject ceases there. Where the dear friends, for 
reasons of their own, work on each other's assignment 
we do not feel it incumbent to object further, knowing 
well that their heart-desires are of the very best.] 



page 206 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am thankful for the privilege of informing you 
that the vow published in the last TOWER has been 
registered with our Father as my vow. It already has 
impressed me as being necessary to this evil hour, 
especially as we are convinced of the increasing necessity 
for "circumcision of the heart." 

The Lord has dealt graciously with me, and I do 
love him and want to please him in carrying out my 
consecration, of which I consider this vow now a part. 
I ask your prayers on my behalf. 

May our Father continue his blessing upon you, 
dear brother, and upon us through your willing service. 
Praise to him. With much love, A. M. SAPHORE,-NJ. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In accordance with your request, I drop you a line 
in reference to vow of June 15 TOWER. 

I made the vow to the Lord, dear brother, then, and 
rejoice in the privilege, for it has been along these lines 
that I have had to keep a constant guard since I have 
come to a knowledge of the Truth— nearly seven years 
ago. In my petitions to the Lord, I appealed for strength 
constantly, and in due time I received the strength 
needed, which I consider a miracle. 

Dear brother, you probably do not know how much 
good and how needful those articles in the TOWER are! 
But surely the Lord saw the need. May the dear Lord 
continue his favored blessings with you, and all associated 
with you in the harvest work. 

Your brother in the dear Redeemer, 

E. LAVEALLE-N.Y. 



THE FOLLOWING ADVISE THAT THEY HAVE TAKEN THE VOW 
R. H. Bricker, J. H. Blackmore, C. E. Reed, John 



G. Kuehn, S. J. Arnold, W. E. Page, Henry Hoskins, 
Sr., R. E. Streeter, Paul S. L. Johnson and wife, Sister 
H. O. Henderson, Dr. S. N. Wiley, Dr. W. D. Pelle, 
Ray Domer and wife, C. D. Welborne, Mrs. J. M. White, 
Emil H. Herrscher, F. Brown, Bernice McNaught, W. 
H. Spring, W. W. Black and wife, J. F. Emmerson and 
wife, C. E. Myers, Mrs. E. M. Detwiler, Mrs. F. P. Van 
Amburgh, Mrs. A. M. Weber, Ed. H. Wilhelm, Samuel 
S. Jacobs, M. H. Myers, C. M. Utzler, Virgil C. Haviland, 
C. H. Dickinson, J. W. Watts, H. E. Whitenut, 
J. A. Seip, Ethel Halstead, J. O. Faulk, Wm. Lowry, 
Mrs. M. McGinnis, B. F. Boyer, Springtown, Pa.; Mrs. 
C. C. Stone, Worcester, Mass.; L. M. DeLaMater, Catskill, 
N.Y.; G. M. Hunt, Colorado Springs, Col; Geo. 
W. Harner, Veedersburg, Ind.; J. F. White, Chelsea, 
Mass.; Brother and Sister Merrow, Kittery, Me.; Granville 
Houchins, Huntington, W.Va.; W. E. Richards, 
Toledo, Ohio; Mrs. Carrie Beatty, Kansas City, Mo.; 
A. O. Ogston, Everett, Mass.; E. S. Mason, Bloomington, 
111.; H. P. Gleason, Hyde Park, Mass.; Viola E. 
Imhoff, Mrs. A. Hamilton, Brother Moran, Beth Wikof, 
Ella V. Dyer, J. A. Hodges, Brother and Sister Woodley, 

C. E. Fellow, Lydia A. McMier, John M. Lathwell, B. F. 
Payen, H. S. Blankenship, Roy G. Ratcliff, J. Marriot, 
Alex. M. Graham, Mrs. Alex. M. Graham, Carl F. Hammerle, 

D. V. Haymes, C. E. Frost, J. E. Starks. 

page 207 

ANOTHER INTERESTING LETTER 

R4203 : page 207 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

It is now about five years since I came into the 
light of Present Truth, and the Lord has blessed me 
with the privilege of having the six volumes of DAWN, 
and the TOWERS from 1890, all of which I have carefully 
gone through, and from which I have received a course 
of Bible Study, a knowledge of our heavenly Father, 
and our dear Lord, and the plans and purposes and my 
relation thereto, sufficient thanks for which would indeed 
be hard for me to put in words. But I have the 
privilege of thanking you for the service rendered unto 
me, for I knew nothing of the Bible, although a reader 
of it from boyhood, until the Lord in his own due time 
placed in my hands the "meat in due season" from your 
hands. 

I have in these past years learned to go to these 
helps (TOWERS and DAWNS) for all points that have 
perplexed me, and with very few exceptions have always 
received a reasonable Scriptural explanation that made 
things plain to my mind. Until now if a point comes 
up that I do not grasp I go for help, using the 
assistance the Lord has provided in them for me and 
for all the watching ones. The exceptions I have 



written to you about, and you know they have been few, 
and in thanking you I am thanking our dear Lord and 
Head, who "has girded himself" and is "now serving 
the table." Our heavenly Father I also thank. 

I have practised medicine here since 1889 and had 
quite an extensive practice up to the present time, and 
since coming into the Truth Sister Senor and I have 
used up in the Truth, one way or another, as we thought 
the Lord would have us use it, all above our living expenses 
(and a provision for those dependent upon us, a 
reasonable one we hope, until 1914), by sending TOWERS, 
DAWNS, etc., over the counties near by. 

Your brother in Christ, S. D. SENOR,-Missouri. 



page 207 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Author of the Atonement. 

AUGUST 2 

(78) Is it the Father or the Son that is styled the 
King of kings and Lord of lords? P. 78. 

(79) Does this refer to the Father or how otherwise 
shall we understand it? P. 78, last par. 

(80) Cite and explain other similar passages. 
I Cor. 15:27; Col. 2:10. P.79, par. 1. 

(81) Would the passage "thought it not robbery 

to be equal with God" prove the trinity doctrine? If 
both were one how could one think of robbing himself? 
P.79, par. 2. 

(82) What did our Lord Jesus testify respecting 
his equality with the Father? And did he not tell the 
truth? P.79, par. 2. 

AUGUST 9 

(83) What appears to be the Apostle's argument— 
what point is he proving in Phil. 2:6? P.79, last par. 

(84) Is there any evidence that this verse is improperly 
translated? If so, what? P. 80, par. 1. 

(85) Give, in order, different translations of the 

verse: By Clarke, Wakefield, Stewart, Rotherham, Revised 
Version, American Revision Committee, Sharpe, 
Neeland, Dickenson, Turnbull, and the Emphatic Diaglott. 
Pp.80, 81. 

(86) In view of all this array of scholarship, what 
must we conclude that the passage teaches? P.81, 
last par. 

(87) What great spirit being took a very different 



course? Give proof-text. P. 81, last par. 

(88) What quality in Jesus shines out preeminently 
in contrast with what quality in Satan? P. 81, last par. 

AUGUST 16 

(89) What reward was bestowed on the Son by the 
Father? and on what account? Cite the Scriptures. 
P.82, top. 

(90) Can such rewarding be harmonized with the 

idea of oneness of person or with original equality between 
the Father and the Son? Page 82, par. 1. 

(91) Are we enjoined nevertheless to honor the 
Son whom the Father exalted, even as we honor the 
Father who exalted him? P.82, par. 2. 

(92) Quote a Scripture passage showing the distinct 
separateness of the Father and the Son as persons, 
and also the relationship of their work. P.82, par. 2. 

(93) Does the Scripture, "Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ," favor the thought that 
Father and Son are one in person? Note the entire 
passage. Ephesians 1:2-18. P.82, par. 3. 

THE MEDIATOR OF THE ATONEMENT 

THE ONLY BEGOTTEN ONE 



AUGUST 23 

(1) Who is the Great One whom Jehovah has exalted 
to so high honor? What has he done to merit it? 
What is he yet to do in his high exaltation? P. 83. 

(2) Did our Lord Jesus have a preexistence? What 
was he before he was "made flesh"? P. 84, par. 1. 

(3) Was he then "a good" or mighty one? And if so, 
what was his name? P. 84, par. 2. 

(4) In that pre-human existence, was the Son in 
some sense "before" all creatures in time as well as in 
rank? P. 84, par. 3. 

(5) Why did the Son stoop to human conditions? 
Was it of compulsion? P. 84, par. 4. 

(6) Was his humiliation to human conditions intended 
to be eternal? Explain fully. P. 84, par. 5. 

(7) Did Jesus' resurrection restore him to the spirit 
plane? P. 84, par. 6. 

(8) Of what station is our Lord Jesus now? P. 85, 
par. 1. 

AUGUST 30 

(9) Why was our Lord in his prehuman existence 
known as The Word or The Logos? P. 85, par. 2. 

(10) What does Dr. Alex Clarke say of this word 
Logos? P. 85, par. 2. 



(11) Show the fitness of the name to the Son, and 
give an illustration of a King's Logos? P. 85, par. 3. 

(12) Does the Greek text of John 1:1 show two persons 
and refer to both as God? P. 86, par. 1. 

(13) Is there anything in the Greek text to differentiate 
these two persons who are both styled God? 

What and how should the verse be translated to show 
its Greek value? P. 86, par. 1,2. 

(14) What beginning is here referred to? P. 86, par. 3. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly the same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the New Bible helps refer to its pages. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 