Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JUNE 15, 1918 


No. 12 


THE CHASTENING OF THE LORD 


lt My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his correction; for whom, the Lord loveth he correcteth, 

even as a father the son ih whom he delighteth." — Proverbs 3:11, 12. 
Many excellent people have the thought that special sorrows
, trials, difficulties, are marks of divine disfavor and that 


And a man's foes shall be they of his own household."- 
Matthew 10:34-36. 


the best way to avoid trouble is to become a Christian. But 
the Scriptures show that if one is not already in trouble and 
wishes to get into it and to stay in it for the rest of his natural 
life, his best course is to become a true follower of Christ. 

One of the first characters who received a special invitation 
to walk with the Lord was Father Abraham. We are told 
that, "By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a 
place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; 
and he went out, not knowing whither he went." (Hebrews 
11:8) At the time this call was extended to Abraham he was 
seventy-five years of age, rich according to all the standards 
of earthly riches of his time, and no doubt comfortable and 
happy among his friends and relatives in the pleasant and 
productive region of Mesopotamia where he had been born and 
iu which he grew to manhood. We can imagine that his relatives
 were very much displeased with the choice he made. 
They no doubt considered it a species of insanity that this 
man, happy, prosperous and well established in life should 
at his age leave the environment with which he was familiar, 
and travel hundreds of miles through the sands of the Arabian 
desert to a land which neither he nor his fathers had 
known. 

One of the first crosses that must be taken up and borne by 
one who would walk in fellowship with the I/>rd is the certainty
 that he will displease his earthly friends by so doing. 
Nevertheless, the Psalmist urges, "Hearken, daughter, and 
consider, and incline thine ear; forget thine own people and 
thy father's house; so shall the king greatly desire thy 
beauty." (Psalm 45:10, 11). Eight well did the Lord know 
that our act of becoming his foot-step followers would bring 
us into difficulty with our earthly loved ones, our relatives 
according to our "father's house, else would he never have 
«aid: "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: T 
came not to send pence, but a sword. For I am come toset 
a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against 
her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. 

[6273] 


"WATEBS OF A TOLL CUP" 

The experience of the Psalmist was that his efforts to live 
a godly life brought upon him the reproaches of those who 
could not understand his motives. David was a type of the 
Christ and said' of his opposers and of ours: "They set their 
mouth against the heavens, and their tongue* walketh through 
the earth. Therefore his people return hither: and waters of 
a full cup are wrung out to them." {Psalm 73:9, 10). David 
was in the wilderness and because he was in the wilderness 
was a target for slander and ridicule until his cup of sorrow 
was filled. 

If we would see how God has been pleased to deal with 
those who give themselves unreservedly to him during the time 
in which sacrifices are acceptable, we have only to consider the 
fact that after the Beautiful One had laid his perfect sacrifice 
at the Father's feet, he was immediately "led up of the spirit 
into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil." (Matthew 
4:1) And he has not held out to his followers any expectation
 that the result of their consecration to do the Father's 
will would differ from his own; rather, he has assured us: 
"The disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above 
his Lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his 
Master, and the servant as his Lord. If they have called the 
Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call 
them of his household ?"—- Matthew 10:24, 25. 

Lest, in the midst of our trials, we should be inclined to 
fear that these are evidences of divine disfavor, we are especially
 invited to "consider him that endured such contradiction
 of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in 
your minds." (Hebrews 12:3) And as we consider him we 
recall especially the last events which crowned his three and a 
half years of faithful doing of the heavenly Father's will. We 
remember that he allowed himself to be smitten, crowned with 
thorns, mocked as a royal impostor, spit upon, and his beard 
to be torn out. He allowed himself to be sentenced to a 


(180 181) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


felon's death. Under a cross which he had not the strength to 
bear he passed through the streets of the same Jerusalem 
over which he had wept — but five days previously lined with 
the crowds that then were shouting, "Blessed be the King that 
cometh in the name of the Lord" (Luke 19:38), but that now 
were eager for his death. In the midst of this throng for 
whom he was about to die, the just for the unjust, he permitted
 himself to be stripped of his clothing, nailed to the 
cross, and hanged between two thieves until the sacrifice was 
completely finished in death. 

WEARIED AND FAINT IN MIND 
The Apostle says we should consider this, 'lest we be 
wearied and faint in our minds.' The word 'wearied' here 
(Greek kamon) is the same word that is translated sick in the 
passage of James 5:15. Thus the Lord would tell us that 
the surest protection against soul-Biekness is to keep our sacrifice
 on the altar as Jesus did and to comfort ourselves with 
the assurance that in some degree the experiences which were 
permitted to come to him are permitted also to come to us. 

When that sincere and zealous man, Saul of Tarsus, had 
met the Lord on the way to Damascus, and in prompt obedience
 to the heavenly vision had said, "What shall I do, Lord?" 
(Acts 22:10) and had remained without sight and without 
food or drink for three days (Acts 9:9), the lord sent him a 
message of comfort by the hand of Ananias, one of his faithful
 servants. The message was: "He is a chosen vessel unto 
me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the 
children of Israel: for I will show him how great things he 
must suffer for my name's sake." (Acts 9:15, 16) The 
Apostle Paul never forgot this lesson. On his first missionary 
tour, after he had preached the gospel at Iconium, Lystra and 
Derbe, and after the Jews from Antioch and Iconium had persuaded
 the people of the latter city to stone him into insensibility
 so that they supposed he was dead, then it was that "as 
the disciples stood around about him, he rose up, and came 
into the city: and the next day he departed with Barnabas to 
Derbe. And when they had preached the gospel to that city, 
and had made many disciples, they returned again to Lystra, 
and to Iconium, and Antioch, confirming the souls^ of the 
disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and 
[telling them how] that we must through much tribulation 
enter into the kingdom of God."— Acts 14:20-22. 

The Revelator shows that the experiences of the Lord Jesus 
and the Apostle Paul constitute a picture of the experiences of 
those members of the Lord's body who come in contact with 
the earth — "his feet were like unto fine brass as if they burned 
in a furnace." (Revelation 1:35) No doubt in a very special 
sense too, this picture is true of the last members, the feet 
members, of that glorious body. 

NONE WITHOUT CHASTBNINGS 

We have the Father's Word for it that "if we be without 
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are we spurious, 
and not sons." (Hebrews 12:8) It does not follow that all 
will be partakers in the same degree, nor in the same manner. 
For some a look is sufficient, for others a word, still others 
require scourgings, and some repeatedly, but the chastisements, 
whatever they may be, serve the* grand purpose of giving us 
opportunities for overcoming, for proving our fidelity, for developing
 self-control, sympathy, forgiveness, gentleness and 
patience. 

The children of Israel were to eat their passover lamb 
"with bitter herbs'* (Exodus 12:8), so that they might be 
able to partake of it more freely. Christ is our passover; and 
the effect of every bitter experience, on one who belongs to the 
Lord, is to drive him closer to the Lamb of God that he may 
feed more and more upon that Lamb. 

In the typical ceremonies of Israel one of 'the duties of the 
lngh priest was to dress the laimps which burned in the Holy, 
(Exodus 30:7^ Those who live in country districts understand
 very well what this moans. If one would have good 
light,, not only must a lamp be kept filled with oil and the 
burner and globe be kept clean, but the burned portion of the 
wick must he cut off from time to time. This represents the 
trimming off of the dross of the old nature — the wick through 
which the holy Spirit operates. If the wick could speak it 
would protest that it was being injured or wronged by the 
sharp shears which cut it in two. but the one who trims the 
wick is thinking not of the wick but of the beautiful light 
which later shall give .joy to all who are in the house. "Let 
your light so shine before men that they may see your good 
works and glorify your Father which is in heaven."- — Matthew 
5:16. 

The heavenly Father is developing and training the royal 
priesthood so that they may be merciful and faithful priests 
of the poor world when it shall be given its opportunity of 
reconciliation. They <could not become merciful and faithful 


priests without experiences such as their fellowmen have had; 
for even of Christ Jesus himself it is written: "Wherefore in 
all things it behooves him to be made like unto his brethren, 
that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest." 

NEED OF PEESEVEEANCE 

There would be scanty satisfaction in receiving chastisements
 if we could not see the end to be gained; but, since we 
can see, "we glory in tribulations also; knowing that tribulation
 worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience
, hope: and hope maketh not ashamed.*' (Romans 5:3-5) 
Those who are inspired by the hopes which animate God's sons 
experience no sense of shame under the discipline and trials 
they must endure, but glory in tribulations and rejoice to be 
counted worthy even to suffer shame for his name's sake. The 
apostle tells us: "Ye have need of patience, that, after ye 
have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise." 
(Hebrews 10:36) The tribulation which brings that patience 
is seen in its true light as a friend, and not as an enemy. 

How could we ever expect to be made strong enough, as 
new creatures, for the great future work to which we are 
called, unless, while still in this tabernacle and by the means 
which God provides, we are "strengthened with all might, 
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and longsuffering
 with joyfulness?" — Col. 1:11. 

We are hoping to be earth's future kings and priests 
(Revelation 5:10; 20:6) ; but we shall not be fitted for that 
relationship unless, as a result of the Lord's disciplines, we 
have first learned to rule our own Bpirits, for "he that is slow 
to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his 
spirit than he that taketh a city." (Proverbs 16:32) To take 
a city one must have the skill and equipment necessary for so 
great an undertaking. Small wonder then that the Lord is 
giving us experiences of a kind that the world cannot at all 
understand. 

Now that we are seeing the good results which are already 
coming to us and which will forever continue to come as a 
result of the trials which the Lord permits, let us reflect on 
what our attitude should be toward these trials. The Apostle 
tells us: "My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into 
divers temptations." (James 1:2) It may take* us a little 
time before we arc able always to "count" it just this way; 
but after a time we shall reach the point where, like the 
Apostle, we can "reckon that the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which Bhall 
be revealed in us. 5 ' — Romans 8:18. 

EVEN GOLD IS TEIED 

Most men and women at the present time think that gold 
is a very precious thing, but we who know of the new order 
of things know that its value will diminish when it will be 
easy to have all that we require. We know something which 
the world does not know; find we are able to rejoice in the 
conviction "that the trial of our faith, being much more 
precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with 
fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ." ( 1 Peter 1:7) Here and now, 
"many shall be purified, and made white, and tried" (Daniel 
12:10); and here and now our Lord urges us: "1 counsel 
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may est be 
rich."— Revelation 3:18. 

It seems a very strange thing to the world that any who 
profess to be true Christians should have special trials above 
those which come to other men, but we are, specially forewarned
 to 'think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 
which is to try us, as though some strange thing happened 
unto us: hut rejoice, inasmuch as we are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings.' (1 Peter 4:12, 13) Some time Aye shall he glad 
when we see how these experiences have proven to the Lord 
cur love and loyalty, how they have strengthened our characters
 and caused* the principles of truth and righteousness to 
take deep root in our hearts. 

God does not purpose that our sufferings shall continue 
beyond this life; and even here it is not his design that they 
should be incessant They are to be only for "a while." Most 
of us had many years of childhood in which our sufferings 
were very slight. And if we have some during the time that 
yet remains to us here, it is all intended to fit us for the 
eternal glory to which we are invited: "The God of all grace, 
who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Chridt Jesus, 
after that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, establish, 
strengthen, settle you." — 1 Peter 5:10. 

How else would the Lord know to a certainty who are his 
truly loyal people except by the trials of faith and love which 
he permits to come upon them? By these, "the Lord your God 
proveth you. to know whether ye love the Lord your God with 
all your heart and with all your soul." — Deuteronomy 13:3, 


[6274] 


Junk 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(isi-is:?) 


God's people are different from other people in that they 
alone find real comfort in the heavenly Father's rod of 
discipline. — Psnlm 23:4. 

"By this we may our calling prove. 
When Father 'plies the rod; 
We kis3 the chastening hand of love, 
Beloved sons of God." 

HEAVEN-SENT MESSENGERS 

When we get to the end of the way we shall find that the 
sorrows, "o'er which we grieved with lashes wet," were heavensent
 messengers to preserve for our everlasting enjoyment the 
exceeding great and precious inheritance for which we are in 
training. "Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now 
have I kept thy Word," said the chastened singer of Israel. 
( Psalm 119:67) How can we look with disfavor upon anything 
which prevents us from going, astray and keeps us safe in 
harmony with the Father's Word in the evil day? 

Observing now, aa we have studied the matter, that trials, 
yes, even fiery trials, are the inevitable accompaniments of a 
close walk with God, what should be our attitude when we 
enter some one of those many new and strange miscarriages 
of justice with which the history of God's sons abounds? The 
Psalmist has laid before us the method which he pursued 
under similar circumstances: "I will take heed to my ways 
that I sin not with my tongue : I will keep my mouth with 
a bridle while the wicked [who tempts and tries the righteous] 
is before me. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even 
from good [from doing or saying what seemed good in my own 
sight] and my sorrow was stirred. My heart was hot within 
me; while I was musing the fire burned [the fiery trial continued
] : then spake I with my tongue, Lord, make me to know 
mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that I 
might know how frail I am," Thus realizing that present 
vexations and sorrow will soon be over I shall be better able 
to control my tongue. 

David was the one who also said: "Thou art my hiding 
place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shalt compass
 me about with songs of deliverance." (Psalm 32:7) 
David could figuratively hear the heavenly messengers singing 
songs over his deliverance, even while he was in the midst of 
his chastisements. 

What should be our attitude toward the instruments the 
Lord may allow to be used in bringing sorrows upon us? A 
great principle is set forth by the Apostle when, in writing to 
the Corinthian brethren concerning a brother who had brought 


suit against another in a worldly court for rectification of an 
injustice, he said that, rather than permit hard feelings in the 
church with the possible defilement of some, he would better 
have meekly accepted the injustice. His word-; are: "Why do 
ye not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather sutfor yourselves
 to he defrauded?" — 1 Corinthians 6:7. 

NEITHER MTOMUBINa NOB REPINING 

The attitude of the true ^Christian toward his sufferings is 
not to repine because of them but rather to rejoice been use of 
them, as did the noble Apostle Paul, who could say of himself
: "I rejoice in my sufferings for you. and fill up that 
which ia behind of the afflictions "of Christ in my flesh for hibody
's sake, which is the church." — Colossians 1:24. 

His spirit beareth witness with our spirit that we are the 
children of God and .shall be his heirs. Hut there is a condition
 attached to that inheritance and the condition is that we 
joyfully suffer with Christ as did the Apostle Paul. "And if 
[we be] children, then heirs; heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Christ; if so be that we suffer with him." (Romans 8:17) ''if 
we suffer, we shall also reign with him," but not otherwise. — 
2 Timothy 2:12. 

There will be no crowns for those unwilling to endure with 
patience whatever the Father may have seen t>est to pour into 
their cup. But, on the other hand, "Blessed is the man that 
endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the 
crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love 
him."— James 1:12, 

We have it in our power even after starting upon the 
heavenward way to draw back by endeavoring to avoid the 
sacrifice which we have covenanted to make, or through fear 
that the Lord has forgotten us in our trials or through unwillingness
 to submit longer to the polishing. At first this 
drawing back may consist in only looking back with a sigh, 
then in a little disposition to compromise truth in favor of 
the cravings of the fallen nature, and finally in complete surrender
. "But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition
, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul." — 
Hebrews 10:39. 

We are not therefore to consider the trials and difficulties 
of our Christian pathway as marks of divine disfavor, and we 
are to be sorry for those who have not made a careful study 
of this question and have not seen the precious comfort contained
 in the words of our text: "My son, despise not the 
chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his correction: for 
whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son 
in whom he deHghteth." — Proverbs 3:11, 12. 


SUNSHINE OR SHADOW? 

"Be anxious for nothing" — Philippians 4:G. 


Our lives may be bathed in sunshine or steeped in somber est 
gloom, according as we are close by or far removed from the 
fountainhead of light. The patches of light and shadow 
which alternate upon the landscape do not determine the seasons
 and temperature of that locality; nor do petty anxieties 
or passing pleasures make us altogether warm or gloomy 
Christians. It is the long night of the Arctic region or the 
long day of the tropic clime which makes the one a barren 
waste and the other a fruitful land. Life and light go hand in 
hand; the "Father of Lights" is also the Father of Life: 
whereas death is the region of gloom, night. 

The King James version renders our text: "Be careful for 
nothing." The thought is the same as, "Be anxious for 
nothing," if we remember that careful is not here used with 
its present signification. A few definitions of words which 
naturally arise in a consideration of this subject may not be 
out of place. 

Anxiety is uneasiness or distress of mind respecting some 
uncertain event which may involve danger or misfortune. 
Anxiety produces a morbid condition of restlessness and 
mental agitation with a distressful feeling of tightness and 
oppression in the region of the heart. Anxiety is, according to 
its derivation, a choking disquiet, akin to anguish. 

Anguish is in respect to the known: anxiety in respect to 
the unknown. Anguish is because of w r hat has happened; 
anxiety because of what may happen. Anxiety refers to some 
future event, but is a little milder yet than apprehension, 
fear, dread, foreboding, terror, all of which suggest despair. 
In matters within our reach anxiety always stirs up the 
question as to whether something can be done. But with the 
Christian it is often difficult to ascertain just what is within 
our reach. When joined w r ith such perplexity, anxiety produces
 foreboding, dread, and dread commonly incapacitates one 
for helpful thought or endeavor. 

Worry is a more petty restlessness and manifest anxiety. 


Anxiety may be quiet and silent; worry is communicated to all 
around. Solicitude is a milder anxiety. Fretting, or fretfulness
, is a weak complaining without thought of accomplishing 
or changing anything, but merely as a relief to one's own 
disquiet. 

Care concerns what we possess; anxiety often what we do 
not. Caution has a sense of possible harm and risk only to 
be escaped, if at all, by careful deliberation and observation. 
Care inclines to the positive; caution to the negative. 

Anxieties, like barnacles on a ship's hull, hinder progress 
and, if they be not removed, will surely keep the Christian 
from reaching his haven of peace. They will weigh him down 
until, out of sheer inability to resist, he will seek relief by 
letting himself sink into the elements of the world. 

Entrance into the body of Christ does not change our outward
 environs. The world is still worldly; it is still filled 
with imperfection and unbalance. The same impressions seek 
to gain our attention through the avenues of sense. There are 
just as many occasions for anxiety as before, or rather as 
many occasions out of which anxieties naturally arise. But 
not only is a state of over ^solicitude opposed to the divine 
will for us, but it is also directly injurious to mind and body. 
It contracts and stiffens the walls of the blood-vessels and thus 
cuts off the refreshing supply to the brain ; we cannot think as 
well as we should. The muscles, too, become inert; for their 
waste products are not well carried away. A slow poison 
ensues. 

The cares, the anxious feelings, will come again and again: 
what then is to be done? Ah! The beloved Peter says the 
w T ord: "Casting all your care upon him; for he oareth for 
you." It is not, then, that we are miraculously made immune 
to care, but that we are furnished with a recipe for ridding 
ourselves of it. We are not immune to" dirt; it will collect of 
its own accord. But we can bathe, if we have the needed 
equipment. 


[6275] 


(I8J-I84) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


TChookt.vn, N. Y. 


ANXIETIES CONOERNINa PEE SENT AND FUTtT*E 
The anxieties which naturally rise in our lives pertain 
either to the immediate future or to the future life in another 

state. 

We may feel anxious about the body, in respect to food, 
raiment, shelter. But does not the Apostle tell us a few 
verses further on in this same chapter: *'M£r God shall supply 
all your need, according to his riches in glory" ? And does not 
our Master, knowing how these- things would tend to worry 
us, tell us gently but plainly: 

"Do not accumulate for yourselves treasures upon the earth, 
where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through 
and steal; but deposit for yourselves treasures in heaven, 
where neither moth nor rust can consume, and where thieves 
break not through nor steal. For where thy treasure is, there 
thy heart will also be. The lamp of the body is thine eye ; if, 
therefore, thine eye be clear, thy whole body will be enlightened
; but if thine eye be dim, thy whole body will be darkened
. If, then, that light which i% in thee be darkness, how 
great is that darkness! No man can serve two masters: for 
either he will hate one. and love the other; or, at least, he 
will attend to one, and neglect the other. Ye cannot serve 
God and Mammon [Syriae for riches]. Therefore I charge 
you, be not anxious about your life, what ye shall eat, or 
what ye shall drijik; nor about your body, what ye shall 
wear. Is not the life of more value than food, and the body 
than raiment? Observe the birds of heaven; they sow not, 
nor reap, nor gather into storehouses; but your heavenly 
Father feeds them. Are not ye of greater value than they? 
Besides, which of you, by being anxious, can prolong his life 
one momenta And why are ye anxious about raiment? Mark 
the lilies of the field. How they grow! They neither labor 
nor spin; yet I tell you, that not even Solomon, in all his 
splendor, was arrayed like one of these. If, then, God so 
decorate the herb of the field (which flourishes today, and 
tomorrow is used for fuel) how muoh more you, O ye distrustful
 ones!" 

But some good brother may say: "Yes, but you've got to 
get out and hustle for it." But if by "hustling for it" we 
mean to wrest the responsibility from God's own hand and to 
choke our spiritual enjoyment by fear of loss or failure, it is 
wrong, very wrong, and an insult to the Almighty by implying 
that he is not able to fulfil his promises, or is too fickle to be 
relied upon. But if we are diligent in duty, leaving the 
results with the Lord, we have already a blessing, because we 
are "workers together with God." 

But read on: 

"Therefore be not anxious, saying, What shall we eat? or, 
What shall we drink? or, With what shall we be clothed? for 
all the nations seek after these things; and your heavenly 
Father knows that ye have need of them. But seek ye first 
his righteousness and kingdom; and all these things shall be 
added to you. Be not anxious, then, about the morrow; for 
the morrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient for each 
day is its own trouble." 

Hard though each day's trouble be, it is only intolerable 
when we imagine an endless vista of just such days. But we 
do not know that all the days will be just like this one; or, 
if they be like it, who knows but what other outward or 
inward experiences may be ours, which will completely alter 
the aspect of things whieh now seem so heavy? Unquestionably
 our weightiest burdens are the ones we make for ourselves
. 

The Apostle Paul says concerning our sometimes frantic 
efforts to gain more than our daily bread : "Piety with a sufficiency
 is great gain. For we brought nothing into this 
world, and it is evident that we are not able to carry anything 
out; and having supplies of food and clothing, with those let 
us be content. But those wishing to be rich fall into a temptation
, and a snare, and into many foolish and injurious desires, 
which sink men into destruction and utter ruin; for a root of 
all kinds of evil is the love of money; which some, longing 
after, wandered from the faith, and pierced themselves around 
with divers sorrows. But thou, man of God, flee from these 
things, and pursue righteousness, faith, patience, love, meekness
/'— 1 Timothy 6:6-11. 

And again : "Charge those rich in the things of the present 
age not to be high-minded, nor to confide in wealth so uncertain
, but in that God who imparts to us all things richly for 
enjoyment — to do good, to be rich in good works, to be liberal, 
willing to bestow; treasuring up for themselves a good foundation
 for the future, that they may lay hold of that which is 
really life."— 1 Timothy G: 17-1 a. 

We might toil early and late, work ourselves gaunt and 
gray-headed, and still not have more than those who trust in 
the Lord and who enjoy "his fellowship all the while. Remember
 the story the Master gave us about the man who toiled 
after riches and who put off the higher life until he should 
have enough. When he had what he thought was enough he 
purposed to enjoy it but, to his surprise and chagrin, was met 
with the rebuff: 'Why, man, you have worked yourself to 
death; your bank account is fat enough, but your heart is lean 
and scrawny.' 

The worldly at our very elbow, father, brother, sister, 
friend, may prosper greatly; but if we walk close to God it is 
likely he will keep us poor, for few have ballast enough of 
character or experience to "know how to abound." — Philip - 
pians 4:12. 

THE HXnrOER OF THE BOND 
But all our anxieties do not arise from wondering what we 
shall eat or with what we ehall be clothed. The mind ha^ 
needs, both real and fancied. Eve's oversolicitude about supplies
 for the mind was a powerful influence contributing to 
her downfall. We may be anxious about the Lord's providence 
for us and think: 'Yes, it looks as though the Lord were 
leading me into this place, but shall I have the proper stimulus
 to my mind?' How absurd! Why talk of our minds as 
though they were a museum of geology, some precious, fossil 
fragment of which might be lost! Are our minds nothing 
more than rows of shelves and cases into which are stored 
items of information chanced upon? 

No position is too humble to be entirely without opportunity
 of ministering to others in a mental way. The precious 
knowledge we have of God and his beneficent designs makes us 
able to give a word in season; and how good it is! We need 
not worry about our precious minds, as long as we use them; 
for "he that watereth, shall himself also be watered." 

Are we feeling the need of wisdom? No need to be distracted
 on that score; for the discretion whieh comes dowm 
from above is at our disposal. We have the Apostle James' 
word for it that the call of faith is all that is needed to open 
the boundless storehouse of Jehovah's wisdom. If we have not 
sufficient wisdom to decide the questions which confront us, 
and that with conscientiousness, let us ask for more wisdom. 
Sometimes the wisest way is simply to wait on the Lord for 
further indication of his will. Our greatest and worst mistakes
 have been made by taking some trying situation rashly 
into our own hands and deciding it at once. The Devil delights 
to get us into a dilemma and, mocking, to tease ua into 
choosing one of the two ways he points out, when the Lord's 
way is possibly still a third and far better one. 

No mind culture which the world has to offer can give us 
an appreciation of the deep things of God. As Paul, the truly 
wise one, said: "And when I came to you, brethren, I came 
not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declaring to you 
the testimony of God ; for I determined to make known nothing 
among you, except Jesus Christ and him crucified. And I, in 
weakness and in fear, and in much trembling was with you. 
And my discourse and my proclamation were not in persuasive 
words of wisdom, but with a demonstration of spirit and of 
power; so that your faith might not be by the wisdom of 
men, but by the power of God. Wisdom, however, we speak 
among the developed; but wisdom, not of this age, nor of 
those rulers of this age who are coming to an end;* but we 
speak the wisdom of God which was hidden in a mystery, and 
which God previously designed, before the ages, for our glory: 
which no one of the rulers of this age knew; for if they had 
known they would not have crucified the Lord of glory ; but it 
has been written: Things which eye hath not seen, and ear 
.never heard, and to which the heart of man has not aspired — 
things which God hath prepared for those who love him' — 
God has revealed even to us through the spirit." 

We need not worry even if we do not have alt the opportunities
 for "mind-culture" which some of the world possess. It 
is even more likely to hinder than, of itself, to help us in the 
discerning of spiritual truths. When the confident Peter 
boldly declared our Lord to be "the Christ, the son of the 
living God" he was answered with half commendation, half 
rebuke (or shall we rather say, warning?) : ''Blessed art 
thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed 
this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven" — i. e. t *Thou 
art blest with a clear recognition of this great fact, which 
most people are so slow to perceive; but do not think that it 
is due to extraordinary brilliance on thy part, but rather is it 
because my Father has been pleased to honor the spirit of 
devotion and love for truth which thou hast displayed.' 

THE HUNGER OF THE HEABT 

The hunger of the heart will be laughed at and tabooed 
only by the novice in life. Loneliness, the heart's hunger, is 
but a covert acknowledgment of the fact that no one is selfsufficient
, that "no man liveth to himself or dieth to himself." 
Our most complicated anxieties and distractions arise from 


[6276] 


Jitns 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(184-185> 


this field and, like an evening damp, tend to choke our newbom
 hopes of a better life and to estrange us from the source 
of light and joy. 

But has Jehovah erred? Are there no compensating magnets
 to keep the compass of our hearts true to the pole? Has 
he invited us upon this perilous voyage and abandoned us 
without chart or rudder? Why, even man is wiser than that, 
and more provident. The great ships which plow the sea have 
their great master compass. In theory the needle of that 
compass points true to the magnetic pole. But that pole is 
leagues removed ; and every piece of iron in the ship's hull, in 
her engines, in passing vessels, in deposits in the bottom of 
the sea, influences that needle, too. So, very carefully made 
smaller magnets are so placed as to counteract the influence 
of things close by, that the subtle influence of the North may 
still lead the ship true. It is not wrong that the great compass
 should feel or be moved by the local forces; but if, and 
to the extent that it is so moved, it ceases to be a reliable 
compass and will cause confusion, dismay, perhaps even shipwreck
. If it could speak it would say: * But I want it; I 
need it; and see, it wants rae, too." 

These local magnetic fields do not harm the ship if they but 
pull in the same direction as the North Pole. And, if the 
influence we exert on one another is the influence of the 
spirit of unselfish love, of the image of Christ in us, we shall 
draw one another toward that image, we shall build one 
another up in the most holy faith and not tear down. When 
the heart's yearning seems more than we can bear, when it 
dumbly grasps for the strong arm of support or the tiny arms 
of human joy, shall Ave say the thing is wrong? The God of 
Nature made us so. 

But we have undertaken a voyage; and we must not blindly 
answer every call without listing to the compensating maspiets 
— the example of holy conquerors before us, or the words of 
the Apostles, such as, "Center your minds on things above 
.... that when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, ye also 
might appear with him in glory." Surely we would not wish 
to sell our glorious birthright for a mess of pottage, be it ever 
so fine. 

But this is all passive. We are not merely inert needles 
waiting to be acted upon by worldly or heavenly power. The 
hunger of the heart is best satisfied not by receiving but by 
giving. The chief of givers gave his best, his only son; our 
Savior gave himself. But we may say: 'The people with 
whom I meet are so crude and ungenteel, I don't know how to 
give them anything.' But can they be more crude and coarse 
than the best of mankind was to our Lord? When he fed the 
four thousand he had very little to give; yet, under Jehovah's 
blessing, it accomplished wonders, feeding not only himself and 
his close associates, but the multitude as well! Is it not 
more blessed to give than receive? How commonplace it 
would have been had someone driven up with a cartload of 
bread that he might merely receive it! He gave what he had ; 
it was enough. It is seldom that our etorehouse of blessings is 
so scant that we cannot give even a smile. And who knows 
how much warmth it starts? 

Besides all this we have a love, a fellowship, nearer, dearer, 
truer than all the best there is on earth. "The Father himself 
loveth you," and "truly, our fellowship is with the Father and 
with his son Jesus Christ." Can anything surpass that for 
honor? Can even the dearest human tie come so close or 
know our needs so well? Adam, with more spleen than spine, 
when driven to the choice, took the human companionship 
without God — and lost them both. But better than the touch 
of the tenderest hand is the consciousness of his nearness and 
interest who said, "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee." 

Tf we keep our hearts ever sensitive to the drawing of that 
far away, yet mighty magnet, though beset with blizzard, 
cloud and mist we shall pass, safely into port and "meet our 
pilot, face to face." 

To be over-anxious about our heart's supplies means to 
invite self-pity, that insidious poison which, like the vapors of 
the Flanders field, seeps into the trenches of our nobly gained 
redoubt and kills the guardians of our better self. We cannot 
expect to have the world kowtow to us if we are 'following 
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth'; for the world comes to the 
stubborn, obstinate, one-idea-at-a-time man who blows lustily 
his own horn. 

We need not, then, be distracted about our lack of Wisdom
; for it is ours, as soon as we are sure we need it, and 
ask for it. We need not be anxious or hopeless over what 
seems impossible to us; for divine Justice is such that God 
would not expect anything of us which we could not perform. 
Divine Love U too great to give us needless occasions for 
anxiety; and divine Power stands guard to see thnt no temptation
 shall befall us but such as we are able to bear. 


OTHER PRESENT OCCASIONS FOB ANXIETY 

The possibility or the probability or the fear of loss tends 
to cause many a cautious one much anxious thought. We fear 
to lose our friends, our money, our health, our influence, our 
prestige, our mental acumen, our vouth. The effect of losses 
on others is more or less responsible for this fear which we 
have. But have we not learned that loss does not always mean 
loss? We lose one thing only to find that after all it was not 
so important as we had supposed. We lose one thing and find 
in its stead a keener appreciation of what we have left. We 
lose our life-in-self and find a life in more abundant measure. 
We lose the warm hearth -glow of the valley and gain the clear 
starlight of the mountain peak. We lose the warm hand-clasp 
of a friend and gain the unspeakable pleasures of the life of 
faith. Can we not trust God? Shall we not have the choicest 
portions, if we leave the choice to him? "Oh, rest in the 
Lord, wait patiently for him .... and he will give thee thy 
heart's desires." 

Shall wo worry over disappointments? Is it not rather 
finding fault with Omniscience? 

Delays make us anxious because of the element of uncertainty
. But must we know all things before the time? Having
 used the means at our disposal to avoid delays, shall we 
not wait in peace? "Blessed are the men who fear him; they 
ever walk in the ways of peace." 

Restraints tend to chafe us. We wanted this scheme to 
work out thus and so, and when we are unable to push it 
ahead we feel peeved. But if we left it with the Lord at the 
start and said ( If the Lord will,' where is our ground for 
worrvt 

SWvingir, en a bed of sickness, or otherwise thrown into a 
bayou off the main current of activity, arouse apprehension 
lest we become wholly useless. But perhaps there are some 
lessons for us to learn before we can be trusted with further 
activities. Or maybe we can do something 'on the shelf which 
we had not known to do before. 

Our faults would drive us to distraction if we did not 
remember that the Lord knew all about them before he called 
us. Nonchalance is not the proper mind toward them, but 
useless worry is just as bad. Balance is what we need, as well 
as conscience. 

Others' faults make us anxious, for fear we may be the 
victim of their injudition. But shall we not remember that 
"the battle is not to the strong, nor the race to the swift"? 
"Our lives are hid with Christ in God" and cannot be injured. 

Our failures in the past tend to discourage us regarding 
the future and to make us anxious about the outcome. But 
"we have not a high priest unable to sympathize with our 
weaknesses; but one having been tried in all respects like 
ourselves, apart from sin. We should, therefore, approach 
with confidence to the throne of favor, that we may receive 
mercy and favor for seasonable help." It is not so much the 
breaking of the lines of conventionality, the makeshift for 
virtue, which constitutes a mistake or failure. The deadly 
mistake is to give up hope and stop trying. Jt is mora vanity 
than devotion if we wish to give up just because we are not 
able to make as prominent a showing as others or as we had 
koped for ourselves. A mistake is not necessarily a fatal 
thing. 

Chastisements, when wrongly viewed, fill us with foreboding
. But is it not true that in many ways love and pain 
go hand in hand? 

Hardships cause us anxious thought; for we wonder 
whether we can endure them. But we have the Apostle's 
cheering words: "I can endure all things through Christ who 
strengthens." 

ANXIETT ABOUT THE FUTURE LIFE 

No undue care need be taken for that which is beyond our 
realm. We are promised the holy Spirit if we ask it; and 
the holy Spirit, dwelling richly in our minds, will guarantee 
the development of the fruits of the spirit; and we are distinctly
 told that 'if these things be in us richly and abound, 
so an abundant entrance shall be ministered unto us into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.* 
Again : "He that hath begun the good work in you shall complete
 it unto the day of the Lord Jesus." Again, the consoling 
yet stirring word: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life" — not I may, if I feel so inclined at 
the time, but "I will give thee a crown of life." 

Fear of the great change affects some. But why should it? 
we have nothing to lose and all to gain. Moreover our Master 
desires to have us there; for he prayed the Father, "I will 
that they be with me where I am." 

DROP OTTO BURDENS AT THE THRONE OF GRACE. 
To dispel anxiety, reverence is necessary. But much more 
than reverence is necessary. We might have reverence and 


[6277] 


(185-188) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


think of God as a mighty being, too great and too far removed 
to care for our welfare. We must fellowship with him, aa he 
invites us. Undoubtedly the relationship of children to a 
father is the one which Jehovah seeks to encourage in us. He 
says, "in everything." Not merely may we take the great 
trials of life to the Burden-Bearer, but also the little things 
that nag and annoy us not less. 

"Oh, what peace we often forfeit! 
Oh, what needless pain we bear! 
All because we do not carry 
Everything to God in prayer/' 

not complaining, but thankful for God's part in them. 

We have seen how many natural occasions for care may 
arise in our daily lives. And the Apostle knew all this; so 
he, as the mouthpiece of the Lord, gives us the recipe for 
losing them. He says, "Be anxious for nothing; hut [instead 
of thatl in everything by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving
, let your requests be made known to God." Constant 
touch with Jehovah, then, is the potion which drives from our 
spiritual systems the germ of care, and makes us sing, though 
in prison. 

As we come to realize him as our Father we shall wish to 
make our requests known to him. As the wisest of fathers he 
deals with us individually according to our several needs. He 
seeks to encourage us to decide for his way, but he never 
coerces us. Sometimes we are rebellious and foolishly insist 
on having our own way; and he lets us have it, only to find 
with godly sorrow that his way had been untellably better. 

In a large family or school many children suffer great 
nervous irritation from the habit of being considered collectively
 instead of individually. Demanding instant and unquestioning
 obedience is also harmful, as coercive restraint 
weakens character. But how long-suffering is the Lord! He 
knows we must eventually do his way if we love the right. 

A child shows the desire to exercise its own reasoning faculties
 by constantly asking, "Why ?" in its attempt to find the 
balance 'between the true and the false. The answer, "Because 
I told you so," may silence, but never satisfies. But how 
kindly are the words of our Father: "Come now, let us 
reason together" — 'Come and tell me what worries you; perhaps
 I can make some suggestions that will help you to see.' 
He gives us real aid ; for he helps us to harmonize submission 
and liberty, to substitute co-operation for obstinacy, and noble 
independence for slavish subserviency. 

TRUE SOURCE OF OUB PEACE 

If something worries us, let us take it to the Master-lVftnd. 
If we are in need, let us make it known to the Giver of every 
good and perfect gift. If then hi3 providence or reason suggest 
that we might properly expect a supplying of our need through 
some other channel than ourselves, it would not be amiss to 
let our request be made known there also — but to him first. 
Turmoil and strife of heart and mind are not conducive to the 
development of the richest character. But great care must be 
exercised in discerning between outward turmoil and that of 
the heart. Only wHen we are habitually losing our anxieties 
in the bosom of him before whose face every perplexity is plain 
as noonday can we have that truest Christian experience of 
the following verse: "And the peace of God, which passeth all 
understanding, shall guard your hearts and minds in Christ 
Jesus." Only in that peace which comes from a consciousness 
of our vital union with God Almighty can we use our powers, 
great or small, to the best advantage. 

Our confidence in him is not merely the blind and heathen 
confidence of the poet who, observing the passage of the waterbird
 across the heavens, said: 

"He who from zone to zone 
Guides through the boundless .sky thy certain flight, 
In the long way that I must tread alone 
Will guide my steps aright." 

That is good; but ours is better. Ours is a warm, sweet 
and personal faith in God, based on his word and on our own 
experience, "so that we can boldly say: The Lord is my 
helper, I shall not fear what man may do unto me" — be it 
Gethsemane, Hall of Judgment, the Way of Tears, or even 
Calvary. 

"Under his wings I am safely abiding, 
Though the night deepens and tempests are wild; 
Still I can trust him. I know he will keep me; 
He hath redeemed me, and I am his child." 


•IF" 


If I can warm with Love some lonely heart, 

Hope's lustre to some listless eye impart; 

If I can make a straight path for the lame, 

Or fan some smoldering Faith to fervent flame; 

If I may help some faltering foot to keep 

The painful, narrow way, though rough and steep; 


If thou, dear Lord, wilt use me, even me, 

To draw some trembling soul more close to thee ; 

If, when the end of all things is at hand, 

My feeble efforts may help one to stand ; 

If I may live to make truth's message plain — 

Ah! then, 'twill ne'er be said, my life was vain. 


GROWING STRONGER 

Luke 2:42-52; 2 Peter 1:5-8. 
[The first 12 paragraphs of this article were reprinted from an article entitled, "Holy, Harmless, Perfect," published 

issue of January 15, 1906, which please see.] 

he might bring everlasting life 


OUR LORD'S CONSECRATION AND BAPTISM 

Being free from sin, our Lord required no justification by 
another; and when he had reached manhood's estate, at the 
age of thirty years, he presented himself wholly, unreservedly, 
to do the Father's will. At the moment of consecration his 
earthly life was yielded up as a sacrifice for the sin of the 
whole world; and this consecration was symbolized by his immersion
 into water at Jordan. The remaining three and onehalf
 years of his life were already on the altar; and he merely 
waited for his sacrifice to be consumed, crying with his last 
breath, "It is finished!" 

Quickly following our Lord's consecration and its symbolization
 came the evidence that his sacrifice was accepted of 
God. We read that the heavens were opened unto him. This 
probably signifies that he was granted a vision of heavenly 
things, an insight into the deeper things of the Scriptures, an 
understanding of the higher things of God's Word. Hitherto 
he had in a measure understood about the lamb that was to be 
led to the slaughter, but saw nothing to identify the one who 
was to be the great deliverer or to explain the wonderful pictures
 in the Scriptures. But just as soon as he was begotten 
of the holy Spirit, he began to see that if he would accomplish 
the great work of blessing all the families of the earth it 
would be by a manifestation of loyalty and of righteousness. 
As soon as' his mind was illuminated he saw the things pertaining
 to the sufferings of the Christ. 

At his consecration at Jordan our Lord agreed to give up 
the human life, all rights and privileges as a human being. 
The ultimate purpose of this full surrender of his life was that 


to mankind*. The Father's 
arrangement with him, however, was such that our Lord might 
retain his personality, his identity. But after he was begotten 
of the holy Spirit, he was a new creature; and as a new 
creature he had his human body in which to develop character 
suitable for the high condition to which his successful accomplishment
 of his mission would lead. The latter part of our 
lesson for today calls to our attention the elements which 
enter into that character and which must be developed by all 
who would attain to membership in the body of Christ. 

GROWTH IN THE FRUITS OP THE SPIRIT 

The matter of cultivating Christian character is not one 
to be accomplished in a few hours or days. It is the work of 
a lifetime, a process of addition, virtue added to virtue, grace 
to grace, and assimilated by the spiritual germ of the new 
nature, until the embryo new creature is formed; and then it 
must continue to develop to completion. 

St. Peter indeed describes a most amiable character. But 
who can meditate upon hi a description without feeling that to 
attain this high eminence will be the work of a lifetime? 
Day by day, if we are faithful, we should realize a measure of 
growth in grace and of development of Christian character. 
We must see to it that we have the truth of God's Word, and 
that it is having its legitimate and designed effect upon out 
lives. And if the truth is thus received into good and honest 
hearts, we have the assurance of the Apostle that we shall 
never fall, but that in due time we shall be received into the 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 


[6278] 


HELPING OTHERS 


[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Who 13 My Neighbor," published in issue of July 1, 1000, whieh please see,] 

QUESTIONS CONCERNING EZEKIEL'S TEMPLE 


Question. — Dues Ezekiel \s Temple represent God's finished 
work only? 

Answer. — It represents both the finished work and the work 
in process. But when we apply the picture to the Gospel age 
the same gate, including the porch, symbolizes the tentative 
and the vitalized justification of the little flock and the great 
company, and the gate up to the porch the tentative justification
 of others of the household of faith. In the Gospel age 
picture the Holy represents the tentative condition of those 
begotten to the divine nature. After each age is over, the 
part of the Temple which had represented a wonc in process 
during that age represents the memory of that same work in 
the mind of God, of Christ and of the beings concerned in the 
work. 

Question. — Does the east gate of the inner court symbolize 
the fact that the members of the great company are developed 
after having been "raised to the spirit condition"? 

Answer. — It depends on the meaning attached to the expression
 "raised to the spirit condition." "Raised" means resurrected
, and is properly figured by the porch of the gate. A 
porch represents vitalization, resurrection, raising to the condition
 of the plane indicated by .the court to which the gate 
belongs. The outer-court north-gate-porch shows the final 
resurrection, or full life, through the process of resurrection, 
which will be gained by the hosts of mankind. Such a resurrection
 requires that all the conditions of obedience be met, 
and they will be met by all the loyal portion of mankind by 
the end of the thousand years, and by many individuals much 
sooner. The porch of the outer gate (east) represents the 
vitalization of tentative justification. For the little flock and 
the great company this takes place, after having met the conditions
 for justification, at the instant of begetting to the 
divine nature in the Holy. The ancient worthies will receive 
the vitalizing, or making alive of their tentative justification, 
at the beginning of the earthly phase of the kingdom of 
heaven, we believe in 1925, having met all the conditions during
 their first earthly lives. — Hebrews 11. 

On the divine plane (the building) and on the spirit plane 
(inner court) the vitalizing, raising, takes place first, in the 
begettal to the divine nature, as showoa in the porch of the 
Temple building. Those begotten to divinity find themselves 
in the Holy, having by the act of consecration unto death 
passed over the threshold — assuming that the consecration was 
accepted. The faithful 144,000 remain in the Holy till death; 
many of them passed into the Most Holy in 1878, following 
the Head, who went in A. D. 33. Those proving more or 
less unfaithful have been put out of the Holy by the million*, 
into the inner court east gate, there to meet all the conditions 
necessary for the birth to the spirit plane, represented by 
passing out of this gate into the inner court. While originally 
begotten to the divine nature, in the porch of the Temple, the 
great company nourish themselves poorly or poorly assimilate 
their spiritual food, the Word of God. This begettal therefore 
not resulting in divinity, they must count themselves as having 
been in the porch of this east gate; for it results in birth to 
the spirit plane, but not to the divine stage of that plane. 

It is after the begettal, the quickening, the raising to sit 
in the heavenlies { Ephesians 2:6) in this life, that those begotten
 to the spirit plane or to the divine plane become overcomers
 (Revelation 7:9), or more than overeomers (Revelation 
3:21), as the case may be. In other words they meet all the 
conditions of the Word of God as represented in the chambers 
of the gate or in the picture-lessons on the walls of the Holy. 
After having been born to the proper plane of being, they will 
grow greatly in knowledge and will forever practice the graces 
of the spirit; but they can never have any further change in 
plane of being, as far as we have any knowledge. — Ezekiel 
48:12, 14. 

Question. — What is signified by Ezekiel 46:24, "The ministers
 of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people"? 

Answer. — These passages from Ezekiel read as follows: 
"After he brought me through the [priests'] entry [S], which 
was at the side of the finner north] gate, into the holy chambers
 [I, I, I, I] of the priests, which looked toward the north; 
and behold there was a place [J, J] on the two sides westward
 [west of the priests* chambers]. Then said he unto me. 
This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass 
offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake the meat 
offering."— Ezekiel 40:19, 20. 

"Then he brought me forth into the utter [outer] court, 
and caused me to paas by the four corners of the court; and 
behold in every corner of the court there was a court [W, W, 


W, W], in the four corners of the [outer] court there were 
courts joined [made with chimneys] of forty cubits long and 
thirty broad : these four corners were of one measure. And 
there was a row of building round about in them, round 
about them four, and it was made with boiling places under 
the rows round about. Then said he unto me, TTiese are the 
places of them that boil, where the ministers [servants. Lovites
, the great company] of the house [the little flock] shall 
boil the sacrifice of the people." — Ezekiel 40:21-24. 

The foregoing refers to an important part of the treatment 
of the private sacrifices made by individuals among the people 
during the year after the day of atonement. The sacrifices of 
the day of atonement typified the "better sacrifices" of Christ 
(Hebrews 9:23), Head and body, during the Gospel age. In a 
general way any sacrifice pictures the consecration, the setting 
apart to divine service of the offerer (Romans 12:1), the 
specific purpose or object being indicated by the peculiar ritual 
of each sacrifice. 

In certain of the private sacrifices of the people the flesh 
of the animal offered was eaten by the priest or by the offerer. 
(Leviticus 7:7, 15) The eating signifies the appropriation of 
the offering by the person or being to whom it was divinely 
ordained that the part eaten should pertain. In a peace offering
 the breast and the shoulder (the best parts) were for the 
priest to eat, the rest of the animal being for the offerer, 
except the part burned. (Leviticus 7:11-18) In a trespass 
offering the part of the animal not burned was for the priests 
to eat. — Leviticus 7:1-6. 

This signifies that in the coming age when an individual 
consecrates or reconsecrates himself his consecration will be 
accepted as made to and belonging to the royal priesthood, 
Christ the great High Priest and the church the under priests. 
This will be proper because Christ bought the world with his 
blood; and for a thousand years everyone will belong to our 
Lord by right of purchase. — Ephesians 1 : 14. 

The flesh of the animal was not fit for eating immediately 
the animal was slain; nor will the consecration by a human 
being of himself be Teady for assimilation by the priesthood 
until something more is done, As before being eaten the flesh 
was washed with water ; so, too, ittfie person consecrating will 
be washed by the water of the Word. His being must be 
cleansed and made to approach closer to the divine standards. 
His new human mind aad will must continually be transformed
 by the renewing of that mind, through the Word of 
God relating to human perfection. — Romans 12:2. 

Even the washing did not finish the preparation of the 
flesh. It was still raw, tough, not tender enough to be eaten 
or assimilated; for the application of cold water did not make 
the flesh tender. The mere learning of the truth, will not 
transform character. Theory alone does not make a good 
workman; practice under difficulty causes the theory to become 
part of the character, the being, and makes the learner a good 
workman. The cold water of the truth touches the outside; 
only when heated to boiling does water penetrate throughout 
the entire substance. The Word of God, the truths destined to 
become a part of the very being, penetrates throughout, and 
thoroughly softens the whole being of the individual, when the 
lessons of the truth are learned and practiced amid fiery trials 
— when symbolical heat (trials) is applied with and through 
the water. — Hebrews 5:8. 

In the Hebrew Tabernacle the flesh was boiled or seethed 
before the door of the Holy. As in the consecration of the 
priesthood, "Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the 
flesh at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation ; and 
there eat it with the bread that is in the basket of consecrations
." (Leviticus 8:31) "And thou shalt take the ram of 
consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place [court]. 
And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and 
the bread that is in the basket, by the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation." — Exodus 29:31, 32, 

The significance is much the same here as in the subsequent
 private sacrifices of the people. In the private sacrifices
 the boiled flesh was *aten by the priest alone, or by 
priest and offerer, typifying the assimilation of that degree 
of human perfection which was signified by the flesh of the 
particular creature sacrificed. In the antitype the degree of 
perfection attained or desired by the offerer will be taught 
him by the royal priesthood — will originate with them, as 
will the character development accompanying the merit of 
Christ applied to and assimilated by the consecrator. 

The receiving of the flesh by the priesthood is from our 
viewpoint the receiving back by the Christ of the mental and 

[6279] (189-190) 


(190- 191) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


moral development of the consecrator, which is but their own; 
for the consecrator will have received it from them. (1 
Corinthians 4:7) Thus will the people acknowledge their dependency
 on the priesthood as the source of all the attainments 
and of the ideals connected with the gaining and the enjoyment 
of human perfection through restitution. They will separate 
themselves to the ownership and control of the royal priesthood
; they will give themselves to the Christ as Lord (owner) 
and Master. (Isaiah 2:3) They will acknowledge their new 
selves, their beings to be transformed by the renewing influences
 of the divine instruction and guidance of the coming 
age, as of the Christ and to and for the Christ, by whose 
merit and through whose ministry they may be made ready to 
be "delivered up to God, even the Father," at the end of the 
thousand years of probation, after which, "when all things 
shall be subdued unto him fthe Son], then shall the Son also* 
himself be subject to him [God] that put all things under 
him [the Son], that God may be all in all." 

Only through sacrifice, trial and suffering can the imperfect
 approach unto God. (Psalm 51:17-19) The imperfections 


DIVINE SANCTUARY 



THE TEMPLE OF EZEKIEL'S VISION 


A — Brazen Altar 
B — Temple Porch and Entrance 
C— The Holy 

D — Entrance Into Most Holy 
E — The Most Holy 
H — Separate Places in Inner Court 
I — Priests' Chambers 
J — Priests' Boiling Places 
K^Weatern Building 


L — Levites' Chambers for Washing 

Burnt Offerings 
M — Singers' Chambers 
N — Porch or Lobby <Jate 
— Inner Threshold of Gate 
P — Six Little Chambers in Gateway 
Q— Entry 
R— Door of Gate 
S — Private Steps for Priests 

[6'280] 


T — Four Tables for Slaying Sacrifices 
U — Inner Wall of Lower Pavement 
V — Thirty Chambers on Lower Pavement
 
W — Levites' Boiling Places 
X — Stairs to Gates 
Y — Stairs to Brazen Altar 
Z — Stairs to Temple Platform 


June 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(191 l?S) 


of the people can be eliminated only through great effort, 
spurred by chastisements; effort against the flesh engenders 
suffering, though finally that suffering emerges into the peace 
and joy of ripened character. (Hebrews 12:9-11) The chastisements
 and the sufferings will be the "boiling" of the flesh — the 
outcome of which will be a character of tenderness, like to the 
mind and character of the divine Christ, and fit to be acknowledged
 by and assimilated as their own by the Christ, Head 
and body. In that way it will be true that "that servant 
which knew his Lord's will and prepared not, neither did 
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But 
he tHat knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, 
shall be beaten with few stripes." (Luke 12:47, 48) Those 
whose natural characters, whose fleshly minds, are tough and 
unassimilable for the priesthood, shall be "boiled" thoroughly 
until they are tender-hearted; but those who are readily responsive
 to the "ministry of reconciliation" will need but littln 
of the trials administered by and through the water of the 
Word of God. 

The eating of the ilesh by the offerer is the thorough assimilation
, by the consecrator, of the new human character ideals 
presented in the restitution teachings. There, too, 'tribulation 
worketh patience; and patience experience; and experience, 
hope; and hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God 
[on the natural plane] is shed abroad in [their] hearts by 
the holy Spirit which is given' (TComans 5:4, 5) ; for all the 


willing and obedient, at least, shall receive of the holy Spirit, 
as says Jehovah, "I will pour my spirit upon all flesh" (Joel 
2:28) in the world-wide blessing, soon to come. 

In the Ezekiel Temple the boiling of that part of the sacrifice
 to be eaten by the offerer was done in one of the boiling 
places in the outer court (W, W, W, W), symbolizing the 
infliction of chastisements on the natural restitution plane. It 
was done by the Levites, symbolizing the fact that of all who 
are on the spirit plane the great company will be the moat 
directly identified with earthly matters. This flesh when 
"boiled" was eaten by the offerer, representing his moral 
assimilation of the ideals presented by the Word of God, touching
 upon human perfection. The flesh belonging to the priesthood
 is boiled in the boiling places (J, J) in the rear of the 
inner court, symbolizing the consecration of the offerer's new 
natural mind/ as sharing in the holy Spirit poured out upon 
all f osh, and symbolizing also the trials which he must endure 
mentally in connection with his chastisements. This boiling 
was done by the priesthood, suggesting that they will exercise 
supervision and direction over the acts of the great company. 
They collectively constitute a 'merciful and faithful priesthood 
in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the 
sins of the people. For in that they themselves have suffered 
[in this life], being tempted [tried to the "uttermost, "boiled"], 
thov are able to succor them that are tempted/ — Hebrews 
2:17, 18. 


THE TRIAL IN BROOKLYN 


The trial of the eight brethren from these headquarters 
was set for the criminal term beginning Monday, June 3, ir> the 
Federal Court of the Eastern District of New York. Affidavits 
had been filed by the eight defendants stating their reasons for 
believing ^that Mr. Justice Garvin was biased against us and 
our work. This action automatically removed him from the 
trial and adverted the case to Mr. Justice Chatfield. He, however
, referred it to a judge specially brought here from Vermont
 — Mr. Justice Howe. 

At this writing, one week of the trial has elapsed, with 
perhaps a little more than half of the testimony presented by 
the prosecution. Our legal counsel, Messrs. Sparks and Fuller, 
are loyally looking out for our interests, and under great 
handicaps, for the government has had three months for preparation
 and our counsel is obliged to prepare as we go along, 


because no disclosures were made in the indictment as to what. 
portions of our literature were objected to. 

It se<ems we have a fair-minded jury, but it is too early to 
be able to discern which way the trial will go. Of one thing 
we are certain: all concerned are perfectly willing to accept 
the Lord's providence in the matter, and rejoice that they are 
accounted worthy to suffer shame for his sake. 


Foreign Agencies .-—British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE
, Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner
 Str., 76 Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building
, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address the SOCIETY in 
every case. 

[Last appearance of this paragraph, which previously 
appeared in every issue since the agencies were formed.] 

