
Moses—A Man of Love



WHAT IS LOVE?
 Love involves deep affection for others. A loving person shows by his words and actions how he feels about those dear to him, even when doing so requires personal sacrifice.








HOW DID MOSES DISPLAY LOVE?
 Moses showed love for God. In what way? Well, recall the words recorded at 1 John 5:3: “This is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments.” Moses lived by that principle. In all that God asked him to do—from an assignment as daunting as confronting mighty Pharaoh to a task as seemingly simple as stretching out his rod over the Red Sea—Moses obeyed. Whether the command was easy to fulfill or difficult, Moses complied. “He did just so.”—Exodus 40:16.
Moses showed love for his fellow Israelites. They recognized that Jehovah was using Moses to guide his people, so they approached Moses with their various problems. We read: “The people kept standing before Moses from the morning till the evening.” (Exodus 18:13-16) Imagine how draining it must have been for Moses to listen—hour after hour—as the Israelites unburdened themselves of their concerns! Yet, Moses was happy to help the people he loved.
Besides listening to them, Moses also prayed for his loved ones. He even prayed for those who had wronged him! For example, when Moses’ sister, Miriam, murmured against Moses, Jehovah struck her with leprosy. Rather than rejoicing over her punishment, Moses immediately interceded for her, praying: “O God, please! Heal her, please!” (Numbers 12:13) What else but love would have caused Moses to offer such a selfless prayer?



WHAT ARE THE LESSONS FOR US?
 We can imitate Moses by cultivating deep love for God. Such love moves us to obey his commands “from the heart.” (Romans 6:17) When we obey Jehovah from our heart, we bring joy to his heart. (Proverbs 27:11) We also benefit ourselves. After all, when we serve God out of genuine love, not only will we do the right things but we will enjoy doing them!—Psalm 100:2.
Another way we can imitate Moses is to cultivate self-sacrificing love for others. When friends or family members approach us with their concerns, love moves us to (1) give them our heartfelt attention; (2) empathize with them, or feel what they feel; and (3) let them know that we care.
Like Moses, we can pray for our loved ones. Sometimes we may feel helpless when they share their problems with us. We might even lament, “I’m sorry that all I can do is pray for you.” But remember: “When a righteous person prays, that prayer carries great power.” (James 5:16, The Kingdom New Testament) Our prayers may actually move Jehovah to do something for the person that He might not otherwise have done. Really, then, what better thing could we do for our loved ones than to pray for them?a
Would you not agree that we can learn much from Moses? Although an ordinary person, he set an extraordinary example of faith, humility, and love. The more closely we imitate his example, the more we benefit both ourselves and others.—Romans 15:4.



In order for God to listen to our prayers, we must sincerely strive to meet his requirements. For more information, see chapter 17 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

