From Our Readers
Comfort for the Sick  Thank you for the series “Comfort for the Sick.” (January 22, 2001) Four years ago I was involved in an accident. Many times I felt that it would have been better if I had died. I have a lot of memory loss and have many troubled days as a result. When I read this series, I was encouraged.
T. M., Japan
Since the age of 15, I have had to cope with painful rheumatoid arthritis. The information helped me to realize that I need to learn to trust more in Jehovah, who is “a stronghold in the day of distress.”—Nahum 1:7.
Y.F.R., Colombia
I am a full-time evangelizer. Shortly after moving to serve in a new area, I learned that I have diabetes. Your description of the vortex of emotions felt by someone with a chronic illness was marvelous! The articles helped me to reconsider my own situation in a more balanced way and to make adjustments in my life.
L. A., Italy
We are not sick, but the principles in the article have helped us a great deal with a problem we are facing. As is so often the case, the magazine was an answer to a specific prayer.
R. P. and L. P., Sri Lanka
A few weeks ago, I was told that I have a carcinoma on my liver. You can imagine the impact that had on me, since I had been healthy up till then. Today I picked up the January 22 issue and devoured the articles. They described all my doubts, thoughts, and emotions but, at the same time, promoted a positive viewpoint.
J. E., Spain
True-Life Experience  I am writing about the touching experience of Bill and Rose Meiners, “Countering Setbacks by Setting Goals.” (January 22, 2001) It is encouraging to learn that they have been persevering for more than half a century. These life stories touch the deepest chords of the heart. I would like Bill and Rose to know that I am praying specifically for them.
V. G., Italy
For those of us who are healthy, this story of a man struggling with his disease for over 50 years was unimaginably inspiring. It helped me appreciate that as a healthy woman, I should hold my health in high esteem and make full use of my life.
P. V., Czech Republic
I have a mother who has been ill for close to 20 years. Right now she is despairing and wonders why she cannot get at least some relief. I read this article to her, but I benefited from it too. Now I understand why she feels depressed most of the time.
G.O.A., Nigeria
Bill and Rose, as well as many others who have to live with serious illness, are so brave! I think we who have it so much easier can learn from their example. Bill and Rose, keep being strong! You are an example to us!
I. S., Germany
Teen Dating  I am 15 years old, and I enjoyed the article “Young People Ask . . . What if My Parents Think I’m Too Young to Date?” (January 22, 2001) Kids at school ask me if I’m gay because I do not date. I’ve usually told them that my parents don’t let me date, but I’ve always wanted to give them a better answer. Having read this article, now I know how to answer their questions. Thank you very much for thinking about us teenagers.
C. G., United States

