Question Box
▪ What should be kept in mind if we want some or all of our assets to go to Jehovah’s organization upon our death?
When humans die, they no longer have control over their material possessions. (Eccl. 9:5, 6) So in advance many execute a will or trust that explains their wishes for distributing their assets. (2 Ki. 20:1) This legal document generally also indicates whom the person wants to serve as the trustee or executor. If the document is not prepared, in many lands the authorities will determine how to distribute the deceased person’s assets. Therefore, if we have specific wishes regarding our assets, such as that some or all go to Jehovah’s organization, it is important that we execute a legal document to stipulate this and that we carefully choose the trustee or executor.
The trustee or executor has a heavy responsibility. Depending on the size of the estate, his assembling and then distributing assets can involve many details and can be time-consuming. In addition, the secular authorities often have guidelines that must be followed. Not everyone who is a member of the congregation would automatically be a good trustee or executor. The person we choose should be someone whom we know to be capable, trustworthy, and willing to follow our wishes.—See the article “The Wisdom and Benefits of Estate Planning,” in the December 8, 1998, issue of Awake!
If You Are Asked to Be a Trustee or Executor: If you are asked whether you would be willing to administer someone’s estate upon their death, first make sure to count the cost and determine prayerfully if you are able to fulfill this responsibility. (Luke 14:28-32) After the person’s death, you will need to inform all who are named as beneficiaries. Then once you have authority to do so, it will be your duty to distribute the assets according to the law and exactly as directed in the will or trust. A trustee or executor should be aware that whether the estate is large or small, liberties should not be taken with the assets. Any bequests to a legal entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses are dedicated funds that belong to Jehovah’s organization.—Luke 16:10; 21:1-4.

