VOL. XXXII DECEMBER 15 No. 24 



A.D. 1911-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

1911-AnnualReport-1911 451 

Facts and Figures Helpful 451 

1912— Views from The Watch Tower 454 

The Outlook is Promising 455 

What Recent Events Foreshadow 455 

The Editor's British Tour 456 

Preparing for the Kingdom 457 

The Very Greatest Prophet 458 

A Savior-A Life-Giver 459 

The Hallelujah Chorus 460 

Consecration in the Temple 460 

"Set for the Fall and Rising Again of 

Many in Israel 461 

What We are to Expect 461 

In Everything Give Thanks (Poem) 462 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 462 

Lecture Announcements 463 

Index to 1911 Watch Tower 464 

page 450 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. 
Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please 
address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4939 : page 450 

A SPECIAL JANUARY NUMBER 

The Pastor Russell Lecture Bureau is the style of a newspaper 
syndicate which handles Brother Russell's weekly sermons. 
This syndicate felt a deep interest in the world tour 
and published a pamphlet descriptive of said tour and containing 
sketches of Brother Russell's younger days, gleaned 
from an article in the National Encyclopedia of American 
Biography, Vol. XII. Several WATCH TOWER readers saw 
the pamphlet, which is about the size of THE WATCH TOWER, 
and they urged that it be made a part of the January 1st 
issue. We have adopted the suggestion, believing that the 
pamphlet would be interesting to all of our readers. The 
value will be enhanced by the printing of the outside cover 
of that issue in colors, thus making that page suitable for 
framing, if desired. 

Additionally, on another of the cover pages, we purpose 
a reproduction of a new and very popular picture of our 
Lord and His Apostles passing through a wheat-field, Jesus 
and Peter in conversation, John following, then James, 
Matthew the Levite and others. We are sure that this picture 
will be greatly prized by every WATCH TOWER reader. To 
avoid the marks of folding, we purpose that they shall be 
rolled and suggest to you great care in cutting the wrapper, 
lest the picture be injured. It is quite a work of art and 
probably could not be purchased in any art store for less than 
fifty cents. 

We trust that our subscribers will be as interested in the 
receiving of the January number as we feel interested in preparing 
it for them. 



YOUR CHURCH CONNECTION REPORTS 

In our issue of October 1 we suggested an appropriate 
answer for such as might inquire respecting our Church 
connections. It is important that we state ourselves truthfully 
and explicitly that we be not misunderstood— that our 
good be not evil-spoken of. Many were greatly pleased with 
our suggestions, yet they prefer not to cut the item from 
their WATCH TOWER and inquire if we cannot provide this 
same matter neatly gotten up in card form. 

The suggestion seems a good one and we have followed 
it, only that we have put the entire matter on one side of 



the card and on the back of the card the synopsis of faith 
found at the top of this page— as to what the Scriptures 
teach. We believe that these cards will be very desirable to 
the friends. We are able to provide them at a very small 
price, postpaid, namely 20c. per 100. 



page 450 

EXTRA TOWERS FOR BEREAN CLASSES 

Some are inquiring, "Could a lower price be made on 
THE WATCH TOWER if sent to Berean Classes in addition to 
those which the same persons subscribe for and get individually? 
The thought is to have THE WATCH TOWER at 
our Class Meeting for use in connection with the Berean 
Studies." 

We are pleased with this suggestion, but would not wish 
it to interfere in any way with the subscription standing in your 
own names. We specially like to have upon our lists the 
names of all who are interested in Present Truth— the 
Harvest Message. For such Berean Classes we will supply 
THE WATCH TOWER at half-price. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family 
listens to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," 
then joins in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA 
text is considered. Hymns for January follow: (1) 34; 
(2) 320; (3) 300; (4) 130; (5) 12; (6) 103; (7) 32; 
(8) 112; (9) 333; (10) 279; (11) 73; (12) 259; (13) 
Vow; (14) 177; (15) 229; (16) 16; (17) 301; (18) 70; 
(19) 135; (20) 325; (21) 191; (22) 87; (23) 109; (24) 
127; (25) 96; (26) 291; (27) 307; (28) 313; (29) 213; 
(30) 91; (31) 260. 



R4934: page 451 

1911 -ANNUAL REPORT- 1911 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 

DEC. 1ST, 1910-DEC. 1ST, 1911. 

SWIFTLY SPEED the years-another has 
gone! But none too swiftly do they fly 
when we reflect that they bring us nearer 
and nearer to our goal— "the hope set before 
us in the Gospel"— "the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son," in which with all the faithful 



of this Age we hope to share, as members of 

"the Bride, the Lamb's Wife," associated 

with Him in His Throne. Yet, while rejoicing 

in the nearness of the Kingdom, another 

thought presents itself— are we ready for it— have 

we the graces of the Holy Spirit shed abroad in our 

hearts? Have we the fruits of the spirit well ripened in 

our characters? The greater our faith the more earnest 

should be our zeal in the race for the prize set before us. 

If by God's grace we discern with clear vision the goal of 

glory, honor and immortality, in association with our Redeemer 

in the glorious work of His Messianic Kingdom 

of a thousand years, what manner of persons ought we to 

be in "all holy living and godliness" while awaiting that 

consummation! 

We are glad to be able to report from our vantage 
point on THE WATCH TOWER that a deep work of grace is 
in progress amongst the readers of this journal. We 
know this from the thousands of letters which come to us, 
as well as through the reports of the Pilgrim brethren and 
from our own personal contact with you at conventions, 
etc. Apparently there has been quite a clearing of the 
spiritual atmosphere within the past two years; some 
whom we loved walk no more with us, yet, strange to say, 
their places have been more than filled; and many who 
have come recently into the light of "present truth" give 
evidence that for a considerable time they have been in 
the school of Christ and learned of Him. In the light of 
"present truth" some of these have made such remarkable 
progress as to startle and abash others who have enjoyed 
the light of the Divine Plan much longer. 

The general effect is stimulating; many are realizing 
the force of what we have long pointed out, namely, that 
while the Divine requirement is not knowledge but grace, 
nevertheless, in Divine providence, the two go hand in 
hand today, the one sealing the heart and the other the intellect. 
The daily Manna text and comments are proving 
helpful in many homes. Many are joining with the Bethel 
Family daily in the use of the same hymn of praise and in 
the reading of the Vow. The numbers who have informed 
us that they have taken the Vow is now close upon 10,000. 
What a wonderful prayer circle— these each remembering 
the others throughout the world. The Berean Studies with 
the printed questions are stimulating thought and are helping 
Bible students to consider deep subjects far more than 
would printed answers. The little classes everywhere are 
finding that they thus make much better progress than ever 
before in the mastication of spiritual food. Increasing 
numbers are following the suggestions offered by one of 
our correspondents— that the reading of eight pages per 
day permits the reading of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES series 
of six volumes in a year. Great blessing is reported; 
truths are kept freshly in mind which otherwise would be 
forgotten or lost. The daily touch with the Scriptures and 
their gracious promises is strengthening and assists in 
repelling the spirit of the world and in entertaining the 



holy spirit of the truth. 

But while this personal work is indispensable, class 
work is progressing also. More and more it is being realized 
that while the Church is indeed commissioned to let 
her light shine before men as a witness— to reprove sin 
and to attract those who are feeling after God— yet this 
is not her only work nor the most important. The Bride 
is to make herself ready, the various members are to build 
one another up under the Headship of Jesus. And more 
and more is it seen that the Divine Plan interweaves for 
our highest welfare. 

Thus while we let our light shine before men, and additionally 
seek to build one another up in the most holy faith 
we are by both of these good works developing ourselves 
personally in the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. 
Thus personal character-building leads us to "forget not the 
assembling of ourselves together as the manner of some is, 
but so much the more as we see the day drawing on." 

R4935 : page 45 1 

Similarly, it leads to volunteering or free-tract distribution, 

to class extension work and to a personal work 

amongst our neighbors and friends, in the sale or the loaning 

of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. So many and so diversified 

are the opportunities of service that every consecrated 

child of God may have a share in the blessed Harvest 

work, however few his talents or opportunities. And 

the zeal for this work to a considerable extent marks our 

love for the Lord and our appreciation of our invitation to 

be associated with Him in the conquest of the great Enemies, 

Sin, Satan, Error. Faint-hearted fighting against 

these implies a lack of love for the Lord, the Truth and 

the brethren— a lack which must be made up if we would 

be counted in amongst the "more than conquerors" who 

will share the Messianic Throne. 

FACTS AND FIGURES HELPFUL 

While we are confident that you will rejoice as you 
read our estimate of the spiritual growth of Bible Students 

R4935 : page 452 

with whom you are so closely in touch, we are sure 
that you will appreciate the corroborative testimony of the 
facts and figures of our annual report. And while you 
read with pleasure of the considerable work accomplished 
by our Society through its Office, through its Pilgrims, 
Colporteurs, and by tons of free literature, etc., do not forget 
your own share in this great harvest work. Do not forget 
the thousands of patient, earnest, self-denying laborers 
whose zeal has been shown to the Lord, to us and to their 
neighbors by their faithful circulation of the free literature, 
and also by the providing of the money wherewith 
the entire campaign under God's providence has been carried 



on. 

Sometimes our carefulness and economy in connection 
with all the details of the work have been reflected upon 
as parsimonious, as a greater degree of economy than the 
Lord would approve. But we reply that Divine economy 
is everywhere shown— nothing goes to waste. Every leaf, 
every flower and every blade of grass, as well as every 
animal, dying, produces a fertilizer or nourishment for 
others. And when our Redeemer multiplied the loaves 
and fishes into an abundance for thousands, He was economical 
enough to direct that the broken fragments should 
be collected, that nothing be lost. Frugality is a new lesson 
to some of the Lord's people, but love will teach it. 
A desire to do good to others will prompt not only economy, 
but self-denial. Many of our readers have surmised 
that the growing donations to the Tract Fund for the 
spread of the Truth implies that there are many rich 
amongst the donors. This is a mistake. It is with us as 
the Lord declared it would be amongst His faithful, "not 
many rich." 

We are glad of the opportunities afforded by these 
earnest reapers to show all the dear friends who have 
contributed to the funds how carefully these have been 
handled— how much work has been accomplished— so much 
more than usual in religious or other enterprises. The 
secret is the love, the zeal of all the workers. Without 
this no such results would be possible. We believe that the 
Lord guided from the very beginning— that no financial 
inducements should be extended to anybody connected with 
the work— that none should have more than comfortable 
necessities— "things decent." The love of money lies 
close to every evil, and money lovers find nothing to attract 
them in our Society's arrangements for any part of 
the world. 

LETTERS RECEIVED AND DISPATCHED 

The importance of the Correspondence Department 
may be judged to some extent by the report below of mail 
received and mail dispatched. We take this opportunity 
to assure our readers that their letters are always very 
welcome— including those which seem to require no special 
answers except THE WATCH TOWER articles twice a month. 
Ordinary letters please direct invariably to the Society to 
insure prompt attention. Occasional changes in the Office 
force might otherwise delay replies. Of course, with the 
considerable development of the work in recent years, the 
Editor has been obliged to give less and less time to the 
correspondence. Nevertheless, if you so desire, important 
doctrinal or business questions may still be addressed to 
the Editor. Such letters will be handled by brethren specially 
deputed to act as his private secretaries. With these 
as with the Editor, communications will be confidential. 
If the questions require, the secretary would communicate 
with the Editor before sending a reply. But remember, 
please, to address all general and business communications 



to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society— to the 
Brooklyn, London or Melbourne address, as may be most 
convenient to you. Where the business relates specially 
to Colporteuring, you may add, "Colporteur Department;" 
where it relates specially to Pilgrim service, you may add 
"Pilgrim Department," and where it relates specially to 
Class Extension work, you may add "Class Extension." 

Total letters received 1911— Brooklyn 128,712 

Total letters dispatched 191 1 -Brooklyn 221,789 

"WATCH TOWER" SUBSCRIPTIONS 

We watch THE WATCH TOWER subscription list with 
keen interest, considering it our very best index to the general 
growth of the work, because all who become truly, 
deeply interested in "present truth" we assume will want 
to be on THE WATCH TOWER list-that they may keep in 
touch with the work as well as with the Truth. Especially 
have we reason to expect this because we continually 
keep before our readers the fact that we are glad to have 
their names there whether they are able to pay their subscription 
or not. All who ask for THE WATCH TOWER 
may have it on credit and will not be held responsible if 
they never pay, or they may have it sent to them free if 
they will request it as the "Lord's poor"— for whom we 
have a specially contributed fund. 

We have felt considerable disappointment that our list 
has grown so slowly— that even now it is not much above 
the thirty thousand mark. True, sometimes the one paper 
supplies several of the interested, but we would rather 
that each one have a copy himself, even though the additional 
copy be on the free list. Specially would we like 
to have the names of all fully consecrated Bible students on 
THE WATCH TOWER list. For various reasons we incline 
to think that our list should be at least double what it is. 

However, we must not forget that long ago, before the 
government made more stringent rules respecting newspaper 
subscriptions, we had names upon our list from 
whom we had heard nothing for years. New postal regulations 
required that addresses be dropped unless subscriptions 
be renewed, either for money or on credit. We encouraged 
the Students everywhere to do what they could 
to help forward this branch of the service because we believe 
that a stimulating and helpful influence is exercised 
by the twice a month visits of our journal. 

THE COLPORTEUR DEPARTMENT 

We have a grand little army of Colporteurs, numbering 
about six hundred faithful bearers of the cross, enduring 
hardness as good soldiers. Although more than half a 
million volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES went into 
the hands of the public during last year, and although this 
is a phenomenal sale for such books, we nevertheless are 
not quite satisfied. We hope that 1912 will show a considerable 



increase. To facilitate this the books are now 
appearing in a new style of binding— still more attractive 
than formerly. And now the sets are put up in paper 
boxes, making them very attractive. Besides, the prices 
have been made uniform for all volumes, and the Colporteurs, 
sharpshooters and classes ordering twenty volumes at 
a time will be supplied any volume, in any language, at sixteen 
cents net. Some who cannot give all of their time to 
colporteuring can give two or three half days of each 
week. Application to the Office will bring to you helpful 
suggestions along the lines of this work which God has so 
greatly blessed in connection with the harvesting of the 
"wheat." 

The total volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES circulated 
in 1911 was 538,783. 

I.B.S.A. BIBLE STUDY CLASS EXTENSION 

During this year our Society recommended a class extension 
work on the part of classes possessed of more talent 
for public work than they required. Any brethren 

R4935 : page 453 

who are thought by the class to be worthy, on Scriptural 

lines of selection, as Elders, whose talents could be spared, 

they were encouraged to send forth to start new classes in 

surrounding villages or wards, as opportunity might offer. 

Full particulars were sent to the classes telling upon what 

terms the Society would be glad to co-operate in this work 

by furnishing free literature for the public announcements 

of these meetings, and occasionally by rendering some assistance, 

financially. The subjoined report shows that little 

financial assistance was called for— the dear friends 

gladly and enthusiastically took hold of the service. We 

hope that the results may be a blessing to some truth hungry. 

Although this work has been under way but a few 

months, the following reports received are very encouraging. 

Number of meetings reported 3,049 

Attendance at meetings 97,898 

Number of copies "Everybody's Paper" 

circulated 1,111,238 

Reported cost of the above $6,927.21 

Amount supplied by the Society 1,1 16.34 

"Everybody's Paper" supplied by the Society Free 

R4936 : page 453 

We encourage the dear brethren possessed of ability 
for public speaking to engage in this Class Extension 
Work rather than to visit and attempt to preach to other 
classes. This latter work we believe can better be done 
by the regular "Pilgrims" sent by the Society in every direction 
in response to requests. It may be urged that the 
Pilgrim visits are not very frequent, and we reply that we 



believe this is all the better for the classes. It gives them 
an opportunity to serve themselves through the Berean 
Studies published in THE TOWER. This stimulates thought 
more than does preaching. Besides it tends to throw responsibility 
upon each little class and thus to draw out or 
develop whatever talent for leadership it may possess. 
Class Extension work is evangelistic and the plan which it 
outlines and which is being followed is bringing good results 
and apparently has the Divine blessing. 

We have noticed with regret that some of the dear Colporteurs 
have left their special work to engage in the 
Class Extension Work. We are sure they meant well, 
but not so sure that they are doing wisely. The Class 
Extension is excellent for those classes which have more 
talent for public speaking than they need— brethren who 
cannot engage in the Colporteuring. For those who have 
time for Colporteuring we still recommend that branch of 
the service as the very best and most useful. All of our 
meetings anyway will be without results, except as we get 
the STUDIES into the hands of the interested, and get them 
to read. One brother and sister, besides Colporteuring, 
usually leave a Class of Bible Students in every town or 
city they serve. They note evidences of interest and call 
back and "water" the seed sown. 

HARVEST WORK IN NEWSPAPERDOM 

Many of our readers appreciate, as we do, the publication 
of our weekly sermons by the secular press. This is 
effected by a newspaper syndicate. The prosperity and 
success of the syndicate depends upon getting sermons 
into numerous papers and keeping them there. We supply 
the sermons to the syndicate free, but, additionally, the 
one thousand papers which it supplies should have every 
encouragement our readers can give them. The number 
of American papers and their circulation is practically the 
same as a year ago, but the number of British papers publishing 
the sermons has greatly increased— to about three 
hundred. The syndicate estimates that thus our sermons 
go weekly to over ten million readers. This is little short 
of a miracle. Never before have sermons reached one-fourth 
this circulation. We are not to deceive ourselves 
into supposing that this number read the sermons, nor 
that all readers are converted to the Truth. We have, 
however, good evidence showing that gradually superstition, 
ignorance and the errors of the Dark Ages expressed 
in our creeds are giving way before the light now shining 
from God's Word. It is our privilege to let our light shine 
before men, witnessing to the Truth whether they hear or 
whether they forbear to hear. 

A GREAT VOLUNTEER WORK 

This year's figures on the Volunteer Work are astounding. 
To those who understand what tract distribution is 
these figures speak of an immense amount of work— carrying 



the Gospel into millions of homes of all denominations 
of Christendom, in all parts of the world, to which 
all other efforts put together are as nothing in comparison 
with our figures, yet they include great institutions with 
powerful financial backing. There is a difference, for 
which there is a reason. And we know what the reason 
is! Ours is the true Gospel of God's Love and Mercy, 
not only for the elect Church but also in due time for the 
non-elect world. Ours is the Gospel of which we are not 
ashamed, and this cannot be said of the other messages of 
bad tidings of great misery which are mis-named the Gospel, 
for the word Gospel signifies good tidings. We hope 
that every reader scanning these figures may have the 
consolation of thinking— I was a volunteer! I shared in 
this work! My labors are represented in the grand totals! 
Well has someone said that to love means to serve— to 
serve the Lord, the Truth, the brethren. 

TRACT DISTRIBUTION FOR 191 1 IN U.S. AND CANADA 

(includes EVERYBODY'S PAPER and PEOPLES PULPIT) 
DEC. 1, 1910-NOV. 1, 1911. 

In the English language (copies) 22,308,582 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 356,101,756 

In the Swedish language (copies) 92,500 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 1,480,000 

In the German language (copies) 25,700 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 422,400 

In the Polish language (copies) 189,500 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 3,032,000 

In the Greek language (copies) 109,200 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 1,747,200 

In the Italian language (copies) 53,500 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 856,000 

In the Hollandish language (copies) 1 1,750 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 124,000 

In the Hungarian language (copies) 7,000 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 224,000 

In the Spanish language (copies) 19,750 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 316,000 

In the Finnish language (copies) 16,500 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 264,000 

In the Norwegian language (copies) 1,000 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 16,000 

In the French language (copies) 2,000 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 20,800 

In the Syrian language (copies) 1,300 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 20,800 

Grand total of tracts 22,838,282 

Grand total in tract pages 364,624,956 

THE YEAR'S FINANCIAL SUMMARY 



The cost of foregoing work, including all the 
expenses of the Office and of the Bethel 

Home maintenance, was $140,729.51 

Last year's deficit 11,901.94 

ADDITIONAL EXPENDITURES IN OTHER LANDS: 

British Branch $23,401.87 

Germany and Holland 4,098.81 

Australasia 2,046.40 

India 1,366.25 

South Africa 904.71 

Sweden 3,462.65 

Jamaica 3,004.42 

Greece 240.00 

R4936 : page 454 

Crete 50.50 

Syria 69.34 

Egypt 115.84 

Cuba 5.00 

Hungary 115.25 

France, Italy and Switzerland 137.67 

Total $39,018.71 

Grand total $191,650.16 

Receipts from "Good Hopes" and other 
sources 169,234.23 

Deficiency or shortage $ 22,415.93 



We doubt not this indebtedness will soon be cancelled; 
nevertheless the fact that it is nearly double the shortage 
of last year cautions us that we must to some extent put 
on the "brakes"; for it is our judgment of the Lord's will 
that we spend money only as it is supplied under His 
Providence. 

PUBLIC PREACHING OF THE TRUTH 

During the year a very successful work has been accomplished 
by the brethren of the Peoples Pulpit Association. 
Every one of them participated and some other 
laborers were from time to time pressed into service as 
the work seemed to require and as the funds seemed to 
permit. Altogether fifty-eight participated in these public 
ministries, setting forth the teachings of the Divine Word. 
Some of these brethren labor during the week in the Correspondence 
Department and otherwise in the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle, and attend to public preaching on Sunday 
only, or chiefly. 

About an equal number have traveled through the 
length and breadth of the United States and Canada, 



holding meetings, both public and semi-public— the latter 

in connection with Classes of the International Bible 

Students Association. These are routed from the Office 

here and all of their expenses are provided. They average 

meetings twice a day every day in the week. Without 

flattery we can say for them that they are able to 

"rightly divide the Word of Truth" and that they are thoroughly 

furnished for their work of helping God's people 

to an understanding of His Message. They make weekly 

reports covering every meeting held and are entirely free 

from family and business cares, and thus are able to say, 

with St. Paul, "This one thing I do"— the preaching of 

"the good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 

people." 

We encourage our readers everywhere to co-operate 
with these dear brethren, whose entire lives are given to 
the Lord and His service. All classes who are prepared to 
supply places for meeting and to provide for the entertainment 
of the speaker are requested to write to us if 
they desire such services for the New Year, giving particulars 

R4937 : page 454 

re the numbers usually attending the Class Meetings 
and whether any public meetings would be undertaken. 
Those unable to provide for the speaker at any of 
their homes should also mention that fact. 

While our Society urges upon the brethren strict 
economy it nevertheless desires them to be suitably dressed 
for their profession as ministers and representatives of 
the Lord and His Message. As for their entertainment it 
is expected or desired merely that it be clean and wholesome 
—nothing elaborate or costly. 

The totals below testify to the zeal of these dear 
brethren and the efficiency and economy of the arrangements 
under which the Society regulates this branch of 
the Harvest Work. We are sure that all of our readers, 
as members of the Society, will greatly rejoice in the 
work in this direction which they have been able to 
achieve during the last twelve months: 

Total number of ministers engaged 58 

" " " cities and towns visited 4,735 

" " " public meetings 3,780 

" attendance 508,900 

Semi-public meetings held 8,333 

Total number in attendance 168,904 

" miles traveled 470,702 



R4937 : page 454 

1912-VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER- 19 12 
WHO CAN TELL what experiences lie just before 



us within the portals of the New Year! 

Ah! 'tis better so; 'tis better that the future 

is open to our Lord alone, and that 

we by faith should trust Him for life's blessings 

and for a measure of the peace which 

passeth all understanding and which the 

world can neither give nor take away. It 

is better, too, that the trials, the difficulties, 

the sharp stones and thorns of the narrow 

way we tread are seen alone by our gracious Care-taker 

who has promised His faithful that all things shall be so 

overruled as to outwork for their highest welfare. 

"My times are in Thy hand; my God, I wish them there." 

But while rejoicing that God knows, not we, what lies 
before us of joy or pain, we may profitably retrospect the 
past year and begin the new one with good resolutions. Indeed, 
the custom of merchants to take an account of stock 
and to map out their business energies at the beginning of 
each new year is evidently a wise one which may be adapted 
to our still more important spiritual interests and activities. 

Looking back upon the activities of 191 1, we are surprised 
at their magnitude, and amazed that the apparently 
wise expenditure of so much money has not produced 
greater results as respects the number of those who have 
publicly acknowledged the opening of the eyes of their 
understanding. One would think that our wonderful message 
of the grace of God shining out as an electric searchlight 
would have aroused much more interest than we see 
manifested. One would suppose that so reasonable and 
gracious and Bible-harmonious a message, so widely delivered 
in this our wonderful day of intelligence and increasing 
liberty from superstition, would have aroused the 
world to a far greater degree than is manifest. 

One lesson taught us by this retrospect is a fresh reminder 
that only he that hath an ear to hear can hear; and 
that the number with hearing ears at the present time must 
be comparatively small. Another lesson is that our work 
must be more particularly in the interest of those who believe 
—the workers. The wonderful opportunities presented 
to these for serving the Truth at the cost of self-sacrifice 
serves to prove their zeal, their loyalty and love for 
God, the brethren and the Truth. A third lesson is that 
the present very widespread circulation of the Truth into 
every nook and corner of civilization implies a general 
"rounding up," to the intent that not one saint in all the 
world shall fail to come into contact with "present 
truth," which, if he be an Israelite indeed, without guile, 
must surely prove attractive to him and thus draw him to 
the feast of fat things which some of us have been enjoying 
for years. Remember the words of the Master, 
"Wheresoever the carcass is there will the eagles be gathered 
together. "-Matt. 24:28. 

Year after year the swing and impetus of the work has 



R4937 : page 455 

increased until, as the report for 191 1 shows, our Society 

is spending nearly $500 per day for the heralding of the 

Good Tidings of Great Joy. True, that sum is little compared 

with the estimation of the value of the Truth to our 

own hearts, and therefore its value to others with whom 

we would desire to share our great blessings of the knowledge 

of Divine Grace. True, our shortage of a year ago, 

as we predicted, was made up by the third of January; but, 

as the report shows, since then our expenditures have exceeded 

the income, leaving a much heavier deficit than 

ever before. We have no doubt whatever that the deficit 

will be wiped out; but the increase in the amount warns us 

that we must curtail expenses— that we are moving too 

rapidly. This was our Society's decision long ago: that 

it would work on a cash basis and avoid any danger of 

insolvency. 

Some months ago we realized that we were going behind, 
and we began to put on the brakes. But the momentum 
was so great and the opportunities for the service 
of the Truth so many, that it has been difficult to know 
just when, where and how much to curtail most wisely in 
the interest of the cause we serve. The Colporteur work 
is self-sustaining, except for foreign editions and "bad 
debts," when some of the dear Colporteurs, through no 
fault of their own, fail to make ends meet. Neither can we 
think of curtailing the Pilgrim service— so valuable has it 
appeared to be. Our curtailment evidently must be along 
the lines of the supply of free literature, and we must withdraw 
our offer to assist in "Class Extension," except in 
the providing of free literature— until we get evened up 
and see that the expenditures do not exceed the income. 
Meantime let our watchword be "faithfulness," not only 
in energy but in frugality. If any have literature laid by, 
unused, let it be brought forward; and let all orders for 
free literature be for no more than can and will be used 
faithfully and judiciously. Perhaps this is a lesson which 
the Lord would have us learn. 

THE OUTLOOK IS PROMISING 

Never has the outlook been more promising than at the 
opening of 1912 A.D. More than twelve hundred newspapers, 
whose combined circulation is probably twelve 
million copies, are carrying the Truth to reading, thinking 
people, especially in country districts. City papers are 
too crowded for sermons; and if they were published, the 
readers would not appreciate them. But the Colporteurs 
are reaching the people in the cities. The increased attractiveness 
of the books, the increased wisdom of the Colporteurs 
in presenting them, the increased intelligence of 
the people and the growing evidence that we are in the 
midst of a change of Dispensation— these are all very 
favorable to the Colporteur work; and some of the dear 
brethren and sisters engaged in this work are not only 



greatly blessed themselves, but are making their work 
more efficient by calling back on the interested and watering 
the seed sown, and starting classes of Berean students. 
Many are having excellent success in selling the entire six 
volumes with one year's subscription to THE WATCH 
TOWER, all for $2.65, the ordinary price for one volume on 
theology. 

There are good evidences both in Great Britain and 
America that 1912 may be our very best year yet, so far 
as the Colporteur work is concerned; and for the volunteering, 
order all the free literature you can wisely use. 
If we find it necessary we will cut down the quantity sent 
you, but not otherwise! Let us hope that 1912 will not 
fall short of 191 1 in the circulation of free literature. 

WHAT RECENT EVENTS FORESHADOW 

The confession of the McNamara brothers has made 
a profound impression on the social world. For several 
years they have been under the pay of $1,000 per month 
to dynamite bridges and buildings with a view to the 
intimidation of capitalists and the assistance of trades-unionism. 
It is claimed that no less than twenty serious 
dynamite explosions have been accomplished through 
them— some say sixty. The most serious of the lot was 
the damage done to the Los Angeles Times building, in 
connection with which twenty-one persons lost their lives. 
It was hard to believe that members of our race could 
be so depraved and still harder to believe what trades-unionists 
claimed, namely, that the explosions have been 
caused by capitalists in order to incite the public mind 
against trades-unionism. Now we have the truth in the 
confession of the McNamaras and the implication of 
various prominent labor leaders. 

The shock to moral sense is tremendous and is sure 
to cause a reactionary sentiment against all trades-unionism 
and socialism. 

The results we anticipate are the drawing closer together 
than ever of capitalism and of all law-and-order 
people. This will mean a practical union of Church and 
State. Everybody not in sympathy with lawlessness will 

R4938 : page 455 

be expected and ultimately required to identify himself 

with the politico-religious arrangement thus inaugurated. 

Those who for any reason attempt to stand free and to 

oppose Churchianity will doubtless be seriously misunderstood 

and make themselves liable to hatred and persecution. 

Thus the readers of this publication, although 

the most staunch defenders of Law and Order and the 

most pronounced opposers of everything like anarchy, may 

yet find themselves branded as opponents to law and order 

—just as Jesus was crucified between two thieves. 

WHAT OUR POSITION SHOULD BE 



The exhortation of the moment is loyalty to God and 
to the Truth, but great moderation and love and wisdom 
in every expression respecting the same. Nevertheless, 
even at the risk of being misunderstood, the true message 
of the Kingdom must be proclaimed by those who 
would be esteemed of the Lord good soldiers of the Cross 
and Ambassadors for God. But let us not forget the 
Master's words, "Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as 
doves." 

The results of the combination will be powerful restraints 
upon everything supposed to effect the present 
social order and the ultimate results will be that this 
weighting down of the safety-valve will bring the great 
explosion of anarchy a little later on, very much as described 
in the volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
explanatory of the Divine prophecies that our Age will 
end with "a Time of Trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation," and that this will usher in the glorious 
Kingdom of Messiah. 

The experience of our British friends in connection 
with the dock-workers' strike and the railway men's strike 
of last September was good. They had read of strikes 
elsewhere, but seemed not to dream of their possibility in 
Britain. The general stagnation of business for a few 
days opened their eyes to the fact that, prolonged a little 
while, it would mean starvation to thousands— so dependent 
are we today upon modern methods of food and fuel 
distribution. The British people seem to realize that a 
mighty struggle between capital and labor is not far distant. 
The working people are boasting that they realize 
their strength as never before, and that the next strike will 
be much more severe than was this one. Capitalists are 
saying, "It must be settled once and for all who is master; 
and next time we will resort to severer measures." This 
determination on both sides is what will make the crisis 
the more severe when it comes. Both sides will be shouting, 

R4938 : page 456 

No quarter! No surrender! The next demonstration 
may be in Germany or in America. 

The proper course for us is to keep close to the Lord, 
maintaining an attitude of humility and justice toward all 
—always counseling peace, never strife. Half a loaf is 
better than no bread. The worst government is better 
than anarchy. To those who expect strikes, etc., we suggest 
the advisability, where financially practical, of keeping 
a full supply of coal and of such staples as oatmeal, 
dried beans, etc. 

However, our special concern should be to abide under 
the shadow of the Almighty, by abiding in His love and 
hence under the assurance that all shall work for our good. 
Then with hearts full of faith and rejoicing that the day 
of redemption draweth nigh, let us use our every opportunity 
for promoting peace and consolation amongst those 



of the world with whom we are in contact. "Blessed are 
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of 
God." As the time of trouble closes in, the "foolish virgin" 
class are to get the oil, the light; and we should be on the 
alert to assist them. Many of the worldly also will then 
be amenable to the Truth who are now deaf to it. Perhaps 
1912 A.D. may be one of our most successful years 
for witnessing. In the meantime let us never forget that 
our main responsibility is in connection with our own 
covenant with the Lord— a covenant of sacrifice— whereby 
we are to make our calling and election sure. "They 
shall be Mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I 
make up My jewels; and I will spare them as a man 
spareth his own son that serveth him."— Malachi 3:17. 



R4938 : page 456 

THE EDITOR'S BRITISH TOUR-PART 2 

THE ATTENDANCE at the meeting held in 

the Royal Albert Hall was estimated at 

three thousand— excellent, indeed, for a 

mid-week religious service in an Auditorium 

not very conveniently located for the 

general public. We had an excellent hearing 

on the topic, "Two Heavens and Two 

Hells." Amongst those who spoke to us 

after the meeting was a Methodist brother, 

who thanked God for what he had heard, 

saying that he accepted the message fully, and that previously 

he had been in danger of drifting into infidelity. 

Another remarked that he came in an unbeliever and departed 

with faith both in God and His Book. We thanked 

God and took courage. 

The London Tabernacle was the center of our activities 
in the world's metropolis. We delivered thirteen 
public addresses there; the attendance and interest were 
excellent. On one or two occasions the Tabernacle was 
overcrowded; even with extra chairs some stood. We 
hope that the dear friends of London and vicinity were 
as much encouraged and spiritually strengthened as we 
were. 

In our previous report of our visit to Scotland, we 
overlooked mention of the meeting at Motherwell Town 
Hall, which was attended by a thousand. Our Scotch 
brethren are very enthusiastic in their love of the Truth 
and in its service. We were most hospitably entertained, 
and brought back greetings to the Bible Students of 
America and everywhere. 

THE GOOD TIDINGS IN WALES 

We visited two of the principal Welsh cities and gave 
two addresses in each. At Cardiff the public address was 



in Park Hall. About fifteen hundred gave most earnest 
attention to what we had to say respecting "The Great 
Hereafter." About the same number were present at the 
public meeting in Swansea at Albert Hall. 

The Welsh friends are a little diffident, but evidently 
warm-hearted and very keen in their love of the Truth 
and in their service of it. They worked hard for both of 
these meetings. The Truth is making good progress in 
Wales, and the brethren are much encouraged. 

HOW THE ENGLISH HEARD 

We visited eleven English cities— outside of London. 
In almost all of these at least two meetings were held— 
one specially advertised to the public. These gatherings 
of the Bible Students were well attended, and in many 
cases were really little conventions of five, ten, fifteen, 
twenty, thirty and forty, who attended from surrounding 
cities and towns. How we enjoyed their fellowship, their 
earnestness, and how we noted their zeal for the Truth 
and the earnest endeavors put forth to make the meetings 
a success! And they were very successful. 

In our previous report we mentioned four English cities 
visited; now we record others:— 

At Reading at the Town Hall about a thousand were 
present— intelligent, attentive, sympathetic hearers. At 
Oxford the Corn Exchange was crowded to its capacity, 
seven hundred, and closest attention was accorded our 
message. At Newport we addressed the public in Phillips' 
Memorial Hall. The audience was estimated at above a 
thousand. They gave the same close attention and showed 
the same keen interest in the argument that was noted in 
preceding meetings. So also it was with the audience at 
Kittering, where Victoria Hall was filled— about seven 
hundred. Next came Nottingham. We spoke in Mechanics' 
Hall to an audience estimated at twelve hundred. We 
had various manifestations of deep interest and sympathy 
here also. In Sheffield the public service was at Albert 
Hall. It was well filled; the audience, approximately 
eighteen hundred, gave us undivided attention and evidenced 
much interest. At Leicester we addressed the 
public in Corn Exchange. Nearly a thousand were present, 
and from the sympathetic looks and occasional applause 
we feel sure that many of our hearers caught 
views of the Hereafter which will help them in future 
days in their battle against infidelity, doubt, fear, the 
world, the flesh and the Devil. 

On Friday, Nov. 17, at the London Tabernacle, our 
visit concluded. We bade the friends goodby, exhorting 
them to be of good courage and be faithful unto death. 
We spoke from the Apostle's words, which indicate that 
although our lives and message are an odor of death unto 
death to those who are in darkness, they are an odor of 
life unto life to the children of light, and to God a sweet 
odor in the Anointed One. Although the meeting was 
not advertised about eight hundred were present. The 



next day about thirty met us again at the railway platform, 
where we took the boat train. 

Surely we were greatly privileged of the Lord in connection 
with this British visit. The Lord alone knows to 
what extent it has stimulated and encouraged the faithful, 
or enlightened some of His faithful who previously 
sat in darkness. We leave the results with Him, thankful 
for the privilege of knowing the Truth and for the joy 
of being permitted to serve Him in this or in any manner. 
We felt, and endeavored everywhere to impress upon the 
dear friends the thought that the Truth is not ours; that 
it is God's, and therefore belongs to all who are His, and 
that it is a great privilege to be His ambassadors and 

R4939 : page 457 

mouthpieces in making it known to all who have hearing 
ears. Hence we properly ascribe all the glory to Him, 
from whom cometh every good and perfect gift, our 
Father in Heaven, and to Him through whom these gifts 
come to us, namely, our Lord and Redeemer, Jesus. 

A summary of our tour shows twenty-four cities visited, 
fifty-five public meetings held, forty-four thousand 
hearers and over a million papers and pamphlets distributed 
free. The dear friends in every place displayed 
great energy and devotion in connection with the meetings, 
arrangements and announcements. 

Our homeward journey was uneventful. The ocean 
voyage furnishes excellent opportunity for our literary 
work. 



R4939 : page 457 

PREPARING FOR THE KINGDOM 

-LUKE 1:5-23. -JANUARY 1 .- 

"Without faith it is impossible 
to please God."— Hebrews 11:6. 

OUR BEREAN STUDY course for the year 
has been mapped out by the International 
Committee. It constitutes a very thorough 
investigation of our Lord's earthly life, 
from His birth to His ascension. Today's 
study very appropriately calls for investigation 
of God's dealings and promises up to 
the birth of John the Baptist, the Redeemer's 
forerunner and herald. 

Four thousand years before the birth of 
Jesus, God declared that the Seed of the woman would 
bruise the Serpent's head. This dark saying we now see 
signifies that sin with all its work of havoc in the world 
is to be offset and destroyed in due time and that the 



power of God to this end will operate through a wonderful 
Son of the disobedient Eve. Centuries passed with no 
sign of a fulfilment of this promise. Our race became 
more degraded and lapsed more and more into unbelief. 
Then Enoch was born, of the line of Seth. "He walked 
with God" and was used as a Divine mouthpiece to give 
a further prophecy, saying, "Behold, the Lord cometh with 
myriads of His holy ones, to execute judgment (justice) 
in the earth."— Jude 14,15. 

Another thousand years elapsed before God made any 
further suggestion of His benevolent intention of giving 
the world a fresh trial or judgment. Then to Abraham, 
the friend of God, He made known more fully still the 
hope of the world— the Gospel. God declared to Abraham 
His intention to bless all the families of the earth, 
and secondly, that this blessing upon mankind would come 
to them through Abraham's posterity: "In thee and in 
thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed."— 
Gen. 12:3. 

This statement to Abraham, St. Paul pronounces the 
first Gospel message, because the other statements were 
so vague as not to make certain human recovery. Sin and 
the Serpent might have been destroyed without the seed 
of the woman being specially blessed, and the judging of 
mankind mentioned by Saint Enoch implied, but did not 
positively say, that human blessing would result. The 
message to Abraham, however, was explicit— "All the 
families of the earth shall be blessed." See Gal. 3:8. 

St. Paul reminds us that God not only declared His 
coming blessing, but that He made oath to the same. God's 
oath was not necessary to Abraham. He confidently believed; 
but, as St. Paul said, the oath was for our sake. 
The fulfilment of the promise would be so long deferred 
that we, who are so specially interested in it, might have 
feared some change in the Divine Program. St. Paul assures 
us that the oath was in order that, "by two immutable 
things (God's Word and God's oath), we might have 
strong consolation (we, the Church), who have fled for 
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us (in 'the 
good tidings', the promise), which hope we have as an 
anchor to our souls, sure and steadfast, within the veil, 
whither our Forerunner has for us entered." (Hebrews 6:18-20.) 
We see, then, by the Apostle's words, that the 
Abrahamic promise or Covenant has not yet been fulfilled 
—it is still an anchor for our faith. 

SEEKING ABRAHAM'S SEED 

Ishmael was not the heir of the promise, but Isaac 
was; Esau was not, but Jacob was. Finally, all of Jacob's 
family were accepted as Abraham's seed, and in due time 
they were all baptized into Moses in the sea and the cloud 
and became heirs of the promise, on condition that they 
would keep the Law given at Mt. Sinai. Obedience to the 
requirements of that Law would give them eternal life, 
and forthwith the approved ones would be God's agents 



in fulfilling the promise— in "blessing all the families of 
the earth." 

But, imperfect like all the remainder of our race under 
the death sentence, the Israelites were unable to keep the 
perfect Law of God; hence they all died, like the remainder 
of the race— because they were sinners. As Jesus 
said, none of you keepeth the Law; as St. Paul said, "By 
the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in God's 
sight." Nevertheless, the endeavor of the Jews to obey 
their Law brought a great blessing upon them; though 
some were hypocritical and said prayers, not from the 
heart, others were "Israelites indeed in whom was no 
guile." 

The heart-loyalty of the "Israelites indeed" God appreciated, 
and they were granted the privilege at Pentecost of 
stepping from the house of Moses, as faithful servants, 
into the house of Christ, as faithful sons. (Heb. 2:5,6.) 
"To as many as received Him (Jesus), to these gave He 
liberty to become sons of God." (John 1:12.) They 
were accepted into this sonship after Jesus had laid down 
His life sacrificially, had been raised from the dead to the 
divine nature, and had ascended far above angels, principalities 
and powers to God's right hand of favor and 
had appeared as the Advocate for all "Israelites indeed," 
all willing to walk in His steps. 

OTHER GRACIOUS PROMISES 

All of God's promises were to Abraham and his seed 
(his natural seed primarily). Consequently all through 
the Jewish Age, while they as a people were trying to 
commend themselves as worthy to be the Seed of Abraham, 
by endeavoring to keep the Law, God spoke to them 
prophetically. He informed them that it was His intention 
ultimately to make a New Covenant with them, still 
better than the one which Moses mediated. Under that 
New Covenant He would take away their sins and iniquities; 
but He did not tell them how these would be cancelled; 
that they would be cancelled through the merit of 
"better sacrifices" than those which they offered through 
the Law year by year. 

God assured them that this New Covenant would have 
a Mediator who would be higher than Moses. Of that 
Mediator Moses prophesied, saying, "A Prophet shall the 

R4940 : page 458 

Lord your God raise up unto you from amongst your 
brethren, like unto me (I am a type of Him); Him shall 
ye hear in all things— and whosoever will not obey that 
Prophet shall be destroyed." (Acts 3:23.) That greater 
Mediator would be the One by whom they would be really 
helped up to a place where they could keep the Divine Law 
perfectly and be used of God in blessing all the earth. 
-Jer. 31:31. 
How the Israelites longed thereafter for the New 



Covenant with the better Mediator, whom they styled 

Messiah, or the Anointed of God! Hearken again to 

God's message respecting this glorious Messiah, the Mediator 

of the New Covenant; He says, "Behold, I send you 

the Messenger of the Covenant, whom you delight in (the 

One whom you have been so long praying for, the One 

through whose assistance you will be enabled to keep My 

Law and to become My agents in the instruction and blessing 

of the world); but who may abide the day of His 

coming and who shall stand when He appeareth, for He is 

like fuller's soap and a refiner's fire? And He shall sit to 

refine the sons of Levi that they may offer an acceptable 

sacrifice."— Malac hi 3:1-3. 

Thus the Israelites had the precious promise respecting 
the coming of the Messiah— and not only so, but intimations 
that there would be special trials and difficulties on 
those living at that time. Naturally every mother amongst 
the Israelites longed for the birth of a son, hoping that she 
might be honored as the parent of the Seed of the woman, 
who would bruise the Serpent's head— the great One of 
Abraham's seed through whom, by some unknown arrangement 
or process, a great blessing would come upon the 
sons of Levi, upon Israel and through these upon all the 
nations of the earth. 

These promises led up to and culminated in the birth 
of John the Baptist, the incidents of which constitute the 
study of today. He was not to be Messiah, but His herald. 
He was not born of a miraculous conception of the 
Holy Spirit and without human father, but He was announced 
by a special messenger of God, as our lesson 
most beautifully tells. If Zacharias' faith was tested, it 
was found strong and was assisted by his nine-months' 
experience of dumbness. Thus did God prepare the way 
before sending His only begotten Son to be man's 
Redeemer. 



R4940 : page 458 

THE VERY GREATEST PROPHET 

-LUKE l:57-80-JANUARY 14.- 

"Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for He 
hath visited and redeemed His people."— V. 68. 

OF JOHN THE BAPTIST Jesus declared, 

"Verily I say unto you, of those born of 

women there hath not risen a greater 

Prophet than John the Baptist; and yet I 

say unto you that the least in the Kingdom 

of God is greater than he." (Luke 7:28.) 

These words are valuable as showing us 

that John was the last of the Prophets announcing 

the coming of Messiah and the 



beginning of the great work of selecting 

from amongst sinners a loyal class, to be associates with 

the Redeemer in His Messianic Kingdom and glory. John 

could not be of the Kingdom class. His grand work terminated 

before the Redeemer's sacrifice was finished— 

before Pentecostal blessings came accepting some as joint-heirs 

with Christ in His Kingdom. John himself seemed 

to understand this, for he declared, "He that hath the 

Bride is the Bridegroom," but I am the Bridegroom's 

friend and rejoice to hear His voice.— John 3:29. 

JOHN-'THE FAVOR OF GOD" 

In harmony with the message of the Angel Gabriel, 
John the Baptist was born. On his eighth day he was 
circumcised and named. The family relatives urged the 
name of his father, but the father and mother named him 
John, and immediately Zacharias' dumbness departed. His 
faith had been helped. He had triumphed over all doubts 
and manifested this by giving the name mentioned by Gabriel. 
The name John has a beautiful signification— "The 
favor of God." 

As a man John was peculiar in that he had no other 
aim or object in life than to be God's messenger— to proclaim 
His Anointed One and to prepare the people for the 
trying experiences and character-test which Malachi had 
declared would come with the revealment of Messiah, who 
would "sit as a Refiner, to purify the sons of Levi, that 
they might offer to God an acceptable sacrifice." So it 
was that John in his ministry declared, "The Kingdom of 
God is at hand." Believe the good news. Repent, reform. 
Get ready for a share in that Kingdom. 

The trials came in a way not expected. Messiah was 
not born an heir to earthly wealth or name or fame, and 
His experiences as well as His teachings were different 
from any that the Doctors of the Law had anticipated. 
The opposition of sinners and Jesus' opposition to the errors 
and hypocrisies of His time produced a burning 
which had a refining effect upon some and made of them 
antitypical Levites, consecrated people, many of whom 
became antitypical priests, presenting their bodies living 
sacrifices, walking in the footsteps of the Redeemer. 

THE PROPHECY OF ZACHARIAS 

St. Peter distinctly tells us respecting the Old Testament 
Prophets, that "Holy men of old spake and wrote 
as they were moved by the Holy Spirit." He intimates 
that frequently they uttered deeper and broader truths 
than they themselves comprehended— truths which only 
the future would fully reveal. This is true of the prophecy 
of Zacharias, in this lesson. Verses 68-70 constitute the 
first division of this prophecy; praise to God, the Fountain 
of every good and perfect gift, comes first. To Him 
all honor and praise are to be given for the fulfilment of 
His gracious promises of old, "for He hath visited and 



brought redemption to His people; He hath raised up a 

horn of salvation for us in the house of His servant David," 

in harmony with the promises. Here, after the 

usual manner of prophecies, the thing about to be accomplished 

is spoken of as though it had been done. 

As John the Baptist was born but six months before 
Jesus, it follows that the begetting of Jesus had already 
taken place at the time of this prophecy. The Holy Spirit 
spoke of the things begun, but not yet accomplished, as 
though finished: "He hath visited and brought redemption 
for His people." This word redemption applies not 
only to the redeeming work accomplished by Jesus in the 
consecration of His life at baptism and down to the completion 
of His sacrifice at Calvary, but it is comprehensive 
enough to take in the entire work of reclaiming humanity. 

A small section of our race, the "elect," is being reclaimed 
during this Gospel Age; but the Scriptures assure 
us that the Messianic reign of a thousand years will all 
be for the purpose of redeeming or bringing back from 
the power of sin and death Adam and so many of his children 
as shall be willing to accept the Divine favor, when 

R4940 : page 459 

brought to their knowledge. The import, therefore, of 
this first strophe or section of the poetic prophecy is, The 
Lord be praised that the time has come beginning the 
great blessing which He long ago promised. 

DELIVERANCE FROM ENEMIES 

The second section or strophe of this prophetic poem 
runs from verse 71 to 75. It relates to the deliverance of 
God's people from the power of their enemies. One important 
thought here is that none but God's people will 
ever be delivered from the enemies here referred to. However, 
there have been many in the past, as there are at 
present, enemies through wicked works— not because of 
intentional wickedness, but because blinded by the god of 
this world, the deceitfulness of riches, the weaknesses of 
their fallen flesh, etc. 

During Messiah's reign of a thousand years, when all 
the blind eyes will be opened and all the deaf ears will be 
unstopped, and when the knowledge of the glory of God's 
character will be clearly revealed and the horribleness of 
sin be fully manifested— then many, now led captive by 
Satan at his will, will bow the knee to Emmanuel and confess 
to the glory of God. In other words, as Jesus said, 
His consecrated followers are His "little flock" of the 
present time. But during His glorious reign He will 
gather another flock. As He said, "Other sheep I have 
which are not of this fold— them also I must bring, that 
there may be one fold and one Shepherd."— John 10:16. 

"One fold and one Shepherd" does not signify that all 
of the sheep will be of the same nature. On the contrary, 
the Apostle tells us that God's Plan is ultimately to "gather 



together under one Head (Shepherd) all things, both in 
heaven and in earth." (Ephesians 1:10.) Of these "all 
things" the Church, the Bride, will be chief, on the plane 
of divine nature. The Great Company, cherubim and angels 
will follow in order, and redeemed and restored mankind 
in human perfection will be the lowest order in the 
Divine fold. 

St. Paul tells us about the enemies from whom ultimately 
all of God's people shall be delivered. Satan is an 
enemy. He shall be bound for a thousand years and ultimately 
shall be destroyed. Sin is an enemy, which will 
be stamped out in its various phases during Messiah's 
Kingdom. And we read, "The last enemy that shall be 

R4941 : page 459 

destroyed is death"— and with it will go the tomb. Adamic 
death will be no more. None will be under its power. 
The resurrection power will release all. Only those who 
sin wilfully, deliberately, will die the Second Death, which 
is not an enemy. 

THE PREPARATORY WORK 

The third section or strophe of this prophetic poem 
tells us of a work to be accomplished before the grand 
consummation of the destruction of all enemies and the 
lifting up of all accounted worthy to be sons of God. This 
is recorded in verses 76-79. It tells how John the Baptist 
would be the forerunner of the Lord's special Servant, 
Jesus, to pave the way for His great work. That great 
work would be to give the knowledge of salvation to 
thousands who were already God's people, to show them 
the "high calling" of this present Age. Thus in God's tender 
mercy the Church sees and is enlightened by the 
"Morning Star" or "Day Star" before the Sun of Righteousness 
arises to scatter the darkness of mankind during 
Messiah's reign. This lesser light of the present time 
shines into the hearts of believers with sanctifying power 
and sets them afire with zeal for the Truth. They in turn 
shine forth upon those who are sitting in the shadow of 
death. This "Day Star" guides the feet of the saints in 
the way of peace, even while still in the time of trouble 
and before the New Dispensation is ushered in. 



R4941 : page 459 

A SAVIOR-A LIFE-GIVER 

-LUKE 2:l-20-JANUARY 21.- 

"For unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Savior, which is Christ, the Lord." 



TODAY'S STUDY is a most interesting one, 

relating to the birth of Jesus. The Scriptures 

are most careful to point out to us that 

He was not begotten after the usual manner 

—that He had no earthly father, but was 

begotten by the Holy Spirit. The necessity 

for this is manifest. The father is the 

life-giver, the mother is the nourisher of 

the offspring. If Jesus had received His 

life from a human father it would have 

been tainted, impaired, under condemnation of death, as 

is that of all others. This would have frustrated any 

work on His part as the world's Redeemer, because no 

imperfect man could have redeemed a perfect one, as the 

Psalmist declares— Psa. 49:7. 

In order for Jesus to be able to give His life a redemption 
price for Father Adam's life (and for the life of his 
race, forfeited by disobedience), it was necessary that He 
be perfect, sinless; as we read, "He was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners." And again, "A body 
hast Thou prepared Me," for the suffering of death. 

It is not enough, then, that we recognize Jesus as good, 
well-intentioned in mind. We must see in Him human 
perfection, sufficient as a sacrifice to offset the forfeited 
life of the first perfect man, Adam. And we must see 
also that He was begotten from above— that the holy 
spark of life in Him as the babe was a transferred life-principle 
from a pre-existent condition, mentioned by our 
Lord when He prayed, "Glorify Thou Me with the glory 
that I had with Thee before the world was." St. Paul 
explains to us that "He was rich and for our sakes became 
poor, that we through His poverty might be made rich." 

FOR OUR SAKES HE BECAME POOR 

Few babes in all Judea or in all the world were born 
in a more humble place than Jesus. Joseph and Mary had 
gone to their native city, Bethlehem, for tax registration, 
under the imperial edict. The little city was crowded with 
others on similar errand. And so it came that Jesus was 
born in a cattle stall, where Joseph and Mary had been 
compelled to lodge for the night. Ah! we cannot wonder 
that it is difficult for many to understand why our Heavenly 
Father sent forth His Son for our redemption under 
such ignominious conditions! Only those who have the 
spirit of the Divine Plan, through the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit, can see the wherefore. 

FEAR NOTJ-GOOD TIDINGS-GREAT JOY-ALL PEOPLE 

The Message of the angels was surely an inspired one, 
fully in harmony with God's promise to Abraham— only 
an enlarged statement of the same— the same "all people" 
to be blessed— and it was still good tidings and it still 
meant great joy; but now, two thousand years later, the 
Message pointed out the very Individual through whom 



the good tidings would have fulfilment— the Babe of Bethlehem. 

The angelic announcement, "Fear not," is interesting. 
All humanity realize that they are sinners and naturally 
have forebodings. They find it difficult to believe that 

R4941 : page 460 

God is really gracious and loving. The gods of the heathen 
nations are ferocious, unloving and unlovable. But the 
God of all Grace, the Father of Mercies, is a God of Love, 
who delights to use His Divine power for the blessing and 
uplifting of His erring children. Therefore He was peculiar 
in sending the Message of "good tidings of great joy 
unto all people," as well as in sending His Only Begotten 
Son at great cost to be man's Redeemer— that He might 
be just and still be the Justifier of those who believe.— 
Rom. 3:26. 

The Message declared that a Savior had been born— 
the Anointed, the Lord. He was to be the antitypical 
Moses, the antitypical Aaron, the antitypical Melchisedec, 
the antitypical David. In addition to the qualities pictured 
in these various typical characters, He was, also, the Son 
of the Highest. He was to be the Savior— the Deliverer 
—the Mediator of the New Covenant, so long looked for, 
hoped for, prayed for. 

There is a special force or meaning in this word Savior 
—it signifies life-giver. The Syriac version is the one in 
which Savior is translated life-giver; and Syriac was, 
likely, the language spoken by Jesus and others of Palestine 
at that time. And is there not a special fitness or appropriateness 
in this name life-giver? What had man lost and 
what would he wish to have back? The Scriptures answer 
that Adam lost life and came under the penalty, "Dying, 
thou shalt die." He did not lose heaven, for he never possessed 
it. He lost earthly life, an Eden home, human perfection. 
And Jesus declared that He "came to seek and to 
recover that which was lost."— Matt. 18:11. 

R4942 : page 460 

Hence, as we have seen, He was provided with a perfect, 
human life, that "He by the grace of God might taste 
death for every man," and that by thus suffering, the Just 
for the unjust, the penalty of the sinner, He might become 
the purchaser or the Redeemer of Adam and all his race, 
with a full right to restore to perfect life and to all that 
was lost as many as would receive it at His hand— thankfully. 
Throughout His entire Messianic reign of a thousand 
years He will be the world's Life-Giver, raising the 
willing and obedient up out of sin and death conditions to 
perfection and everlasting life and earthly, human blessings. 

But our Lord also does a work for the Church, the 
"elect," His bride and joint-heir in the Kingdom, and 
this blessing to the Church begins before the setting up of 
His Kingdom. The Church "are by nature children of 
wrath even as others," but they are not to be restored to 



what was lost. The offer to them is that they shall become 

copies of the Redeemer and lay down their lives, walking 

in His footsteps, and that He will make up for all their deficiencies 

and that thus the Father of Mercies will bring 

them like their Lord to the divine nature, will assist them 

in making their "calling and election sure" to the heavenly 

state which God has promised them, for "if we suffer with 

Him, we shall also reign with Him; if we die with Him, 

we shall also live with Him."— 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

THE HALLELUJAH CHORUS 

In verse 14 we have a kind of Hallelujah chorus or 
angelic response to the Message of the angel already given. 
A heavenly host sang, "Glory to God in the highest, and 
on earth peace, good will toward men." How grand! 
How inspiring! But we see not yet this glorious condition 
achieved. The proper glory to God is not yet rendered 
on earth as it is in heaven. Nor does peace yet wave 
her banner, even over so-called Christendom. 

What is the matter? Ah, said the Apostle, that is a secret, 
a mystery, hidden from past Ages and Dispensations! 
The mystery is that God not only intends to have Jesus 
for His Anointed One, to rule and bless the world, but He 
has foreordained also a company of footstep followers to 
be with Him and share His work, and this entire Gospel 
Age has been devoted to the work of selecting this class, 
variously called the Body of Christ and the "espoused virgin," 
which eventually, at the Second Coming of the Lord, 
is to become "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife" and joint-heir. 

It is for this that the Apostle declares that the whole 
creation groans and travails in pain until now— waiting 
for the manifestation of the Sons of God— the revelation 
of Jesus and His Bride in the glory of the Kingdom for 
the blessing of natural Israel and all the families of the 
earth with knowledge and assistance, that the willing and 
obedient may be recovered to the image and likeness of 
God and to everlasting life. 



R4942 : page 460 

CONSECRATION IN THE TEMPLE 

-LUKE 2:22-39.-JANUARY 28.- 

"For mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast 
prepared before the face of all people."— Vs. 30,31. 

WHEN JESUS was forty days old, Joseph and 
Mary took Him to Jerusalem and presented 
Him in consecration in the Temple. This 
was in accordance with the custom which 
related specially to the first-born in each 
family. Although the first-born of the entire 



nation were passed over at the deliverance 

from Egypt, they had been exchanged 

for the one tribe of Levi, which had been 

specially devoted to God's service; nevertheless, 

the same principle was exemplified in respect to 

the first-born of each mother. It was to be devoted specially 

to God and His service. 

The significance of this we see when we remember 
that the elect Church, being gathered during this Gospel 
Age, is styled the Church of the First-borns. Again, St. 
James tells us that we are "a kind of first-fruits unto God 
of His creatures." The clear intimation of all this is that 
after the Church shall have been gathered to heavenly 
glory by the power of the First Resurrection, the Kingdom 
then to be established will bring blessings to all the 
families of the earth, giving them also the opportunity of 
becoming sons of God, on the earthly plane, by restitution 
processes.— Acts 3:19-21. 

Incidentally we remark that it is the custom of some 
parents to make a formal consecration of their children to 
God in the presence of believers. The influence upon the 
children cannot be other than beneficial, as in future days 
they shall look back and realize the parental care and love 
and devotion thus manifested in the giving of the very 
best they possessed to the Lord (the fruit of their bodies). 
Doubtless very many children will thus experience a beneficial 
influence upon their minds as respects their own 
consecration to their Creator. 

Furthermore, we believe that the parents who thus give 
their best to the Lord are really bringing to themselves 
great blessings. Trials and difficulties are sure to come, 
but in all of these their children belong to God. And if 
they can pray, Thy will be done, then they may have a 
peace and receive a joy in the Spirit which others cannot 
know. Of course, this does not take the place of the 
child's personal consecration when it reaches the age of 
discretion and judgment, but we believe that the blessed 
influence will be helpful to the child in mature years, assisting 

R4942: page 461 

to a right decision for God, for Truth and for 
righteousness. 

At the time of the consecration ceremony at the Temple, 
an aged Prophet came forward and took the babe 
Jesus in his arms and praised God. The record is that in 
some manner God had revealed to him that the accomplishment 
of the gracious promises made to Abraham was 
nigh, and that he should not die until he had seen the Deliverer 
of Israel. By some power Divine this aged 
Prophet recognized Jesus, and, after saying, "Now lettest 
Thou Thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen 
Thy salvation"— the way in which Thy salvation shall 
come to Israel and to all the families of the earth— he proceeded 
to say, "which Thou hast prepared in the presence 
of all people— the Light of the world and the Glory of 



Thy people Israel." 

"SET FOR THE FALL AND RISING AGAIN OF MANY IN 
ISRAEL" 

Simeon, addressing Mary, declared prophetically that 
the Child was "set for the fall and the rising of many in 
Israel, and for a sign [mark or standard], which shall be 
spoken against, that the thoughts of many hearts may be 
revealed." How wonderful a prophecy! It reminds us 
of the words of St. Paul, that our Lord is "a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offence" to many in Israel, that 
many stumbled, being disappointed. And St. Paul told 
also of the rising again of many who stumbled. He declares, 
"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for, 
but the election hath obtained it and the rest were blinded" 
—stumbled— turned aside from Divine favor. (Rom. 11:7.) 
Nevertheless he assures us that as soon as "the 
elect," the Church of Christ, shall have been completed, 
by the power of the First Resurrection, then Divine favor 
shall return to natural Israel, through Elect Spiritual 
Israel: "They shall obtain mercy through your mercy." 
—Romans 11:25-33. 

Not a sufficient number of "Israelites indeed" were 
found to complete the foreordained elect, and hence the invitation 
went beyond Abraham's natural seed to gather 
during this Gospel Age the saintly of every nation, people, 
kindred and tongue. These must all be found before the 
blessings shall go to Israel and to the remainder of our 
race, offering to them restitution and human perfection. 

A saintly woman, Anna, a Prophetess, over a century 
old, resided in Jerusalem and in the precincts of the Temple 
courts. She, also, moved by the Holy Spirit, recognized 
the Babe and gave praise to God and mentioned 
the matter to the saintly ones who were waiting for the 
fulfilment of the Abrahamic promise— "for the consolation 
of Israel." 

If the seeing of Jesus as a babe was worthy of praise 
and thanks, still more was it a cause of gratitude to God 
for those who beheld Him at the age of thirty, consecrating 
Himself a living sacrifice even unto death, and who 
realized that He had been begotten again by the Holy 
Spirit to be a New Creature, of the divine nature. Those 
who saw the Master's faithfulness in performing the sacrifice 
of His consecration during the three and a half 
years of His ministry beheld still more for which to give 
God praise. And when He had finished His course at 
Calvary and was raised from the dead the third day, and 
forty days later ascended up on high where He was before, 
happy were they who recognized that further development 
of the Divine Plan for man's salvation— the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. 

Still more blessed were those who at Pentecost received 
the Holy Spirit as a begetting power and those 
who since have received the same, evidencing that they 
are the children of God, and, "if children, then heirs of 



God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ" their Lord to the 
great inheritance— to the oath-bound promise made to 
Abraham, that through them all the families of the earth 
shall be blessed. 

THE FALL AND RISING AGAIN 

The entire nation of Israel stumbled over Jesus, failing 
to recognize Him as the Sent of God— except the comparatively 
few who became His disciples— probably ten or fifteen 
thousand, according to the records. Of the nation 
in general the Prophet Isaiah declared, "They shall fall 
backward and be snared and taken." St. Paul, quoting 
Isaiah's prophecy, proceeds to show the recovery of Israel 
to Divine favor as soon as the elect class of this Gospel 
Age shall have been completed from amongst all nations. 
Then will come the time for Israel's rising again to Divine 
favor. -Isa. 8:15; Rom. 11:9-11. 

Continuing his argument, St. Paul assures us that blindness 
happened to Israel, not permanently, but merely for a 
time, until the full number of the "elect" from the Gentiles 
should come in. He declares that then all Israel shall be 
saved from their stumbling. This is the very "rising 
again" referred to in our lesson. St. Paul declares that 
this is God's Covenant with natural Israel and that their 
sins shall be taken away and they shall obtain mercy, 
through the Church's mercy. In other words, when the 
Church shall be glorified in the First Resurrection, Divine 
blessing shall proceed forthwith to Israel and shall then 
extend to all the families of the earth. God hath concluded 
them all in unbelief that He might have mercy upon 
all.— See Romans 11:25-32. 



R4941 : page 461 

WHAT WE ARE TO EXPECT 

WHILE IT MAY BE difficult to clearly prognosticate 

the future in respect to God's 

"times and seasons" relating to the Church 

and her glorification, the world's time of 

trouble and the New Epoch of "joy for all 

people," we may surely expect all the time 

and increasingly tribulations: "Marvel not 

if the world hate you; ye know that it hated 

me before it hated you; if ye were of the 

world, the world would love its own"; "I 

have chosen you out of the world" and ordained you. 

How should these attacks be received? may be a question 
with some. Our answer is, With patient endurance 
and without bitterness of heart, but with sympathy, recognizing 
that "they know not what they do." The Lord's 
people must never retaliate, must never render railing for 
railing, accusation for provocation, blow for blow, but 



must ever keep in memory the example of the Lord and 
the Apostles. 

This, however, does not mean that the Lord's people 
may not use means provided by law for their defense, 
when it seems wise for them to do so. Jesus protested 
against being stoned in violation of the Law. St. Paul 
defended himself in court before Felix, as well as upon 
other occasions. He became the plaintiff and aggressor 
in his dispute with the Jews when he appealed his case 
to Rome. Similarly we, if persecuted contrary to the law 
under which we live, are at liberty to appeal our case before 
the courts, but not at liberty to take matters into our 
own hands to judge and punish our enemies. 

When the Apostle reproved some of the early Church 
for going to law with each other, the stress of his argument 

R4941 : page 462 

was that brethren should adjudicate their own troubles 
amongst themselves and not go to law before unbelievers 
—not ask unbelievers to judge between Christians. 
This has no bearing upon our dealing with unbelievers, 
who can be dealt with only through the public courts. If 
nominal Christians should set up the claim that they are 
believers, the answer then would be that in the same sense 
the courts are courts of believers and that, therefore, the 
action before them would not be before unbelievers. 

We must expect that the opposition of the world, the 
flesh and the Devil will increase in virulence. Thus our 
faith in the Lord and in each other— our meekness, gentleness, 
patient endurance, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, 
love— will be in the crucible for refining. And the 
experiences, properly received, may be reckoned amongst 
the "all things" guaranteed to work together for good to 
all those who love the Lord, to the called according to his 
purpose.— Rom. 8:28. 

page 462 

"In the furnace God may prove thee, 

Thence to bring thee forth more bright, 
But will never cease to love thee; 

Thou art precious in His sight." 



R5372 : page 462 

IN EVERYTHING GIVE THANKS 

Dear Lord, with sorrow, I confession make 
That while with joy I suffer for Thy sake, 
Yet in the cares with which my days abound, 
Where I should smile, I fear I often frown. 
In days gone by I've murmured o'er and o'er, 
And unkind words have left me feeling sore; 



Those whom I come in contact with each day, 
Disturb me oft by things they do and say. 

And thoughtless actions have left such a sting 
I could not find it in my heart to sing. 
Lord, I'll be honest with myself and Thee, 
I have not been as sweet as I should be. 
And I have said, "Too hard the wind doth blow, 
Too hot the day, too much rain or snow," 
And tho' at times I've checked the hasty word, 
Still, in my heart rebellious murmurs stirred. 

And I have thought that I could grow in grace 
Much better, were I in another's place. 
Lord, to this whole long list I guilty plead; 
And I am grieved o'er it, I am indeed; 
And I am come to make a Vow to Thee, 
That in the coming year, whate'er shall be 
My portion, trials, cares, vexations, pain, 
Dear Lord, I will not murmur nor complain. 

And I will say when I arise each morn, 
This day my Lord wants me to overcome, 
"In everything give thanks," this is His Word; 
And I will school my heart to sweet accord. 
I'll thank Him for the sun, and for the rain; 
I'll thank Him for the sorrow and the pain; 
And in the things which try my patience so 
I'll thank Him that I have a chance to show 

How Sweet and Kind and Loving I can be, 
How much His Holy Spirit dwells in me. 
Dear Lord, I'll trust Thee tho' I do not know 
Why I should walk the path I'm called to go. 
I'll give Thee thanks whatever be the way 
Which Thou shalt lead me in from day to day; 
Relying on Thy grace to see me through, 
Lord, this is what I've promised Thee to do. 

REBECCA FAIR DONEY. 



page 462 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study VII., The Law of the New Creation. 
FEBRUARY 5 

(1) What does the giving of a law imply on the part 
of the recipient? Why are penalties attached to a law? 
P. 349, par. 1, first 6 lines. 

(2) How do we reason with respect to a law having 
been given Adam? And what was the sin of Eden? P. 349, 
par. 1, sixth to fourteenth line. 



(3) What did the just sentence upon Adam imply with 
respect to his knowledge? And what did the absence of a 
Mediator evidence? P. 349, par. 1, fifteenth line to end. 

(4) How was the Divine Law written in the perfect organism 
of Adam and Eve? And why were they without excuse 

for their sin? P. 350. 

(5) What is the condition of mankind today as respects 
the original Divine likeness? P. 351, par. 1, first half. 

(6) How can we account for the more or less crude conceptions 
of right and wrong among even the most depraved 

of the heathen? P. 351, par. 1, last half. 

FEBRUARY 12 

(7) What two kinds of laws prevail among mankind? 
P. 351, par. 2. 

(8) How does this correspond with the Divine Law? 
P. 351, par. 3; P. 352, par. 1. 

(9) Why was it impossible for God to give the fallen 
race a Law of life? P. 352, par. 2. 

(10) Where is the first intimation of an atonement and 
consequent release from the "prison house" recorded? and 
how fulfilled? P. 353, par. 1. 

(11) To whom were still clearer promises stated as respects 
the blessing of the world, and what did this signify? 

P. 353, par. 2. 

(12) Why did God place a special Law upon the Israelites? 
Why were the mediation of Moses and the typical sacrifices 
for sins necessary, and what does this teach with respect to 
the Law in Eden? P. 354, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 19 

(13) Who was the only Jew who ever perfectly kept the 
Mosaic Law, and what double purpose did the Law Covenant 
serve? P. 354, par. 2. 

(14) Although Jesus fulfilled it, what is the position of 
natural Israel with respect to the Law Covenant? P. 355, par. 1. 

(15) What two forms of Divine Law were operative 
previous to the first advent? and what two classes were subject 
to these laws? P. 356, par. 1. 

(16) Give a brief Scriptural summary of the Sinai tic Law, 
and who only kept this statement of the Divine Law? P. 356, 
par. 2. 

(17) How did Jesus keep and fulfil the Sinaitic Law? 
P. 356, par. 3, first half. 

(18) Was it love to God or love for His neighbor that 
required Jesus' self-sacrifice? P. 356, par. 3, last half. 

FEBRUARY 26 

(19) What two things were accomplished by Jesus' death? 
P. 357, par. 1, first eight lines. 

(20) Make a distinction between these two things effected 
by Jesus' death. P. 357, par. 1. 

(21) Has the New Covenant, suretied by Christ's blood, 



gone into effect? P. 358, par. 1. 

(22) Define the purpose and operation of the New Covenant 
as respects fleshly Israel and the world of mankind. 

P. 358, par. 2. 

THE LAW OF THE NEW COVENANT. 

(23) What is the Law of the New Covenant? Does it 
differ from the original Divine standard? P. 359, par. 1. 

(24) What is meant by re-writing the Law of God in the 
hearts of men? P. 359, par. 2. 


