R4733 : page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

The New Year's Outlook 3 

Morgan's Church Federation 3 

The Message to the Jews 4 

The Harvest Work for This Year 4 

One Word of Caution 4 

We Are in the Morning of the New 

Dispensation 5 

Reports From the Society's Foreign Branches 6 

British Branch Report 6 

Swedish Branch Report 7 

Danish Branch Report 8 

Australasian Branch Report 9 

The Prayer-Answering God 10 

Your Good Hopes-1911 11 

A Discouraged Prophet's Flight 13 

Some Glad, Sweet Day (Poem) 13 

A King Sold Himself 14 

Some Interesting Letters 14 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 15 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 



THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system 

of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now being presented in 

all parts of the civilized world by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 

TRACT SOCIETY, chartered A.D. 1881, "For the Promotion of Christian 

Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students 

may meet in the study of the divine Word, but also as a channel of communication 

through which they may be reached with announcements of 

the Society's Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives 

styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's 
published "Studies," most entertainingly arranged, and very helpful 
to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, 
viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which translated into English 
is, Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. 
S. Lessons is specially for the older Bible Students and Teachers. By 
some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defence of the only true foundation 
of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 
through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 
a ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 



I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of his Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; Jno. 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, 
at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the 
wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, NY., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



PHILADELPHIA, PA., JAN. 15 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock in 
Students Chapter Hall, 1319 Susquehanna Av.; also meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 p.m. in the same hall. Discourse for 
the public at 3 p.m. in Grand Opera House, cor. Broad and 
Montgomery Av. 

BUFFALO, N.Y., JAN. 22 



Morning Rally at 10 o'clock and discourse for the interested 
at 1 1 in Fraternity Hall, Jefferson St., near North St. The 
public Lecture in the afternoon at 3 will be held in the Star 
Theatre, Pearl and Genesee Sts. 

WASHINGTON, D.C., JAN. 29 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 and 
evening discourse to the interested at 7:30 in Old Masonic 
Temple, 9th and F Sts., N.W. Public discourse at 3 p.m. 
in Convention Hall, Fifth and New York Aves. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., FEB. 5 

In conjunction with the Brooklyn meeting on the first 
Sunday in February, an opportunity will be given for the 
symbolizing of Baptism in water. Robes, etc., will be provided. 

Any desiring to make use of this opportunity will please 
give us timely notice. 

TRENTON, N.J., FEB. 12 

ALLEGHENY, PA., FEB. 19 

FALL RIVER, MASS., FEB. 26 



TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENTS --ENGLISH 

A new importation is on the way from Germany, where 
they are published. The demand for these is considerable. 
They are of the Common Version, but with foot-note readings 
showing the variations of the three oldest Greek MSS.— 
The Sinaitic, Vatican and Alexandrian. Price with postage, 
50 cents. In stock Feb. 1. 



TABERNACLE CHARTS 35c, THREE FOR $1 

These charts are quite neat looking, three feet long, on 
paper with metal hangers top and bottom. With these goes 
a picture of the High Priest in his glorious robes, High 
Priest in sacrificial garments, and an under-priest in the style 
of clothing supposed to have been worn of old. 



JEWISH HOPES AND PROSPECTS 

We have in the English a pamphlet which gives certain 
extracts from STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. III., and the 
Jerusalem sermon, 10c. each; in quantities, 60c. per dozen. 

For those Jews who read Yiddish we have secured a large 



edition of the newspaper, Die Stimme, which contains Jerusalem 
news and reports of several of Brother Russell's sermons 
to the Jews. 

This paper is very acceptable amongst the Jews. It does 
not point them to Jesus of Nazareth, but does point to the 
Messiah of Glory. It gives assurances that the time of the 
establishment of his Kingdom is near, and that then the 
Jews will be blessed. It points them to the land of Palestine 
as the place where the national blessings will begin. It does 
not say so, but all WATCH TOWER readers well know that 
according to prophecy it will be then and there that Israel's 
blindness will be turned away and they will recognize him 
whom they pierced. 

It is not our expectation that the Jews will be converted 
to Christianity. Theirs is the chief of earthly blessings. If 
some few of them have the hearing ear for the spiritual message, 
they will hear it, but they will be the exceptional few. 

We can supply these Die Stimme papers in any quantity- 
free. Any of our readers who would like to have some for 
free circulation amongst the Jews should advise us immediately, 
as we are about to order a new edition. 



R4735 : page 3 

THE NEW YEAR'S OUTLOOK 

OUR SOCIETY'S very encouraging report for 

the old year in the December 15 issue naturally 

directs our mind to the New Year and 

inquires the prospects— the outlook. Our 

view respecting the financial and social outlook 

may appear to be prejudiced. We 

believe from the Scriptures that we are in 

that particular time which immediately 

precedes the great period of world-wide 

anarchy foretold by the Prophet Daniel as 

marking the end of Gentile Times and the inauguration 

of Messiah's Kingdom. But while we expect such 

troubles and believe them near, it would be unwise for 

us to attempt to predict strife, lock-outs, panics, etc.— 

though all of these will be prominent factors in the precipitation 

of the anarchy which all so justly dread. 

While the world is outwardly at peace, there is a great 
unrest in the hearts of humanity. The general increase 
of knowledge has brought general increase of dissatisfaction 
and ambition which cannot be satisfied, except in 
a very few instances. This discontent has already made 
itself felt in Russia and in Japan and is likely to precipitate 
trouble in India and China, the most populous 
parts of the world. Only the Lord knows to what extent 
and how long the winds of strife will be held, as pictorially 
set forth in Revelation. 

Governments are beginning to learn that great battleships 
and military fortresses are sources of danger, as 



well as of protection. For instance, quite recently the 
government of Brazil purchased two war vessels of most 
modern type. Scarcely were they put into commission 
and manned by the Brazilian sailors when their crews 
rebelled. After considerable damage and loss, the 
government evidently feels that they are more of a 
menace than are foreign warships in their harbor. It has 
been suggested that the guns from the vessels be taken 
ashore and stored against time of need and to keep them 
out of the hands of rebels. 

Similarly Portugal is having trouble. The revolution 
unseated the King and established a Republic, only to 
find that the soldiers and sailors now feel that they are 
masters of the situation and may demand such wages 
and treatment as they think proper. When the time is 
ripe the trained soldiers of Europe will probably have 
at their control the great arsenals and immense stores of 
war material for the overthrow of the governments which 
provided them. These are not pleasant prospects to hold 
up at the beginning of the year; but why should we 
deceive ourselves? Here in the United States we have 
had a somewhat similar exhibit. A street car strike in 
the capital city of Ohio has been maintained for months, 
accompanied by violence. The State Government has 
sought to maintain order, but has been able to do so only 
to a limited degree. Regiments of State militia, brought 
to the scene of trouble, sympathized with the strikers and 
declined to maintain order and were returned to their 
homes. 

While there is a great deal of prosperity as compared 
with former times, the manufacturing plants of the 
world, equipped with modern machinery, have so large a 
capacity that business seems depressed, because only 
one-third of the possibilities are being accomplished. 
A semi-evident lack of confidence prevails, based upon 
the fact that the intelligent people know that there is not 
one-half the money necessary for business prosperity, 
because of the demonetization of silver. While this situation 
was brought about by the bankers and inures to 
their advantage in keeping up the rate of interest, nevertheless 
even for them it has its drawbacks, producing a 
feverish financial condition— a panicky condition in dread 
of a public loss of confidence and demand for deposits. 
Altogether there is an unquiet financial undertone or 
feverishness unfavorable to the smaller business interests; 
large and profitable enterprises are being well sustained 
financially, but these are retarded by the smaller industries 
and enterprises which they supply and, to some 
extent, depend upon for business. In a word, financial 
matters are top-heavy and nobody knows when something 
may occur to jostle and overturn them. 

MORGAN'S CHURCH FEDERATION 

The newspapers have recently informed the world 
that at a recent Episcopal Church Council the world-famed 



multi-millionaire banker, J. Pierrepont Morgan, 

who was a delegate, contributed ten thousand dollars as a 

start for an expense fund, having for its object the organization 

of a religious trust. Mr. Morgan's well-known 

business capacity, exhibited in connection with financial 

trusts, encourages many to believe that he will accomplish 

the desired end in connection with the movement. More 

and more all denominations are craving a religious trust 

or Federation and are becoming more and more willing 

to sacrifice doctrines and principles formerly held dear, 

in order to accomplish the Federation. This is a confession 

of denominational weakness and an intimation 

that the strength and power to be gained by Federation is 

considered valuable. Prime movers in this undertaking 

dilate upon the great economy of the federated churches 

R4735 : page 4 

in respect to ministers and management. No doubt there 
is some truth in this, but the real reason lies deeper. It 
is believed that Federation would soon acquire a political 
power, and hence a financial backing, before which undesirable 
truths would be forced to seek shelter or be 
publicly pilloried and secretly ostracized. 

Evidently this Federation is near at hand; the Scriptures 
have long foretold the Federation, as we have been 
pointing out therefrom for thirty years. It is to us one 
of the special signs of our day, one of the special indications 
marking the end of the Gospel Age and the inauguration 
of Messiah's Kingdom. 

THE MESSAGE TO THE JEWS 

The Scriptures are explicit in declaring that with the 
close of the Gospel call of this age and the completion of 
the Bride class Divine favor will turn again to natural 
Israel. We have from time to time noted favorable 
climatic conditions in Palestine and later on how the 
Zionist movement has stirred the Jews everywhere to an 
interest in their home land and a desire to re-possess it. 
But these hopes and ambitions have seemed impossible of 
attainment and the fervor of Zionism has recently been 
on the wane. Just at this juncture Divine Providence 
seemed to bless our message to the Jews. Most remarkably 
the message has been scattered all over the world, 
partly by Jewish journals interested in the message and 
partly by others opposing it— nevertheless The Voice (Die 
Stimme) has gone forth to the ends of the earth. 

As a result Jewish hopes are turning more and more 
toward the prophecies of the Holy Scriptures. The result 
bids fair to be such a work of grace as the Scriptures 
describe when telling that the Lord will pour upon Israel 
at this time the spirit of prayer and supplication. The 
message to them now is that the land is theirs— that their 
period of chastisement is at an end and that shortly 
Divine blessing will come to them— not as Christians, but 



as Jews. Subsequently they will recognize the Spiritual 
Messiah referred to in Daniel 12:1. Their journey 
thenceforth will be an easy one, for the Kingdom will 
prevail, and Israel will be blessed and become the channel 
for Divine blessing to all the families of the earth— the 
chief blessing coming to them from the glorified Christ 
on the spirit plane and operating through his spiritual, 
invisible government. 

R4736 : page 4 

THE HARVEST WORK FOR THIS YEAR 

Day by day it becomes more evident that there is a 
great sifting work in progress amongst those who have 
been so highly favored of the Lord in respect to Present 
Truth. During the past thirty years those who have not 
been thoroughly captivated by it, those who have not 
rejoiced to present their bodies living sacrifices in its 
interest, those who have been lukewarm rather than hot, 
are evidently being rejected of the Lord from any part 
or lot in the Kingdom of God. Others in turn are coming 
into the Truth— of all denominations and classes and 
ages. Some of these are ripening very rapidly. Indeed, 
some who have newly learned the Truth, at times put to 
shame those who have had much larger opportunities, but 
who have of late been neglecting them. Our advice still 
is that to keep thoroughly in touch with the Truth and to 
keep the world out of the heart, it will be found an excellent 
plan to read so many pages of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES daily— if possible twelve— because this reading 
permits a review of the entire six volumes in less than 
a year. 

We still also recommend "the Vow." Surely it is 
proving a great blessing to many of the Lord's people, not 
only reminding them daily of their own interest in the 
Harvest Work, but also keeping them in a sympathetic 
and prayerful touch with all the brethren. And finally, 
amidst the increasing besetments of our day, it places a 
bulwark of resolution around the consecrated soldier of 
the Cross. But while this sifting and testing and purging 
of the Church is in progress it is noteworthy that the 
purged seem to be more earnest, more zealous, more 
faithful, more loyal to the Lord and to the Truth and to 
the brethren. 

Additionally we note a broadening of the work within 
the past year, which, for aught we know, may continue 
during the year beginning. More than one thousand 
newspapers, reaching more than ten millions of people 
weekly, is certainly a broadening of the message of the 
love of God to every member of Adam's race. Similarly 
the public meetings of late have been much better attended 
than ever before and more interest has been manifested. 
We should expect this door to open still more widely 
during the coming year. 

We have just contracted for the printing of forty 



thousand PEOPLES PULPITS per day for 19 1 1, and we 
expect this amount, twelve millions, will not be too many 
for our Volunteer work and for use in advertising public 
meetings. Nevertheless we recognize that we have made 
a large contract and that ability to distribute this number 
depends upon the loyalty and zeal of the readers of this 
journal. We urge energy in this Volunteer work, not 
alone for the sake of the public, but also for the sake of 
WATCH TOWER readers. It is our experience that those 
who love the Lord most and who most appreciate his 
goodness and favor are those most anxious and most 
willing to circulate the message to others, and to these 
the Lord gives proportionate blessings. This, then, is our 
reason for urging WATCH TOWER readers everywhere to 
become preachers of the Truth in this simple manner, as 
well as orally, if they have the natural ability and 
opportunity. 

On the whole, dear friends, it is our present opinion 
that the year 1911 offers greater opportunities for service 
of the Lord and the brethren and the Truth than any 
other in the past. Let us be zealous to do with our might 
what our hands find to do. 

ONE WORD OF CAUTION 

We deprecate everything akin to sensationalism and 
everything calculated to the spread of fear amongst the 
Lord's people. Our attitude, based upon our faith, should 
be that of confidence, serenity, knowing that the powers 
of evil, whatever they may accomplish with others, cannot 
harm the "elect," who abide under the shadow of the 
Almighty. Therefore let us put away fears as marks or 
evidences of lack of faith, lack of trust in him who has 
declared that "all things shall work together for good to 
those who love God, to those called according to his 
purpose." 

But while deprecating fear we should not close our 
eyes to what we see going on about us. The courage we 
want and which the Lord will appreciate is not the 
courage which closes its eyes and refuses to see, but that 
which trusts the Lord in the presence of apparent danger. 

We remind our readers that about two years ago a 
variety of incidents was brought to our attention, seeming 
to demonstrate that the fallen angels were more than 
ever active and that the evidences of their ability to 
materialize were increasing, and that their reported 
tendencies toward licentiousness comported well with the 
record of their fall, as portrayed in the Genesis account. 

R4736 : page 5 

At that time we suggested the possibility of evil spirits 
materializing, so as to personate some of the Lord's 
people and then committing flagrant crime, and 
dematerializing, vanishing, leaving the not-guilty one to 
face the righteous indignation aroused by the crime. We 



suggested that possibly, in some such manner, great odium 
might be brought upon the servants of the Truth and 
thus upon the Cause itself. We suggested further that 
possibly the same Divine providence which permitted the 
crucifixion of our Redeemer might permit such experiences, 
and that possibly through these a great persecution, 
as unjust as that which came upon Jesus and his followers 
eighteen centuries ago, might come upon us today. 

HOW FEW OF MANKIND KNOW OF THE FALLEN ANGELS ! 

For some two years we heard practically nothing along 
these lines. We had about concluded that the Adversary 
had misled our attention to this direction, in order that 
he might make the more serious attack upon the minds 
and hearts of the consecrated. Now, however, after two 
years of silence, we have a report from far-off Australia 
which seems to confirm our worst fears as respects the 
course that will be pursued in the time of trouble by the 
demons, the fallen angels. 

Brother Nicholson, of the Australian Branch, writes 
us of an astounding circumstance. One of the Australian 
Brethren has a wife who is neither for nor against the 
Truth, and who professes no sympathy for Spiritism. 
Quite recently the Brother, returning to his home, had a 
harrowing tale related by his wife. She declared that 
Brother Russell had appeared to her. (Possibly she had 
seen his photograph). She declared that he made improper 
proposals, to which she yielded. 

At such a distance it is easy enough to prove an alibi 
—to prove that the Editor was not there. But suppose 
the materialization in all of its particulars had transpired 
in Brooklyn, or in the Bethel home, or in any of the 
various cities which the Editor visits in the preaching of 
the gospel, or in a Pullman sleeping car, in which he 
frequently travels— it is easily seen than an alibi might 
be very difficult to prove in such cases. And what would 
be true in this respect of the Editor might be true in 
some respects of many of the Pilgrim brethren; yea, 
true of all of the Lord's people everywhere. 

How few of mankind know of these fallen angels, or 
believe at all in their power to communicate with men! 
How few, especially, believe in their power to materialize! 
Could we blame such people if they should mob the innocent 
under such conditions? Would not all explanations 
seem like foolishness to them? If such matters as 
this shall form any part of the Church's experiences during 
the year 1911, it will mean very stirring times indeed 
and that some of us wholly innocent may have opportunity 
of dying cruel and very ignominious deaths, after 
the manner of the Master. 

"AS DECEIVERS AND YET TRUE" 

Nothing in all this need make the Lord's consecrated 
people timid or fearful. Nothing can by any means harm 



us as New Creatures. If such experiences come to us, 
let us decide, as did the Master, that it is the cup that 
the Father has poured for us, and let us seek his aid in 
the drinking of it with courage. Whatever may be the 
Lord's portion of experience for us, his grace is sufficient, 
and he is able to make an ignominious death a joyful 
one to those who put their trust in him. 

WAS THE ALARM CLOCK RIGHT? 

Chronology (time prophecies in general) was evidently 
not intended to give God's people accurate chronological 
information all the way down the path of the 
centuries. Evidently it is intended more to serve as an 
alarm clock to awaken and energize the Lord's people 
at the proper time. 

We have no fault to find with the chronology, nor with 
the prophetic periods built upon it, as already presented 
to our readers in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
We would not know how to improve on the statements 
therein presented if the books were to be written today. 

But let us suppose, for instance, that October, 1914, 
should pass and that no serious fall of Gentile power 
would occur. What would this prove or disprove? It 
would not disprove any feature of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages. The ransom-price finished at Calvary would still 
stand the guarantee of the ultimate fulfillment of the 
great Divine Program for human restitution. The "high 
calling" of the Church to suffer with the Redeemer and 
to be glorified with him as his members or as his Bride 
would still be the same. There would still be the two 
salvations— the one on the spirit plane to which we are 
called now; the other to the human plane under the 
terms of the New Covenant during Messiah's blessed 
reign. It would still be true that the wages of sin is 
death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. It would still be true that it is for the 
called to be faithful, in order to be chosen— to make 
their calling and their election sure. The only thing 
effected by the chronology would be the time for the 
accomplishment of these glorious hopes for the Church 
and for the world. 

R4737 : page 5 

WE ARE IN THE MORNING OF THE NEW DISPENSATION 

Suppose that our chronological calculations (never 
set forth as infallible) should prove to be fallible and 
in error. Our conclusion would merely be that the error 
could not be very great. Outward signs of restitution 
multiplying on every hand tell us that the rising of the 
Sun of Righteousness is near at hand. Church Federation 
tendencies attest the same thing, corroborating the 
Scriptures respecting the conditions which will prevail 
at the very closing of this age. The movement amongst 



the Jews similarly implies an awakening and a preparation 
for Messiah much in harmony with what we must 
expect in the close of this age. The stress along the lines 
of social, political and financial affairs all indicate that 
the great time of trouble and anarchy with which this 
age will end cannot be far off— cannot lie much, if any, 
beyond October, 1914. And if that date pass it would 
merely prove that our chronology, our "alarm clock," 
went off a little before the time. 

Would we consider it a great calamity if our alarm 
clock awakened us a few moments earlier in the morning 
of some great day full of joy and pleasure? Surely 
not! Rather we would say that we were glad that the 
alarm went off early and that we were around early, so 
that we could see, appreciate and enjoy more. 

We are in the morning of the New Dispensation. We 
give thanks to the Lord daily for the privilege of living 
in this wonderful time— and for the privilege of having 
our eyes of understanding opened to appreciate the 
Divine Plans for this day. If, then, it should prove eventually 
that the crisis of earthly government will not be 
reached by the end of 1914, should we not be very faithful 
anyway, and remember that had it not been for that 
alarm clock which helped to awaken us from the worldly 
stupor, we might not yet have been sufficiently awake to 
appreciate and enjoy the wonderful spiritual blessings 
which daily crown our lives? 

R4737 : page 6 

The Editor thanks God for any and everything which 
has helped to awaken him to an appreciation of the 
length and the breadth and the height and the depth of 
the Divine Plan now visible to the "household of faith." 
The Editor will not repine, but thank God, even if the 
expected time shall pass without seeing the fruition of 
our every hope. He feels convinced that "Who led us 
first will lead us still," and gladly sinks into his will. 



The Editor requests that the dear friends who send 
him Greetings at this season do not expect personal 
replies, which are impossible. Such will please accept, 
with all WATCH TOWERS readers, his best wishes for their 
best interests during 191 1 A.D. As no special Motto Card 
for 191 1 was prepared he here offers the following:— 



MY GRACE 
-IS- 
SUFFICIENT FOR THEE 
MY STRENGTH 
-IS- 
PERFECTED IN WEAKNESS 



R4737 : page 6 

1910-REPORTS FROM THE SOCIETY'S FOREIGN BRANCHES-1910 
BRITISH BRANCH REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Enclosed is the report of the British work for the 
financial year ended on October 31, 1910. 

Your perusal of the account will show you that though 
all the branches of the work have not made progress the 
work of the year is one of general increase. The Volunteer 
work, the distribution of the PEOPLES PULPIT, has 
made great increase. We have sent out from London 
during the year well over 4,000,000 of these copies, and 
still the brethren are crying out for more, which we are 
proceeding to supply. 

That this distribution of the glad tidings of great 
joy is effective to the stirring up of many minds 
is abundantly evidenced: Our inquiries are both numerous 
and general from all over the Kingdom. It is true, however, 
that the distribution of the free literature has been 
and still is mostly among the urban population. In 
London alone the brethren— helped on the occasions of 
your two visits by some brethren from the Provinces and 
from Scotland— have given out from door to door, and 
from office to office, over 1,500,000 of these messengers 
of Truth. This has meant much labor, for in London 
there is no system of each dweller in a flat having a letterbox 
at the foot of the stairs, and therefore each one must 
have a separate delivery effected. We do find evidences 
of the tracts having percolated into the country districts, 
but there is much work to be done before this Christian 
country is enlightened with the true light now shining 
so brightly. 

Last year a brother spent several months going 
through the southern part of England, visiting the small 
towns and the villages which have no representative of 
the Truth. He worked exceedingly hard, most of the 
days giving out nearly a thousand of PEOPLES PULPIT; and 
this year something has been done, but on a much smaller 
scale. It is not easy to judge the result accurately, but 
it is probable that the country people, the rural population, 
do not respond to our request for inquiry so readily 
as do the town people. But the Lord surely has many 
people amongst these and we have an earnest desire to 
send out the Truth to them. We hope that the newspapers 
will help supply the need. 

The labor has been blessed of the Lord, both to the 
distributors, and, as is clear, to many of those to whom 
the tracts have gone. Many have expressed their thanks 



for the light which is now beginning to shine so clearly. 
Your last two visits and the six large meetings in the 
Royal Albert Hall have meant much labor and expense, 
but both have been expended to advantage, for there is 
plenty of proof that your name, and the work so closely 
associated with it, are now well known, and less introduction 
of the STUDIES is necessary when the Colporteurs 
present the book in their canvass. 

The Colporteur Department has not made increase. 
Indeed the sales are rather less than last year. It is not 
easy to explain how this comes about, for the difficulties 
do not appear greater than before. Perhaps it is owing 
to the expense of the public meetings and a lessening of 
energy owing to the labor and time which the public 
service has demanded. There has been less "sharp-shooting" 
this year, and the regular, whole-time Colporteurs 
have not increased in number. However, the decrease is 
but small, and perhaps it seems a little disappointing because 
we are always desirous to have the increase which 
the work seems to demand. 

We are of the opinion, expressed in our report of 
last year, that there is a large class of people, of 
moderate means, the people who have been the backbone 
of Christian work, and whose hearts lean towards God, 
who have not yet been touched with the Harvest message, 
and who ought to be reached by Colporteurs. No doubt 
this means that the Colporteur must be of good average 
ability; but we have many amongst us well able to do 
any work of the kind, and who could place sets of the 
STUDIES amongst the best of them. 

The donations to the Tract Fund are in excess of 
those of last year; particulars are given in the report, 
showing whence the items come— from London or the 
country. 

From your personal observation you will know that 
the work in the United Kingdom goes on well, accomplishing 
the gathering of the "wheat into the garner," 
and witnessing of the approach of the Kingdom; that 
the Brethren are closely united in the bond of Christ, 
which is the bond of love; and that they are ready for 
the work of the Lord as it may be revealed to them. 

While we say this we nevertheless believe that the 
brethren might do more in the Colporteur work. We 
believe there are many Brothers and Sisters of ability 
who could do well enough to make a livelihood in the 
work, and who could thus become ministers of the Word 
to a large class not yet made aware of the harvest 
message. Besides, many cities and villages have not yet 
been Volunteered. We hope for more of this work in 
191 1; for the spirit of fellowship in the labors and sufferings 
of Christ is on the increase. 

While we joyfully report the prosperity of the 
Brethren, gratefully acknowledging the mercies of the 
Lord in this respect, we know that the warning you give 
in the current issue of the WATCH TOWER is timely, for 
it is clear that as the Day approaches the discrimination 



as to who shall be "cast out" is getting keener, and we 

R4737 : page 7 

do well to take heed to ourselves. We daily commend 
you to the grace of the Lord, and we know you remember 
us all on this side. With much love in him, and on behalf 
of the Brethren, 
I am your Brother in his grace and service, 
J. HEMERY, 
British Secretary. 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY. 

Cost of Public Meetings and 

newspaper work L. 1,476 11 2 = $7,146.50 

Cost of Tracts, postage, office 
expenses, etc 2,170 11 5=10,505.55 

L.3,648 2 7 =$17,652.05 
Studies, Bibles, Booklets, sold at cost, not included. 
Tract Fund Donations, "Good 

Hopes" L.1,719 2 10 = $8,320.64 

Deficit L. 1,928 19 9 = $9,331.41 

R4738 : page 7 

SUMMARY OF WORK ACCOMPLISHED. 

Copies SCRIPTURE STUDIES, sold at cost 34,345 

(Magazine edition) sold at cost 10,742 

Booklets, MANNA, etc. sold at cost 84,012 

PEOPLES PULPIT, issued free 4,062,485 

Other free tracts 353,750 

Free literature, estimated as tract-pages 69,345,560 

Newspaper sermons circulated (estimated) 12,000,000 

Correspondence: 

Letters and cards received 19,870 

Letters and cards dispatched 12,745 



SWEDISH BRANCH REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is once more my duty to send you herewith the 
usual Annual Report from this part of the field. This is 
a great pleasure, because it will, partly at least, show 
you how richly the dear Lord has blessed his Harvest 
Workers here also during the past year, and how our 
humble efforts to glorify his holy name by spreading the 
Truth regarding his character and plan have been successful 
in different ways. All the honor and praise belong 
to him alone. 

A review of the work of the past year, combined 



with present prospects, shows us that almost unlimited 
opportunities for work still present themselves for the 
"harvesters," though even here we can clearly see how 
the oncoming "night" has commenced to cast its shadows, 
and how the threatening clouds gather about us. This 
fact leads us, however, to appreciate still more the 
precious opportunities we now possess, and to pray for 
increased grace and strength from above while we wait 
for our approaching redemption. 

This year we are able to report an increase in the 
circulation of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES of nearly 
12,000 copies. This increase would have been at least 
15,000 copies but for the shortage during the first four 
months of the year— before we had the re-translated 
Swedish edition of Vol. I finished, in the end of the 
month of March. 

The 10,000 copies we then published were all gone after 
six months and now we have already sold a good portion 
of a second 10,000-edition thereof, and are preparing for 
the third. Would you not advise us to take 20,000 copies 
at once this time? It is very difficult, if not impossible, 
for the Colporteurs to sell whole sets of three or six 
volumes at once here, because of the poverty amongst 
the people; the increase has been chiefly in Vol. I. Yet 
we have also sold a good many of the succeeding Vols., 
specially Vol. 4, which we have also had the privilege 
of translating into Swedish this year and of publishing in 
an edition of a little more than 6,000 copies. Besides this 
we have sold over 6,000 more of other books and booklets 
than during the preceding year. 

Recently we have also increased our stock with a 
10,000 edition of the "Evolution" pamphlet, which had 
not before been published in Swedish. At present we 
are going on with the printing of a little booklet containing 
the questions on TABERNACLE SHADOWS, principally 
for the sake of the younger classes of Swedish 
Bible Students who have not earlier used these questions, 
when published in the Swedish TOWER. This booklet will 
also contain some small parts of the Berean Bible 
Teachers' Manual, of special interest for Bible Students. 
Brother Sjo is now busy with the re-translation of Vol. 2, 
in harmony with your authorization to me to republish 
the same if opportunity should occur. 

The number of subscribers to the Swedish WATCH 
TOWER has increased only by 165, yet this cannot be seen 
by comparing this report with the last annual one, as 
that report, as well as its predecessors, included the 
TOWERS sent from here to the Head Office, on your order, 
but which TOWERS are excluded from this report. Although 
we have wished to see the Swedish list of subscribers 
twice as large as it is, yet the friends of the 
Truth in general seem to more and more assimilate and 
appreciate the blessed spiritual food from the Lord's 
table so abundantly spread through you, his faithful 
servant. As a proof of this I can mention that before 
we had gotten ready any of the Swedish Manna-book, 



which we have just translated and published in an edition 
of 5,000 copies, according to your advice, we had received 
orders for more than 2,000 copies thereof, after only one 
little advertisement about the coming book, in one single 
issue of the Swedish TOWER. 

Our dear friends here seem also to be able more and 
more to realize and appreciate their privilege of taking 
part in one way or another in the blessed work still going 
on and increasing. Thirty-six brethren and sisters have 
given all or part of their time in the Colporteur work 
during the year and every one of these seems thereby 
to have greatly profited spiritually. The volunteer work 
also shows some increase, as you will see, and the donations 
to the Tract Fund amount to a good deal more 
than four times the sum of last year. According to our 
lists here the number of donations during the year is 773. 

The Pilgrim service has been greatly extended and 
clearly and richly blessed of the Lord. Seven Swedish 
brethren have taken part in this work, two of them giving 
all their time thereto. Hundreds and hundreds of truth-hungry 
people have gathered at many places all over the 
country and have listened most attentively to the Glad 
Tidings of the approaching Messianic Kingdom. For 
instance, when two weeks ago I visited a large town not 
very far from this place, and had spoken in the evening 
to a very intelligent audience of more than 500 for two 
hours on the subject, "Is there salvation after death?" 
the people would not go even then, but remained nearly 
another hour and a half, asking questions on misunderstood 
Scripture texts, etc., until I had to leave them in 
order not to miss my train. The following Sunday, in 
the afternoon, I visited another place outside of Orebro 
(after having talked in a well-filled hall here in the 
morning), and there also the people crowded the comparatively 
very large meeting hall, giving good attention 
to our presentation of the true Gospel, for fully three 
hours; then we were obliged to stop and empty the hall, 
which was to be used for other purposes. 

Besides the regular Pilgrim service we have had during 
the year two General Conventions (one in Orebro 
and the other in Stockholm) and fifteen very good and 

R4738 : page 8 

well-attended Local Conventions in different parts of 
the country, all of which were clearly used to a large 
degree of the Lord in the encouraging of his people. 
The Swedish friends appreciated very much your kindness 
in sending us the dear Brothers Rutherford and 
Pierson last spring when you yourself could not visit us. 
We now look forward with eagerness to your own return 
here, desiring it as soon as it can be arranged. 

Permit me, please, to add a few words about the 
Harvest Work in Finland, also, before I close. As you 
have earlier been informed respecting our Colporteur 
work amongst the Swedish-speaking people in Finland 



and my Pilgrim trip to that country in the beginning of 
the year, I will not here repeat, but will say that, 
amongst the few ripe "grains" gathered in that land 
through the Truth sent from here in Swedish, were two 
dear brethren, Bro. Osterman and Bro. Von Hartman, 
whom the Lord has surely chosen as his harvest messengers 
to the native (not Swedish-speaking) Finnish 
people, and it is a few statements regarding their labor 
and experiences amongst that people that I, in harmony 
with their own wishes, have the privilege to give you. 

It is only about two months, practically, since their 
work amongst the native Finnish people began, but they 
had previously made preparations for it, in that they had 
translated and published in Finnish (I have been informed 
by Finnish brethren, both in the States and in Sweden, 
that their translations are very good) one edition of 
5,000 copies of Vol. I, two different issues of PEOPLES 
PULPIT and a large quantity of hymn sheets for public 
meetings, translated from the Swedish DAWN-HYMNS, etc. 

During these two months their efforts have progressed 
wonderfully. Since October 1, 1910, they have circulated 
about 2,000 copies of Vol. I, and have just now a new 
edition of 10,000 copies, besides a 10,000 edition of the 
"Evolution" pamphlet in Finnish and the third issue of 
the Finnish PEOPLES PULPIT. As a result of rational 
advertisements in the largest newspapers, concerning 
"The Divine Plan of the Ages," they have gotten 
orders for the same at an average of about twenty 
letters a day. They have also begun the translation of 
Vol. 2 and the "Hell" booklet into Finnish. In addition to 
this they have held, during these weeks, six public meetings 
in the largest cities of the land, visited by altogether 
10,000 attentive listeners to the Harvest message. Some 
of the Finnish papers have stenographed their lectures 
and published them in tens of thousands of copies, spread 
broadcast over the country. Next Sunday, December 4, 
they expect to have the third Finnish meeting in the 
capital of the country. They use the largest and finest 
halls obtainable, which are even then overcrowded and 
often too small to hold the people attending their meetings. 
In one place lately the "noblesse" of the city had to stand 
on the street outside the hall for half an hour in order 
to gain entrance to a lecture by Brother Von Hartman. 

Those Brethren ask me now to convey their deeply felt 
thanks and gratitude to you, our beloved Brother Russell, 
for the great spiritual blessings you have brought to them 
through your writings and your faithfulness to the Lord's 
cause. 

We remember you daily, and with thankfulness, in our 
prayers, and ask humbly for your prayers on our behalf. 
May the Lord's blessing be upon you continually, to the 
glory of his holy Name and the profit and joy of all his 
true people. 

Your brother and fellow-servant, 

AUG. LUNDBORG, 
Secretary Swedish Branch. 



R4739 : page 8 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

(Finnish work and expenses for same are not included 
in these figures): 

Copies of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

circulated 19,011 

Various other books and booklets, MANNA, 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc 17,353 



Total 36,364 

Number of subscribers to the Swedish TOWER 1,445 

Old sets Swedish TOWER, cloth-bound and 

unbound 917 

Bibles sold 125 

Volunteer Tracts and sample TOWERS 629,186 

Expressed in usual form of Tract pages 7,779,984 

Number of meetings held 1,246 

Number of miles traveled in preaching tours 54,796 

Letters and cards sent out 2,551 

Letters and cards received 3,203 

Total number of various sendings, by mail 
and by railroad 17,584 

EXPENDITURES. 

Pilgrims, Conventions and 

other meetings kr. 9,123.13 = $2,259.07 

Translation, printing, binding, 

paper, etc " 25,524.09 = 6,879.81 

Freight and postage " 2,228.16= 600.58 

Helps to poor Colporteurs " 3,020.01 = 814.02 

Office expenses, rent, light, 

heat, telephones, etc " 4,345.62= 1,171.32 

Total kr.44,24 1.01 =$11,924.80 

RECEIPTS. 

Voluntary donations to Tract 

Fund kr.18,649.48 = $5,026.81 

Swedish TOWER subscriptions " 1,921.42= 517.91 

Books sold, etc " 17,350.24= 4,676.61 



Total kr.37,921. 14 =$10,221.33 

Deficit kr. 6,319.87 = $1,703.47 



THE WORK IN DENMARK 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have the pleasure to send you the report of the little 



Harvest Work accomplished in this country during the 
past year. That the number of books sold is not larger 
is partly due to the fact that one of our most successful 
Colporteurs has been out of the work very much this 
year on account of ill health. 

Meetings have been held in a number of towns and 
cities which had been previously canvassed, and considerable 
interest was manifested at the meetings. I have 
strong reason to believe that in spite of the comparatively 
small figures representing the work accomplished here, 
yet a larger number has started studying the Truth, and 
more have become truly interested this year than in any 
previous year. We hope for still better results to come 
through the grace of the Master of the Harvest, who is 
so dear to our hearts. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK. 

Output of DAWN-STUDIES 4,429 

Output of various booklets 2,323 

Total 6,752 

Tracts free 48,663 

Letters and cards received 1,148 

Letters and cards sent out 793 

Parcels sent out 974 

Copies of Danish WATCH TOWERS sent out 
monthly 762 

With much Christian love, yours in our Redeemer, 
CARL LUTTICHAU, 

Danish Branch Secretary. 

R4739 : page 9 

AUSTRALIAN BRANCH REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are pleased again to render account of the year 
that is past, and rejoice that we can show some improvement 
on the previous one. We realize that many hungry 
hearts have found the Truth and are today happy in the 
glorious prospects which it has unfolded to their view, as 
a result of the year's work. 

You will notice that there has been a fair increase of 
STUDIES put out, but according to present prospects we 
cannot hope to reach the same mark in the approaching 
year, as we have lost our ablest Colporteurs in Brother 
and Sister Richardson, who have gone to India at your 
request. This leaves us quite short of such workers, yet 
Australia has been gone over only once, whereas parts 
of the United States have been colporteured several times, 
so we are wondering if the Lord is going to send us any 
others from America; or, may be they will be raised up 
from the friends in Australasia. 

Our output of Free Literature has increased fourfold, 



and this we hope to maintain and further develop, as the 
friends are awakening more to their opportunities in this 
direction, and we believe are realizing a blessing in the 
distribution of Volunteer matter in their own districts, 
as well as in co-operating with us in the mailing of the 
PEOPLES PULPIT. In this effort not only have the Melbourne 
friends done nobly in addressing wrappers, 
wrapping and delivering, but the same zeal is shown in 
other centers. The friends at Hobart, though only few 
in number, undertook, and have carefully carried out, 
the work of putting a "Where are the Dead?" in every 
home in Tasmania as far as the Directory will supply the 
addresses. All we did was to supply the PEOPLES 
PULPITS; they did the rest, even to the posting, and then, 
by their donations to the Tract Fund, have paid for the 
PEOPLES PULPITS also. Again the friends at Ardrossan 
are writing the wrappers for all South Australia, and the 
Wellington and Auckland friends are doing the same for 
New Zealand, while at Sydney they are arranging to 
wrap and post for New South Wales as well as to write 
the wrappers. So you will see that we are a happy, busy 
company in loving co-operation with the Lord of the Harvest, 
in thrusting in the Sickle of Truth. 

Though we have had the PEOPLES PULPIT running 
for only about four months, already there have gone out 
about 70,000 of the special issue, through the post, and 
enquiries are coming in daily as a result. Our Subscription 
Cards number about 250 and many of these have 
subscribed for quantities of from ten to hundreds. We 
believe that the Lord is blessing this work, so "that all his 
saints here shall be 'sealed in their foreheads' before the 
four winds (of trouble) are let loose." 

In regard to Pilgrim Work: With the exception of 
the more isolated parts, the friends everywhere have been 
visited, some more than once, and we believe they have 
been encouraged and strengthened. This means that 
some 10,539 miles have been traveled by rail and boat, 
about 56 public meetings have been held, and about 108 
private and semi-private meetings, with a total attendance 
of about 2,265, besides many personal visits made, 
the traveling cost being L.63 10s. 2d. 

Regarding funds: We would like to be able to show 
Australasia as supporting the work on her own shores; 
this, however, has not been attained, though a big move 
in that direction has been made. In the previous year 
L.9 1 were all that were received by way of donations to 
the Tract Fund. In the year just closed the total of 
Tract Fund, Good Hopes and PEOPLES PULPIT contributions 
has reached L.213 17s. Id.; this is simply the work of 
the Truth in the hearts of the Lord's people, not a penny 
has been solicited in any way. Then if we were to add 
to this the amount which the friends in various parts have 
spent in connection with the Pilgrim meetings of the 
International Bible Students Association, which, as far 
as we have particulars, would be about L.40, it makes a 
total of L. 253 17s. Id., which is much beyond anything that 



has been done in the past. We know that many of those 
who have contributed have done so at quite a little 
personal sacrifice, and yet have realized a joy that money 
cannot buy in thus co-operating with the great Lord of 
the Harvest in bringing the joys of the Truth to others. 

We believe that the interested ones all over have made 
good spiritual progress and our meetings in Melbourne 
have increased in interest, and slightly in numbers also. 
We have just undertaken a special effort in the way of 
Saturday Night Chart-Talks in South Melbourne. The 
first was last Saturday and was quite encouraging; some 
twelve or thirteen of the friends distributed about 12,000 
PEOPLES PULPITS with a good advertisement on the back. 
We hope to find some new interest in this way. With 
Christian regards to yourself and all the happy household, 

Yours in the Service of our Redeemer, 
R. E. B. NICHOLSON, 

Australian Secretary. 
EDWARD NELSON, Auditor. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK. 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES, sold at cost 1 1,927 

" (Magazine edition) 470 

Booklets 2,481 



Total 14,878 

Free Literature: 

Old Theology Tracts 114,710 

Debates, Sermons, TOWERS, etc 54,411 

PEOPLES PULPITS 267,600 



Total 436,721 

R4740 : page 9 

Representing Tract pages 7,924,792 

Letters received 1,944 

Letters sent out 2,829 

TRACT FUND EXPENDITURES. 

Deficit from 1909 L.969 17 7 

General expenditure (including freight, 

postage, rent, etc 21112 5 

Pilgrim work, meetings, etc 107 1 7 



L.1,288 11 7 
Good Hopes and donations to Tract 
Fund from Australasian friends L.197 3 4 



Deficit now owing Brooklyn L. 1,091 8 3 



NORWEGIAN BRANCH REPORT 



Publications circulated: 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES 2,023 

Booklets 3,104 



Total 5,127 

Tracts and PEOPLES PULPIT circulated free 342,600 

These in Tract pages 5,480,000 

Letters and cards received 1,164 

Letters and cards sent out 710 

page 9 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR FEBRUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for February follow: (1) 259; 
(2) Vow; (3) 301; (4) 75; (5) 60; (6) 135; (7) 
129; (8) 333; (9) 176; (10) 238; (11) 38; (12) 105; 
(13) 293; (14) 170; (15) 172; (16) 245; (17) 313; 
(18) 8; (19) 279; (20) 145; (21) 229; (22) 256; (23) 
98; (24) 164; (25) 162; (26) 160; (27) 208; (28) 303; 
(29) 222; (30) 267. 



R4740 : page 10 

THE PRAYER-ANSWERING GOD 

--I KINGS 18:l-40.-FEBRUARY 12.- 

"Choose you this day whom ye will serve."— Joshua 24:15. 

THE word of the Lord came to Elijah in the 

third year instructing him to manifest himself 

to King Ahab, with a view to the 

termination of the drouth. This may have 

been the third year of the Prophet's sojourn 

at Zarephath, or it may have been the 

third year after Elijah's announcement to 

Ahab. The land of Israel may already 

have been experiencing a six-months' 

drouth when Elijah announced to the king 

that no rain was to be expected until he, as God's servant, 

would announce it or bring it. In any event we have the 

assurance that the entire period of drouth was three and 

a half years.— Luke 4:25; James 5:17. 

When the time was fulfilled God directed Elijah to 
present himself to King Ahab, because the time had come 
when God was willing to relieve the drouth— when a 
sufficiency of punishment had come upon the Israelites for 



their iniquities— when at least some of them had been 
called to their senses, reminded of their Covenant with 
the Lord and his engagement to give them blessings or 
adversities, according to their obedience. On arriving 
at the palace Elijah called for the Royal Superintendent, 
or Prime Minister, Obadiah. He was a godly man and, 
of course, distressed by the idolatrous course of the King 
and the Queen. If he was not sufficiently courageous to 
protest openly, he was, nevertheless, courageous, for, 
in a time when the servants of Jehovah were being 
persecuted to death by Queen Jezebel, Obadiah hid one 
hundred of them and supplied them with the necessities 
of life— evidently at the risk of his all. When Obadiah 
met Elijah and was told to tell the King that Elijah was 
there to see him, Obadiah feared to do so. He declared 
that himself and others had searched the entire country 
over most carefully to find Elijah and found him not. He 
realized that the Lord had hidden him. He protested that 
if now he would declare that Elijah was ready to see the 
King, the probabilities were that, by the time the King 
would get there, the spirit or power of the Lord would 
somehow carry Elijah away. Then the King, infuriated, 
would cause Obadiah's death; but Elijah reassured him. 

When the King met Elijah his first word was, "Art 
thou he that troubleth Israel?" This is the worldly custom. 
The fearless minister who tells the Truth and 
relates the Divine prophecy respecting the rewards of 
evil-doing is held accountable, as though he had caused 
the trouble. But Elijah was not intimidated. He promptly 
answered, I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy 
parents' house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments 
of the Lord and followed Baal. Three years 
before the King would have probably ordered the execution 
of Elijah; but the fulfillment of his word and the 
pangs of hunger had humbled him. He was anxious that 
the blight should be removed and responded to the 
demands of Elijah that the eight hundred and fifty 
prophets of idolatrous Baalism should meet at Mt. Carmel 
and that thither all the people of Israel, represented by 
their chief men, should also assemble. The design, evidently, 
was a contest between Elijah, the representative 
of God, and these murderous priests of Baal, proteges of 
Queen Jezebel. 

"CHOOSE YE THIS DAY" 

This gathering of the priests and of the prophets required 
time, but was finally accomplished. When the 
meeting convened Elijah declared that it was time to 
have a testing and showing as to who really was God, 
Jehovah or Baal. The test was to be that two altars 
were to be built and two bullocks were to be sacrificed. 
The Baalites were to provide the bullocks themselves and 
to make choice of the one for their own altar. Whichever 
God would answer by fire and accept the offering, would 
be acknowledged as the only true God. The proposition 



was so fair and reasonable that the prophets of Baal 
could not refuse it. 

To them came the first opportunity. They had the 
noontime opportunity, when the fierce heat of the sun 
seemed almost warm enough to set fire to the fat of the 
bullock. They prayed; they shrieked; they cut themselves 
with knives, entreating that Baal would answer by 
fire and prove himself the mighty god. Hour after hour 
this proceeded until evening, when they were forced to 
give over and admit their inability. 

Then came Elijah's turn. He commanded that water 
be brought and that the altar which he was to use should 
be thoroughly flooded with water. No one must have 
room to say that there was a secret smoulder of fire 
beneath. And, since the sun had gone down, no one 
could claim a spontaneous combustion. Then Elijah 
prayed calmly, earnestly, reverently and the Divine 
answer came— a fire from heaven consuming the sacrifice 
and licking up the water in the trough of the altar. 

Then the people recognized the difference. They fell 
on their faces and said, Jehovah is The God! A great 
lesson had been learned. 

A lesson for us is that the masses of Christendom are 
deceived today, as were the masses of Israel then. And 
when, by and by, God shall open their eyes of understanding 
through the agency of Messiah's Kingdom, every knee 
shall bow and every tongue confess. The knowledge 
of the Lord will fill the whole earth. 

Complying with the Lord's direction through Elijah, 
the Israelites slew all the prophets of Baal. We are 
not to understand this to represent the Divine command 
to us today to put all false teachers to death. We are to 
remember, as before suggested, that Israel was a special 
nation with which God dealt in a special manner, and that 
many of their doings, under Divine direction, were typical 
of higher things to be accomplished in God's Kingdom. 
Ultimately, after full opportunity, every false teacher 
and every wilful sinner will be destroyed. "All the 
wicked will God destroy." The death of those priests of 
Baal foreshadowed the destruction in the Second Death 
of all who work iniquity; but those priests themselves did 
not suffer the Second Death. Like all the remainder of 
Adam's race, their resurrection from the dead was 
provided for at Calvary, and they, as well as all others, 
must be brought to a knowledge of the Truth and to an 
opportunity of reconciliation to God. Following this denouncement 
came the long-desired rain, not only physically 
refreshing, but also showing a return of Divine favor. 
It fell on the evil and on the good, to make both better. 

"When clouds hang heavy o'er thy way, 
And darker grows the weary day, 
And thou oppressed by anxious care 
Art almost tempted to despair, 
Still wait upon the Lord. 



"When friends betray thy loving trust, 
And thou art humbled in the dust, 
When dearest joys from thee have fled, 
And Hope within thy heart lies dead, 
Still wait upon the Lord. 

"Whate'er thy care, believe his word; 
In joy or grief, trust in the Lord. 
Good courage he will give to thee, 
And strong, indeed, thy heart shall be, 
By waiting on the Lord." 



page 1 1 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1911 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of Truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in 
the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and breadths, 
the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 



during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work carried on by 
our Tract Society. Of course, I cannot in advance judge 
or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the 
sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating SCRIPTURE STUDIES in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the PEOPLES PULPIT in various 
languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to brethren 
who have the heart and opportunity to circulate them widely, 
and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent out as "Pilgrims" 
to preach the Divine Plan of Salvation, and in general to 
be expended as the officers of the Society may deem best), 
the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for WATCH TOWER or PEOPLES PULPIT sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y. 

or, 24 Eversholt St., London, N. W., England; or, Flinders 
Building, Flinders St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 



(Post Office) (State) 

page 12 

Watch Tower Subscriptions 
ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT 



The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 



on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us 
such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from their 
donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly, please, 
mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



Watch Tower Subscription Renewals 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of THE WATCH TOWER 
continued. The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to 
send their applications in May. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration, look on your TOWER wrapper. 
Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

Hymns of Dawn with Music 



Our readers have for years inquired for this book. We 
now have it for you in handsome cloth binding and at cost 
price. It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world, 
at 35 cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25c each, in any 
quantity. 

Watch Tower Binders 



These are substantially made of stiff boards, and can hold 
two years' issues of THE WATCH TOWER. They prevent soiling 
and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 

Christian Home Embellishments 



For several years we have been supplying readers with 
handsome text and Motto-Cards for the walls of their homes. 
Their influence is excellent; for they continually and cheerfully 
catch the eye and remind the heart of our great favors 
present and to come, based upon the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of our Father's Word. We commend these 
as helps in the "narrow way"— helps in character-building. 

We have imported an extremely choice line of Motto-Cards 
of entirely new design. We also have some of the good old 



standbys, which are difficult to improve upon. We again 
adopt the $1 packet (postage included) plan as every way 
the best and cheapest. Remember that our prices are about 
one-half the usual charge, and the very choicest. 

Packet M. A. —Nearly all old, but choice, medium sizes. 

Packet M.B.— Old and new designs, about equally assorted. 

Packet M.C.— All new, specially recommended to those 
who have already had our old standbys. 

Packet M.D.— Old and new, but all large. 

Packet M.E.— All new, all large. 

Daily Heavenly Manna 



Those who use this book as we recommend are surely being 
blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the MANNA comment should be read. Introduce it to 
your friends as a help toward godly living. See prices in our 
November 1st issue. 

Cross and Crown Pins 



No. 1. Cross and Crown design in ten-carat gold, five-eighths 
inch in diameter. The crown is burnished. The surrounding 
wreath is rustic in design— brilliant gold. The cross 
is of dark red enamel, with only the outlines showing gold. 
The pin has a patent fastening. Price, $1.15. 

No. 2. This is exactly the same as No. 1, except that instead 
of the pin it has a screw-clamp at the back, making it 
more desirable for men's wear. Price, $1.15. 

No. 3. Exactly the same as No. 2, except that it is three-eights 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 4. Exactly the same as No. 1, except that it is three-eights 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 5. Like No. 1, except that it is of silver instead of 
gold and wreath is washed in green. Price, 35c. 

These prices all include postage and are very much less 
than jewelers would charge, as we have them manufactured 
in large quantities for your convenience. 

New and Old Tracts, All Languages, Free 



A Privilege and a Service 



We are convinced that THE WATCH TOWER lists do not 
contain the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its 
teachings. The total is small enough surely, and we are not 
content that the name of any should be missing. We believe 



that all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 

way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding 

them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the 

flesh and the Devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and 

heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring THE WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; but now we request every subscriber to 
inquire among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in 
their subscriptions either on credit or free, as their circumstances 
may necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any 
future time request that the debt be cancelled, and we will 
cheerfully comply. We desire that as nearly as possible THE 
WATCH TOWER lists shall represent all those deeply interested 
in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the co-operation 
of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
28,000; but it should be at least 30,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join in this service. 



R4741 : page 13 

A DISCOURAGED PROPHET'S FLIGHT 

-I KINGS 19.-FEBRUARY 19.- 

"They that wait upon the Lord shall 
renew their strength."— Isaiah 40:31. 

SO signal a victory of Truth over error, of 
God over Baal, doubtless greatly encouraged 
Elijah, the Prophet. It was God's 
victory and Elijah rejoiced on that account, 
and because he had, in so large degree, 
been the Divine agent in the matter. But 
soon he learned that Queen Jezebel was 
as implacable a foe as ever. She viewed 
the matter, not as a combat between the 
Almighty and Baal, but as between her 
prophets and Elijah. When she learned that her prophets 
had been slain, she was enraged and sent word to Elijah 
that his fate must be the same. So unexpected a turn of 
affairs Elijah had not anticipated. He had the courage 
to meet the King and to denounce the eight hundred and 
fifty priests of Baal, but a mere message from a woman 
sapped his courage. He fled into the wilderness— there, 
strangely enough, to pray the Lord to take away the life 
which he had run away to protect. 
Let us not forget, however, the suggestion in the 



previous study that the course of Elijah was intended to 
be typical— to foreshadow the experiences of the Church 
during this Gospel Age. Let us examine this feature a 
little further and note the type and antitype: 

Not only is Jezebel referred to in Revelation as symbolizing 
a corrupt Church system, inculcating false doctrines 
amongst the Lord's nominal people (Ahab, her husband, 
as representing the civil power and Elijah typical 
of the saintly class of the Church), but let us also note 
that the time of no rain was also typical, as mentioned in 
the Book of Revelation. Four times is this same period of 
three and a half years referred to as the period in which 
the true saints of God were hidden from the eyes of the 
world in general in a wilderness condition. And during 
the same period there was a great drouth and famine, 
spiritual, amongst the people. Those three and a half 
years, in Revelation, are styled three and a half times, 
and again, twelve hundred and sixty days, and again, 
forty-two months. -Rev. 12:14; 12:6; 11:3; 13:5. 

In Revelation, however, these various references to 
three and a half years are symbolical— each day for a 
year— and hence signify twelve hundred and sixty years 
in the antitype. Many believe that those years began to 
count in 538 A.D. and that they ended in 1798. Those 
who thus understand the matter recognize the increased 
interest in the Bible which followed 1798 to signify the 
time of rain (refreshment and blessing), which for the 
past century has brought great enlightenment to the whole 
world. But, however we may apply those three and a 
half years, symbolical years (twelve hundred and sixty 
literal years), most evidently they cover the antitypical 
period represented by Elijah's wilderness experiences. 

If this be a true application it implies a measure of 
fear and cowardice for a time on the part of God's saintly 
people. As Elijah again went into hiding it would imply 
that the saintly ones became obscure. While they were in 
this wilderness condition a second time, God directed their 
course and taught them some important lessons, represented 
in Elijah's experiences related in this lesson. He 
was shown a strong wind, tearing the mountains and 
breaking in pieces the rocks, but this was not the Lord's 
manifestation of himself, but merely an illustration of 
power. The next lesson was an earthquake, but neither 
was this the Lord. Next came a fire, but not in this could 
Elijah fully discern the Lord. Finally came the still, 
small voice and wonderful message of grace and Truth. 
In this Elijah recognized God as he did not recognize 
him in the other manifestations. 

The antitypical Elijah, God's saintly people, are today 
learning to discriminate between different manifestations 
of Divine power through different agencies. Windy 
strife of words, which comes even as a hurricane, bringing 
devastation to the present order of Society, is not the 
voice of God, but the voice of humanity. The earthquake, 
representing a great time of social unrest, disturbance, 
upheaval, is not God's message to Elijah, but, nevertheless, 



is a manifestation of another power which he has in 
the world, by which, ultimately, the present order of 
things will give way before the Kingdom of his dear Son. 
The fire, representing consumption, destruction, anarchy, 
is not the Lord, but merely human passions which he will 
permit. The Elijah class are to understand God through 
the still, small voice heard by the ears of their hearts— 
the voice of Truth, the voice of God's Word speaking to 
his people today most wonderfully, yet unheard by the 
antitypical Ahab, Jezebel and others, intended only for 
the antitypical Elijah class. 

"I HAVE YET SEVEN THOUSAND" 

Notwithstanding this voice, Elijah felt disconsolate 
and desired to die, thinking of himself as being alone 
consecrated to the Lord. But the Lord answered him, "I 
have left me seven thousand in Israel who have not 
bowed the knee unto Baal." Similarly today there are 
two classes in spiritual Israel. One class is in the wilderness 
condition, separate from the world. Another, a 
large class, is still more or less associated with and bound 
up in Babylon, although at heart they do not acknowledge 
any but the true God nor bow the knee to others. 



R4742 : page 13 

SOME GLAD, SWEET DAY 

Some day, some glad, sweet day 
We shall be like our blessed Lord 
And see him as he is. 
Soon we shall strain our 
Weary eyes no more 
To catch, beyond this earthly 
House of fettering clay, 
A gleam of heavenly glory 
From his radiant face. 

Some day, some fair, sweet day 
His loving hand will wipe 
Away our tears. His tender 
Voice will thrill our souls 
With rapture, when we 
Hear him say, "Well done, 
Dear heart, Well done, 
My joy is thine; for thee 
The victor's crown is won. 

"Thou hast been faithful, 
Thou hast borne the cross, 
The thorns have pierced thy feet; 
But now the Night is past— 
The Day has come— bright, 



Glorious Day of endless joy and love. 
The trial time hast proved thee true, 
And thou art safe, beloved, 
In thy Father's home." 

O, glorious Day, for thee we long! 
We will be faithful, will the 
Burdens bear, sustained by grace Divine. 
In meek submission to thy holy will, 
Dear Lord, by faith we clasp thy hand 
As side by side we tread the Narrow Way 
And wait— for it will surely come- 
Some day, some dear, sweet day, 
O, tarry not too long ! 

LIZZIE C. RAMSDELL. 



R4741 :page 14 

A KING SOLD HIMSELF 

-I KINGS 21. -FEBRUARY 26.- 

"Take heed and beware of covetousness— 
which is idolatry."— Luke 12:15; Col. 3:5. 

TO King Ahab Elijah said, "Thou hast sold 

thyself to work evil in the sight of the 

Lord." The effects of the drouth gradually 

disappeared, but its salutary lesson remained 

with the King and with the people 

to a considerable extent. The true God 

had some recognition. Baal's influence was 

considerably broken. Queen Jezebel evidently 

relented concerning her threat 

against Elijah. He returned and founded 

various Schools of the Prophets in Israel, himself being 

the master-spirit amongst them. 

Our present lesson shows the meanness of covetousness 
and the awful power of a wicked woman. Ahab had 
two fine palaces; one of them, at Jezreel, was an "ivory" 
palace, but even its possession did not make the King 
happy. He desired to attach to it a fine vineyard owned 
by Naboth. He sent Naboth word of his desires, offering 
to purchase with money or to trade for it another vineyard. 
Naboth, asserting his rights, declined to sell for 
any price. 

As a result the King was disappointed, heart-sick, 
vexed, pouty. He had allowed covetousness to grow in 
his heart. He wanted that vineyard. He was King, so 
it was very disrespectful of Naboth to refuse to take a 
good, liberal price for it. Naboth declared as his objection 
that the Lord's regulations forbade that he should 
sell his family inheritance. Apparently it was a hopeless 
case and Ahab, solemn and sour, lay abed, refusing food. 



Then entered Jezebel the Queen, inquiring the cause 
of his sorrow. Hearing it she answered, I will give it to 
you. Forthwith she wrote letters to the chief men of 
the city, signing the letters with her husband's seal. With 
brutal frankness the letters told the select men of the 
city what was desired of them. 

(1) They were to make a mockery of religion by 
keeping a fast. 

(2) They were to act hypocritically to their neighbor 
Naboth by giving him the most prominent place of honor 
at the fast. 

(3) They were to provide two worthless scamps 
(presumably by bribery) who, at the appropriate time 
in the fast would take their places near Naboth and 
then, with feigned religious fervor, protest against him 
and denounce him as a blasphemer of God and the King, 
corroborating each other with sworn testimony that they 
had heard the blasphemy with their own ears. 

(4) The penalty of blasphemy was recognized to be 
that of stoning and the decree was to be carried out and 
Naboth thus to be gotten rid of. 

If we are inclined to feel or speak strongly of the 
wicked course of Jezebel, as we should, let us not forget 
that somewhat similar practices prevail in our day. True, 
no one today could be stoned to death at the suggestion 
of a Queen in civilized lands. Nevertheless, people have 
been heard to express the wish that they had lived in 
former times, so as to have had an opportunity for stoning 
those whom they disliked. But take a case in point: 
Suppose a man conducting a successful business. Suppose 
covetous neighbors set up a competing business, as they 
would have a full right to do. But suppose, then, that 
one or the other, coveting the whole trade, were to attempt 
sharp practises in business, selling commodities at below 
cost, interfering with the other's credit at the bank, or 
slandering the other, would not this be covetousness in 
action— covetousness of the same kind which King Ahab 
entertained? And would it not be reprehensible in God's 

R4742 : page 14 

sight? And dare any who respect the Lord, so thoroughly 
neglect the Golden Rule of his Word? 

Another illustration: A storekeeper doing a good 
business was offered a certain commodity at a less price 
than he had been paying under a three-years' contract. 
He accepted. The party who had been selling him this 
commodity in the past was angry, covetous of the trade. 
He set up a competing business and sold goods at a loss, 
as he could afford to do, being wealthy, until the first 
storekeeper failed for lack of business. Then the new 
store was closed down, because it had effected its work 
as a business assassin. It had killed Naboth. Indeed, 
covetousness and Jezebel methods, adapted to present-day 
conditions, prevail much more generally than the majority 
of people suppose and chiefly amongst the very rich, who 



have enough and to spare, but who covet their neighbors' 
stocks and bonds, gold and silver, etc. If God denounced 
Ahab as having sold himself to iniquity, what would the 
Lord's verdict be on some of the customs of our day, 
which has so much greater degree of light and knowledge 
than Ahab possessed? 

"THAT WOMAN JEZEBEL" 

As per instructions, word was at once sent, which 
came to the hands of Jezebel, saying that Naboth was 
dead, as per the King's wishes. The Queen then said to 
her sullen lord, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of 
Naboth; he is dead. 

The King seems to have had no qualms of conscience, 
but to have been in some respects as bad as the Queen, 
but with less courage. At all events he proceeded to take 
possession of the vineyard— as though he did not 
recognize that there is a God of Justice to whom he must 
ultimately account. 

Then Elijah, under Divine direction, went forth to 
meet the King and, by the Lord's command said, "Hast 
thou killed and also taken possession? In the place where 
the dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy 
blood." And this prophecy was fulfilled to the letter 
very shortly after. Note, however, the King's attitude 
and how inclined he was, as before, to ignore the Lord 
and to think merely of the Prophet. 

Ahab accosted Elijah, saying, "Hast thou found me, O 
mine enemy?" He received the answer, "I have found 
thee because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the 
sight of the Lord." 

Covetousness is one of the most crying evils of our 
day. It is causing more heartaches and trouble of every 
kind, perhaps, than any other sin. 



R4742 : page 14 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Though you, dear Brother, are so busy, with the dear 
Lord's work, I am sure you will be pleased to know that the 
passing year has been the best ever to me, your humble 
sister in Brazil. 

Please take my case as a positive, living proof that there 
are none too far away to be reached by the "River, the 
streams whereof shall make glad the city of God." 

It is with thankful heart I mention God's wonderful providence 
in the mail system of this his day, which brings to me 
the precious truths through his chosen "Servant," THE WATCH 
TOWER, etc. I rejoice with you in the new and wider fields 

R4742 : page 15 



of usefulness— especially your recent messages to the Hebrew 
people— and I am trying to "Keep awake and watch the 
stately steppings of our Present Lord amongst the affairs of 
mankind." 

I had some difficulties in understanding the question of 
"Our Advocate and the World's Mediator," but now I see 
clearly the Scripturalness of your teachings, and thank God 
for the light on this and many other points. The only 
"assembling together" there is for me is in the printed page. 
Therefore, "the Vow," "Manna," the hymns, THE WATCH 
TOWER, DAWNS and sermons, and our dear new Bible, are 
unspeakable treasures to me. 

May the Lord's presence abide with you continually. 
Pray for me, as I do for you daily. 

BELLONA FERGUSON.-Brazil, S.A. 



DR. L. W. JONES, Chicago, 111. 
MY DEAR DOCTOR:- 

Your letter dated October 18 reached me in time. I am 
sorry not to be able to help you along on your Chicago 
meeting. I have no one in Chicago with whom I could make 
you acquainted with a view to help along that noble movement, 
which has as its end the spreading of that wonderful 
message concerning the future of the Jewish people. My 
experience with Pastor Russell's literature, particularly that 
part that treats the Jewish question, has taught me that in 
the very near future we shall have created a great movement 
among the Jews, a movement which probably will have no 
equal in the history of my people. 

All over the country, where Pastor Russell's words reach, 
they are received with the greatest enthusiasm. But a certain 
method must be adopted to reach my people. They are 
very suspicious, when they hear a Christian speak about their 
future. They immediately think there must be something 
wrong behind it. Besides, Pastor Russell has created a great 
number of enemies among my people. Some of the influential 
rabbis, and some of the Jewish editors, have seen the 
majority of the Jewish people turn with great enthusiasm 
to Pastor Russell's literature. They have seen the 
popularity that this man has gained within a short time. 
They have heard that in Jewish meetings, in synagogues and 
elsewhere Pastor Russell's sermons are read and discussed. 
Immediately many thought that this man is about to become 
a leader among Israel, and they are trying their best to 
discredit Pastor Russell. 

You know, my dear Doctor, what representatives of the 
Christian dogmatic church are trying to do, in order to minimize 
Pastor Russell's influence in the Christian world. 
Both Jewish rabbis and Christian ministers are led by the 
same motives. They are afraid of a man who proclaims 
the Bible as the supreme authority; the Bible as interpreted 
by itself. 

I hope that your meeting will be a great success. There 



is no doubt in my mind that it will. By this time, every Jew 
in this country and in others has heard something about 
Pastor Russell. I wish I could be present in Chicago and 
help you along as much as possible, to make that meeting 
the success it deserves to be. 

I have great news for all who take interest in Pastor Russell's 
work and would like to see his great ideas and noble 

R4743 : page 15 

teachings become universal. The news that I am referring 
to will make history as soon as it is made public. 
Very truly yours, ADOLPH B. LANDAU. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

When "the Vow" first came out I was undecided for some 
months as to whether I should take it or not. I could not 
see any objection to any of its features, although I felt that 
I had made a full consecration to the Lord and hence did 
not need to add anything to it. In the meantime many 
friends seemed to be greatly blessed through the taking of 
"the Vow," and I came to the conclusion that I could not 
afford to miss any blessings, so I took it. 

It went along about a year and the Lord finally showed 
me, through "the Vow," that after all my consecration had not 
been as complete and deep as it might have been. Then and 
there "the Vow" became to me a real thing and for the past 
year I have had a wonderful blessing through it in the way 
of a closer walk with my Lord and Master. 

The contemplation of what "the Vow" has done for me 
during the past year proves to me that it is only another 
feature of the Truth— "meat in due season." 

My daily prayer for you is that you some day may hear the 
"Well done." 

Your brother in the Anointed, S. M. PETERSON. 



page 15 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study IV.— The New Creation Predestinated. 
FEBRUARY 5 

(1) Explain the doctrine of Election as generally and 
erroneously set forth. P. 163. 

(2) Briefly state the correct and Scripturally supported 
view. P. 164, par. 1. 

(3) Have the non-elect suffered any injury by God's election 
of the New Creation? Give illustration. P. 164, par. 2. 

(4) Distinguish between the "elect" and the "very elect." 
P. 165, par. 1. 



(5) To what unfaithful class does the Scripture, 1 John 5:16, 
apply? P. 165, par. 2. 

(6) How do the Apostles Peter and Jude describe this 
class? P. 166, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 12 

(7) Why is it impossible to renew unto repentance the 
class mentioned in Heb. 6:4-9? P. 166, par. 2. 

(8) While there is wilfulness on the part of both these 
classes, how do those referred to in Heb. 10:26,27,31, differ 
from these just mentioned? P. 167, par. 1; P. 168. 

(9) What class is referred to as the Great Company, and 
why do they fail to be of the "very elect?" P. 168, par. 2. 

(10) Explain the parable of the Vine in connection with 
the New Creation. P. 169, par. 1. 

(11) Is it sufficient that we attain a place among the true 
branches of the Vine? If not, what more is necessary? P. 
169, par. 2. 

(12) Mention other elections in the past, brought to our 
attention through the Scriptures, and name the chief difference 
between these and the election of the New Creation. 

P. 170. 

FEBRUARY 19 

(13) Did any of these elections in any sense apply to the 
everlasting future of any individuals? P. 171, par. 1. 

(14) Explain the types of Jacob and Esau with respect to 
election. P. 171, par. 2. 

(15) What is the proper thought in the statement, "Jacob 
have I loved, and Esau have I hated"? (Rom. 9:13.) P. 172, 
par. 1. 

(16) Cite a notable instance of God's exercise of authority 
in the affairs of mankind in general. P. 173, par. 1. 

(17) Give scientific and Scriptural illustrations of different 
methods of carrying out a death penalty. P. 173, par. 2; P. 174, 
par. 1. 

(18) In his election or selection of individuals and nations 
in the past ages, did God coerce their wills? P. 174, par. 2. 

FEBRUARY 26 

(19) Explain Jehovah's statement regarding Pharaoh, 
"For this very purpose have I raised thee up." P. 175, par. 1. 

(20) How did God "harden Pharaoh's heart"? P. 175, par. 2. 

(21) Quote several Scriptures which declare God's election 
of the nation of Israel. P. 176, par. 1. 

(22) Briefly outline how the election passed from natural 

to spiritual Israel, as described by the Apostle in Romans 9-11. 
P. 177, par. 1. 

(23) Name the features of the original election which still 
remain with natural Israel. P. 178, par. 1. 

(24) Explain the significance of God's grace or favor in its 
relation to the elect New Creation. P. 178, par. 2. 

(25) Does 1 Peter 1:2, or any other Scripture, teach a 



Divine foreknowledge respecting the individuals composing 
the elect Church? P. 179, par. 1. 



BRITISH ITINERARY 

LECTURES BY BROTHER WILLIAM CRAWFORD 

Edinburgh Jan. 14-16 Birmingham Jan. 26, 27 

Blythe " 17 Cardiff " 28, 29 

Newcastle " 18 Llanelly " 30 

Middlesborough " 19 Bristol Jan. 31, Feb. 1 

Eston " 20 Gloucester Feb. 2 

Otley " 21 Tewkesbury " 3 

Bradford " 22 Cheltenham " 4 

Dewsbury " 23 Oxford " 5 

Sheffield " 24, 25 Reading " 6 



page 17 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

A European Trip in March 18 

Western Convention Tour 18 

Views From The Watch Tower 19 

New Danger in Christian Science 19 

Peace, Peace, Yet No Peace! 20 

Baptists Endorse Higher Criticism 20 

German Branch Report 21 

The Great Company as Levites 22 

Only the Priests in the Holy 22 

Relationship to the Lord Not Necessarily 
Dependent Upon Knowledge of 

Every Detail 22 

Those Who Are Reproved by the Light 23 

Regarding the Word Fear 23 

The Ransom and the Church 24 

Our Part in the Sin-Off ering a Favor 24 

The Harvest Work in Africa 25 

Interesting Questions 27 

Woman's Position in Church and Home 27 

Some Interesting Letters 29 

R4734 : page 18 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 



CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



A EUROPEAN TRIP IN MARCH 

The Lord willing, the Editor purposes another visit to 
Great Britain, and possibly to Germany and Scandinavia, 
about March 8th, expecting to be back at Brooklyn by May 
7th. 

WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

Plans are nearly perfected for a Western Convention Tour 
by Brother Russell. He proposes starting June 9th, making 



first stop at Indianapolis, on the 10th; St. Louis, 11th; Denver, 
18th; San Francisco, 24th; Portland, July 2nd; Winnipeg, 
9th. A few stops between these. 

Brother Dr. L. W. Jones, 3003 Walnut street, Chicago, 
learning of the proposition, asked if there would be any objection 
to his getting up a party with a special train, to accompany. 
We replied, "No; it would enhance our pleasure." 
Brother Jones is proceeding to make up a party. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., FEB. 5 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening Question Meeting 
at 7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse 
for the Public at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 
Lafayette avenue and St. Felix street. 

In conjunction with this meeting an opportunity will be 
given for symbolic Baptism in water. Robes, etc., will be provided. 
Any desiring to make use of this opportunity will 
please give us timely notice. 

TRENTON, N.J., FEB. 12 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock in the Auditorium of the 
Republican Club, 139 East Hanover St.; discourse for the 
interested in the same place at 7:30 p.m. The Public Lecture 
in the afternoon at 3 will be held in the Taylor Opera 
House, 16 South Broad St. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., FEB. 19 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony, 10 o'clock, and 
discourse for the interested at 7:30 p.m. in Bible House 
Chapel, 610 Arch St. Lecture for the Public in Carnegie 
Hall, Federal and Ohio Sts., at 3 p.m. 

FALL RIVER, MASS., FEB. 26 

Morning Rally at 10:30 and discourse for the interested 
at 7:30 p.m. in Music Hall, 37 Franklin St. Public discourse 
at 3 p.m. in the Academy of Music, Main St. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 5 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock in 
the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening Question Meeting at 
7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 
Public at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette 
Ave. and St. Felix St. 



HOW YOU CAN ASSIST US 

Our dear readers can save much of our time: 
By writing their letters plainly. 



By putting their full address at the head of the letter. 

By putting their orders on a separate piece of paper from 
their correspondence. 

By giving our file reference in replying to any communications 
from our office. Write "File A," "File B" or "File R," 
as the case may be, on face of your addressed envelope or 
postal-card and at beginning of your letter. 

Some, we notice, are using a small rubber stamp for their 
address. This is convenient and may also be used for stamping 
return address on your envelopes. 

We thank you for interesting clippings sent in, but request 
that you give name and date of the publication. If 
you send the paper be sure to mark the articles distinctly. 



R4743 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

NEW DANGER IN CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 

"DEATH is mortal error!" This is the declaration 

of Christian Science. All Christian 

Scientists thus far have made failure; at 

least, according to their own theory. They 

had hoped that Mrs. Eddy would never yield 

to mortal error and hence that she would 

never die. But she, too, has gone the way 

of all the earth. How uncomfortable must 

be the religious theory which fails its votaries 

at the very last! Every other religious 

system at least claims progress, growth, from grace 

to grace; from knowledge to knowledge; from one attainment 

to another. But Christian Science must admit 

that thus far all of its votaries have made shipwreck of 

their faith in the end— have yielded, according to their 

own theory, to "mortal error"— to the error of thinking 

that there is such a thing as death and going into it. 

Alas! how poor and weak is the human mind! How easily 

deluded! 

BEHOLD NOW A GRAVE DANGER! 

We have already pointed out that the teachings of 
Christian Science (that there is no sin and there is no 
death) is in direct contradiction to God's Word— "The 
wages of sin is death," "The soul that sinneth, it shall 
die." We have pointed out, on the contrary, that Christian 
Science is in full agreement with Satan's first falsehood, 
by which he deceived our first parents, saying, "Ye 
shall not surely die." (Gen. 3:4.) We do not mean to say 
that Christian Scientists are knowingly in league with 
Satan and willingly propagating his falsehoods. We have, 
however, declared and now repeat that we believe that 
Christian Science delusion is of Satan, with whose word 



it agrees, and that it is not of God, whose Word it contradicts. 

The Apostle speaks of the "depths of Satan," and again 
says that "we are not ignorant of his devices." We have 
pointed out the probability that Satan would prosecute 
his work in the near future through various materializations 
for the further deception of humanity and their 
further enslavement to error. But it had not occurred to 
us that the Adversary might make more use of Mrs. Eddy 
after death than before it— that her "mortal error" might 
be made an occasion for the still further delusion and enslavement 
of well-meaning but deceived people. The latest 
pronouncement from one of Mrs. Eddy's most prominent 
followers, Augusta E. Stetson, implies much:— 

(1) Christian Scientists are now directed to expect 
that, as Jesus arose from the dead and appeared to his 
disciples after his resurrection, so will Mrs. Eddy do. 
This, to us, means that, if possible, the fallen angels will 
materialize and personate Mrs. Eddy for the further deception 
of those who have almost worshipped her. Such 
materializations and deceptions are only what we have 
expected, although we looked for nothing of this kind 

from the Christian Science quarter. 

(2) That the teachings of Christian Science will hereafter 
be modeled more carefully along the line which we 
believe to be the Truth— teaching that the millennium is 
nigh, even at the door, with its reign of righteousness and 
inauguration of a new social order. We may be sure, 
however, that our great Adversary, Satan, will not advocate 
any measure of the Truth except for the purpose of 
injuring it or to take advantage of seeds of Truth, which 
the Lord has been permitting us to plant through millions 
of copies of the Press. It is a part of his policy, as the 
Apostle explains, to put light for darkness and darkness 
for light. At every presentation of the Truth of the past 
Satan has more or less successfully introduced grievous 
errors under its cloak. 

Undoubtedly wonderful times are immediately ahead 
of us. It behooves all those who have been blessed of 
the Lord with the opening of the eyes of their understanding 
to walk very faithfully— to remember that theirs is a 
covenant of sacrifice and to count all earthly things but 
as loss and dross, that they may win Christ and be found 
in him— members of his Body in glory, members of the 
Anointed Prophet, Priest, King, Mediator between God 
and men. 

We give the following extracts from the New York 
World:- 

AUGUSTA E. STETSON'S DECLARATIONS 

"I know, and every true believer in Christian Science must 
know, that Mrs. Eddy will make a manifestation, will reveal 
herself to me and to others, to the outside world, the unbelievers, 
too. 

"The same situation exists today as when Jesus of Nazareth 
died and was buried. After three days he manifested 



himself, to prove that there is life after death. Mrs. Eddy 

will do the same, for she occupies in the world of today precisely 

the same position that Jesus occupied in his day. 

"It may take, will take, longer for Mrs. Eddy to pass 
through the experience of material death to the stage of demonstration 
of everlasting life. It may not occur for years, 
or it may occur tomorrow or next week. But she will manifest 
herself, and all men shall know of it. 

"Those in the church who profess doubt of such a demonstration 
are like the disciples who doubted till they saw and 
felt of Jesus. I shall see Mrs. Eddy again, and I shall walk 
by her side, holding her hand, along the path that leads to 

R4744 : page 20 

life which has no death. All men who will believe will be 
shown how they may, by spiritual means, demonstrate over 
death, but first they must await Mrs. Eddy's manifestation. 

"Yesterday I would not answer questions relating to the 
expected demonstration by Mrs. Eddy— her resurrection, as 
some call it. I felt then that the hour for me to speak had 
not come. Today I am convinced the time is proper. From 
all quarters I am receiving reports of demoralization and sadness 
in the field of Christian Science because of the delay in 
the demonstration and because of the spreading abroad of 
declarations that Mrs. Eddy will not manifest herself. 

"To say that Mrs. Eddy is gone forever is to deny the 
very principles of Christian Science and to refute the teachings 
of her life and her works. 

"The age of the gospel is closed," went on Mrs. Stetson, 
speaking in the most earnest way. "A new era is opening, 
the era of the one thousand years which the Bible tells us will 
follow the second appearance of Christ, the opening of the 
millennium. Christ means Truth, and Mary Baker Eddy was 
Truth on earth again. I am waiting and watching, and my 
students are waiting and watching, for we know the moment 
is at hand when God will prove, in the person of Mrs. Eddy, 
that she was his inspired mouthpiece, to teach and unfold the 
glories of Truth and Love and Life which are represented by 
Christian Science." 



PEACE, PEACE, YET NO PEACE! 

At a time when Christendom is talking about converting 
the world by a rush of Christian missionaries upon 
heathen lands— each missionary to convert thirty-two 
thousand heathens in a year— it is well that we try to 
view the situation rationally, as well as sympathetically. 

We certainly have every sympathy for the heathen. 
We surely greatly appreciate the benevolent intentions 
of the so-called Laymen's Missionary Movement, which 
proposes to raise millions of money and accomplish the 
conversion of heathendom instanter. 

Seriously let us ask, How many suitable missionaries, 



able to really assist the heathen out of darkness into 
light— to a true knowledge of God— can be found? And 
where are they? Alas! we know as a fact that our great 
schools and colleges, so richly endowed, are graduating 
infidels, instead of Christians. To send such men to the 
heathen would be to do more harm than good. 

Instead of converting the heathen, present appearances 
are that the world is on the verge of a general conflict 
with heathendom. In Africa, in India, in China there is 
general unrest. The civilized of Europe and America 
have assumed the burden of governing the uncivilized, 
taking from them their land and its riches and compelling 
submission. Undoubtedly this maintains to some 
extent a form of law and order, but it also involves a 
certain amount of injustice against which the heathen 
mind is rebellious, as the civilized certainly would be 
under similar circumstances. 

It looks as though the New Year, 1911, might be expected 
to be a strenuous one. Behind all the military activity 
and naval preparations of the civilized world there 
lie an ambition and a fear. Embroilment in wars with 
the heathen to maintain hold upon their possessions and 
to maintain the peace and order of the world may so 
weaken the strength of some great nations at home as to 
invite conflict in Europe— possibly between Great Britain 
and Germany. Nor could we expect the United States, 
with its interests in the Panama Canal and the Philippine 
Islands and in the open door of China, to be free from a 
share in these troubles. 

How long will Christendom require to learn that the 
present order of things is far from what we may reasonably 
expect of Messiah's Kingdom? To learn this 
great lesson in the great time of trouble which approaches 
will lead all nations to look for, pray for, desire the Kingdom 
of God's dear Son. With it "The desire of all nations 
shall come."— Haggai 2:7. 

BAPTISTS ENDORSE HIGHER CRITICISM 

Amongst the most staunch adherents to the Bible are 
the Baptists. It, therefore, caused all the more astonishment 
that at their Convention in Canada they endorsed 
Higher Criticism— Infidelity. In their Toronto Educational 
Institution the Bible and its so-called Higher Critics 
had a contest. When the decision went against the Bible, 
an appeal was made to the Convention. The Convention 
upheld Higher Criticism in its endorsement of the continued 
teaching of Higher Criticism in Baptist Theological 
Schools. 

For about twenty years Higher Criticism has been 
taking a more and more pronounced stand in all the Baptist 
Theological Seminaries, as well as in all other Protestant 
Seminaries. The surprising thing about the proceedings 
of the Convention is that this brand of infidelity 
has gained such strength and such courage that it is willing 
to announce itself publicly to the whole world as Anti-Biblical. 



Here we see reflected what we have for some 
years been pointing out, namely, that all the young ministers 
of all denominations are being graduated as Higher 
Critics, Infidels, with exactly the same view of the Bible 
as Robt. Ingersoll and Thos. Paine held and advocated. 

The only difference is that these young ministers 
pose as Christians and believers in a personal God and in 
his revelation of his character and Plan in the Bible, 
whereas they are totally unbelievers. Christianity is losing 
its hold when its very foundation is laughed at by 
its most prominent representatives. He who disbelieves 
the Bible record of Adam and Eve and the fall must also 
disbelieve any necessity for a redemption of the fallen 
race. 

Those who believe that Adam fell upward, instead 
of downward, cannot have sympathy or appreciation for 
the words of the Master, that he came to seek and to recover 
that which was lost. They do not believe that we 
were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ. They 
totally deny the Master's own words that he came into 
the world to give himself a ransom-price, a corresponding 
offset, for human sin and condemnation. What Gospel 
have such ministers to preach and how few ministers 
there are in any denomination that are not Higher Critics 
—Infidels? The remainder are classed as old fogies and 
are not in demand. 

Thus we see fulfilling before our eyes the Master's 
words, "When the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith 
in the earth?" The faith once delivered to the saints is 
certainly not very generally held today, even amongst 
those who profess to be the special advocates, mouthpieces 
and champions of true religion. 



FINDING WHAT WE SEEK 

A group of college men were discussing an odd incident 
that took place recently in a university located in 
the western part of the State. Two of the most conspicuous 
young men in the graduating class had been assigned 
to take opposite sides of a debate during their last term, 
upon a religious theme relating to the authenticity of the 
Scriptures. It happened that the man assigned to defend 
the Biblical position was known to entertain pronounced 
infidelistic views, while the counter argument was given 
to one of the most active church and Y. M. C. A. workers 
in the class. 

The young men studied hard upon the theme for 
some weeks, and when the debate came off each maintained 
his side vigorously. The strange sequel was that 
after the debate the infidel had so convinced himself that 
he became a member of the church, while the other young 
man also changed his views and became fully as skeptical 
as his opponent had once been. 



R4744 : page 21 

The above illustrates a principle to which we have 
already called attention time and again. We find what 
we seek! Those who approach the Bible with earnest 
desire to find in it God's Message will be guided of the 
Lord. As it is written, "Blessed are they that hunger 
and thirst after righteousness (Truth). They shall be 
filled." 

On the other hand, those who approach the Bible from 
the standpoint of cavil, unbelief, antagonism are equally 
sure to find what they seek— flaws, contradictions, etc. 
Note how Thomas Paine and Robert Ingersoll illustrate 
this principle, and compare their experiences and findings 
with our own blessings, as we feast upon the Bible as the 
Lord's bountifully spread table of good things, "meat in 
due season for the household of faith." 

The same principle holds true with the SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES. Those who so desire can pick flaws in the 
Bible and turn and twist its statements into unreason; 
they can also similarly pick to pieces the Divine Plan of 
the Ages. 

"We walk by faith and not by sight." This principle 
holds true in respect to all of God's dealings with his 
people during the night of weeping preceding the glorious 
morning of joy, when they shall see as they are seen and 
know as they are known. Hence, to approach God's Word 
and have a right understanding of it implies:— 

(1) A heart condition of teachableness. 

(2) A heart condition of faith in God as the Great 
Teacher who knows our limitations and who has promised 
to guide the willing and the obedient into all Truth 

as it becomes meat in due season. 

(3) They should expect Divine guidance in respect 

to understanding the Scriptures, even as God has promised; 
and, expecting it, they should seek it. 

(4) While expecting and seeking and looking in the 
direction of their expectations and leadings, they should 
exercise their reasoning faculties and thereby approve or 
disapprove what is presented to them. 

(5) They should beware how they neglect these 
favors of God; they should take heed to headiness and 
high-mindedness, lest, after having enjoyed the light and 
the blessing, it should slip from them and leave them in 
the outer darkness in which we see the whole world 
groping. 



ANOTHER PEACE-COMPELLING GUN 

Wake up the mighty men. Let all the men of war 
draw near. Gather ye together in the Valley of Jehoshaphat 
(the valley of death). Let the weak say, I am 

R4745 : page 21 



strong. Beat your pruning-hooks into spears and your 
plowshare steel use for swords.— Joel 3:10. 

What it will by and by mean to go to war may be 
guessed at from the description of the gun given below. 
In connection with this preparation for war between 
nations let us not overlook the fact that governments and 
generals are becoming afraid of their troops. As the 
militia declined to serve in Ohio in connection with the 
strike disturbances, and as the marines rebelled against 
the government in Brazil, and the soldiers of Portugal 
against their generals, so it may soon be in every land 
in the world. 

Germany with her great army is becoming fearful because 
Socialism is gradually making its way amongst the 
soldiers. And even in Great Britain it was recently found 
necessary to disarm some of the militia or yeomanry. The 
secret of all this insubordination is knowledge, and behind 
the knowledge lies education, and behind education 
the printing press and God's wonderful enlightening 
power, lifting the veil of ignorance and preparing mankind 
for the great day of Messiah with its prelude of 
trouble. 

We wondered some time ago how the insurrection, 
such as the Scriptures seemed to imply, could ever sweep 
over the whole earth; how anarchy could break loose in 
spite of all the combined power and influence of capital 
and civilization opposed to it. But now we see that 
education, knowledge, is preparing the way for the 
world's great disaster, which the Scriptures seem to indicate 
may be expected within five years, but which, in any 
event, cannot longer be postponed. Now we can see that 
the very men who have been trained to use the most up-to-date 
apparatus for the destruction of human life may 
be found amongst those who have the charge and care 
of the armories and ammunitions of war. Truly that 
day will be a "time of trouble such as never was since 
there was a nation." Following is the article referred 
to:- 

"This gun, weighing less than twenty pounds, and 
manipulated after the fashion of an ordinary fowling 
piece, pours out a stream of bullets when in action at the 
rate of 400 shots per minute. The new arm is called the 
Benet-Mercier, and is of French invention. It has a 
stock that is placed against the shoulder. In action the 
soldier lies on the ground, resting the gun on two supports. 
This gives an advantage in safety over the Hiram 
Maxim rapid-firing model, since the operator of that 
gun is compelled to stand in feeding it. This brings him 
into full sight of the enemy— or rather it brings all three 
men into sight, for three are required for the manipulation 
of this heavier weapon. 

"Where the original French model weighed about 
twenty pounds, the new gun as turned out by the Government 
experts will weigh even less. Its effectiveness, 
however, it is claimed, will in no wise be impaired. It is 



said to be certain that the army in time will be equipped 
with the weapon." 



1910-GERMAN BRANCH REPORT-1910 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

Enclosed you will find Report of the harvest work done 
here in Germany:— 

DAWN-STUDIES and MANNA sent out 7,306 

Vol. 1 in TOWER form 1,630 

Booklets and TOWERS on "hell" 20,634 

Regular issue of TOWERS (12mo), copies 36,168 

Sample copies of TOWERS 15,450 

Sample TOWERS represented in tract pages 772,500 

TOWERS on "hell" as above 1,326,500 

67,000 tracts, old volunteer matter 656,000 

3,839,200 PEOPLES PULPIT 107,497,600 

Total free literature in tract pages 110,252,600 

Letters and cards received 6,726 

Letters and cards sent out 3,025 

Expense for printing, distribution of P. P. 

through newspapers and special volunteers, 

Pilgrim service, freight, postage, 

rent, light, heat, etc 47,953.54 Marks 

Receipts from European friends, Good 

Hopes, etc 17,123.49 " 



Balance from Brooklyn office 30,830.05 

Equal to $7,340.49 



I am glad to say that the friends everywhere, where 
large or small gatherings meet, seem to be more alert and 
appreciative of the fact that the time is short. Of the 
little more than 3,000 readers of the German TOWER (or 
subscribers, I should say), a good many have freely 
assisted the cause financially (not out of an abundance), 
and some liberally, so that we have received over 7,000 
marks more the past year than the year previous. May 
the dear Lord guide and direct all things to his praise and 
to the glory of our dear heavenly Father, is our prayer 
continually. 

As ever, your brother and fellow-servant in the Lord, 
O. A. KOETITZ. 



R4745 : page 22 

THE GREAT COMPANY AS LEVITES 

ONE HAS asked, "If the Levites, aside from 
their priests, were intended to typify the 
Great Company class, and if all of the Great 



Company class were called with the same 

"high calling" as those who are of the 

"Royal Priesthood," and all were begotten of 

the holy Spirit, why is this not shown in the 

type? Why is it that the Levites were 

permitted in the Court only and never 

entered the Holy? And why is it that they 

are not shown as having been anointed with the anointing 

oil? 

Answering the last question first we would say that 
the anointing oil was poured upon the head of the High 
Priest and ran down over his body. The under-priests 
were not anointed separately, except in the case of the 
death of the High Priest, when one of them should attain 
to that office. The one High Priest, therefore, according 
to the picture, represented all of the anointed; 
he represented all of the members of his Body— all of the 
under-priests. 

Considering the other part of the question, we are to 
remember that the Court condition and the Tabernacle 
condition on the Day of Atonement represented the 
condition of things in God's Plan at the present time, 
during this Gospel Age. During this time all those who 
leave the Camp and desire to draw near to God approach 
the Court, which represents the justified condition, 
the condition of harmony with God. Only those inside 
the Court can see the matters pertaining to the sacrificing 
and the entering into the Holy. In proportion as these 
take the necessary steps toward the Holy, in that proportion 
they draw nigh to God and experience a measure of 
justification, a measure of harmony, and become more 
prepared for complete justification and harmony with 
him. 

Washing at the laver is an important step, and as they 
go on to the door of the Holy and present themselves, it 
implies full consecration. Then they pass beyond the vail. 

Very few make such a consecration. Many prefer to 
stand around outside the door. And when the "harvest" 
time shall come (it being here now), all such shall be 
thrust out. As expressed, a thousand will fall away to 
one who will stand. These, on account of their lack of 
obedience to the Lord, have rejected him and thus lose 
their partial justification— it never becomes vitalized. 
Similarly, those who have made a full consecration are 
subjected to severe tests and, if they prove unfaithful, 
they will not remain members of the Royal Priesthood. 
But this does not prove that these will be unworthy of 
some opportunity for serving the Lord. These will be 
represented in the Levite class. All the Levites consecrated 
to God. But the "more than conquerors," are the 
selected ones, the ones who stand the tests and prove 
faithful. Such as fail to stand these tests, then, will be 
rejected from the condition represented in the Holy, 
which is the "gold" condition and represents the divine 
nature. 



ONLY THE PRIESTS IN THE HOLY 

Being denied the liberty accorded to the Priests, these 
will go out from this condition and will have merely the 
standing of justification, which, if they maintain, will 
constitute them worthy of eternal life. But that life will 
not be human life, because they gave that up in order to 
become Priests. Their failure puts them out of the Holy 
condition back into the Court condition. Only the Priests 
will be in the Holy. Only the Levites will be in the 
Court. But even the chosen ones, while separated in 
their minds, will be commingling with the others so far 
as their persons are concerned. The Court, therefore, in 
its last analysis, represents the spirit-begotten ones as 
separated from the world. Their vitalized justification 
is represented by the white raiment and the white curtains 
which separate them from the Camp. The Great 
Company class are, therefore, not represented as in the 
Camp, but are attached to the Priests. The white linen 
curtain of the Court was suspended by silver hooks. 
Thus this class was represented by the "silver," as in 
contradistinction to those who were represented in the 
"gold" of the Holy and the Most Holy. 

NEITHER PRIESTS NOR LEVITES HAD ANY INHERITANCE 
IN THE LAND 

In order to have a full and complete picture of what is 
typified by the tribe of Levi, we must remember how 
they came into their position of either being priests or of 

R4746 : page 22 

serving the priests. They were all a part of Israel, but 

God separated them unto himself; he gave them no inheritance 

in the land. All their rights were withheld from 

them and they were made dependent upon the other 

tribes. Why was this? The answer is that they were 

taken by the Lord as instead of the "first born" of all the 

tribes of Israel. Thus the tribe of Levi became the 

typical "Church of the First-born". Then out of this 

typical "Church of the First-born" the Lord selected 

a priestly family, Aaron and his sons, who typified 

the Royal Priesthood, Christ and his Church. All of 

the tribe of Levi represented the Church of the First-born 

and the family of Aaron represented the "very 

elect." While the under-priests were not personally 

anointed, they were represented in the body of the High 

Priest. The anointing that the antitypical under-priests 

have, as members of the Body of Christ, is lost if they fail 

to make their calling and election sure. 

RELATIONSHIP TO THE LORD NOT NECESSARILY DEPENDENT 
UPON KNOWLEDGE OF EVERY DETAIL 

We wish to suggest here that none should feel unnecessarily 



annoyed if he is not able to understand all the 

items of the chronology or of the TABERNACLE SHADOWS, 

or other minor features. Our relationship to the Lord is 

not necessarily dependent upon our knowledge of every 

detail. We are to remember that many of us were God's 

people before we understood any of these things, before 

we understood the philosophy of the Divine Plan. Hence 

we are to be trustful of the Lord and wait for the remainder, 

as he may open it to us. And we are to remember 

that the supreme test is loyalty to the Lord. This 

was the test upon our Lord Jesus: would he be loyal to 

the Father? And this is the test upon us. Will we be 

loyal to the Lord? Whoever is thus loyal is an "overcomer." 

He will strive to be faithful under all conditions, 

and will trust even where he cannot trace the 

Lord's providences. 

The difficulty in understanding these matters seems to 
be in failing to harmonize what has been written on 
this point. Realizing the fact that all of the consecrated 
have been begotten of the holy Spirit, and therefore, 
to be perfected, must be born of the holy Spirit on 
the spirit plane, we see that the Great Company class 
must be spirit beings when they shall have been perfected. 
They will not be entitled to the position to which they 
were called, namely, the divine nature, represented in 
the Holy and Most Holy, because they do not make their 
"calling and election sure" to that glorious position. But 
if they hold to the Lord they still maintain their justification. 
This was attained, not when they began to draw 
nigh to God, but when they passed through the Court and 
made their consecration, and when the High Priest, as 
their Advocate, imputed to their sacrifice a sufficiency 

R4746 : page 23 

of his merit to make up for their imperfections. Then 
they were accepted. At that moment they were justified 
to life. They surrendered all claim to human life 
and received the spirit-begetting, which is the foundation 
of their future hope. They may cease to be of 
the Anointed in the sense that they cease to be of the 
Bride, of the Body of Christ. That all of these Levites 
have a heavenly inheritance is indicated in the fact that 
they were cut off from the earthly inheritance in order 
that they might have the opportunity of being of the 
"first-born" with Christ Jesus, the Head of the Church. 
The Tabernacle picture was a temporary one, which 
ultimately gave place to the temple, and that temple 
represented the Church in its glorified condition. Nevertheless, 
the things in the temple represented conditions 
pertaining to the present time. Our access to the Holiest 
of all was evidently represented in the vail being rent 
from top to bottom. The vail represented Christ's flesh. 
Through that rent vail we may see into the things beyond 
and be ready to pass into the Most Holy. 



R4746 : page 23 

THOSE WHO ARE REPROVED BY THE LIGHT 

"Let your light so shine before men, that 
they may see your good works, and 
glorify your Father which is in heaven."— Matt. 5:16. 

GOD'S WORD is frequently referred to as the 

light, the lamp to our feet. But this does 

not seem to be the thought here. The 

meaning might be, partially, that we should 

let the Truth shine out. But the class mentioned 

in the text is the saintly class, the 

spirit-begotten ones. Of these the Lord 

has elsewhere said that they should take 

heed how they let the Truth go out to 

others— that they should not cast their 

pearls before swine. Hence it does not mean to let all 

the light of Truth shine upon the world. The world 

would not be able to receive all the Truth. This light 

here mentioned is elsewhere spoken of as the illumination. 

This illumination comes, not only through the Truth, 
but also through the begetting of the holy Spirit. The 
holy Spirit becomes the illuminating power in the life of 
these. Their whole lives, therefore, should shine; their 
whole lives should show forth the light of him "who has 
called them out of darkness into his marvelous light." 

Another text says, "If the light that is in thee become 
darkness, how great is that darkness!" This is the light, 
or Word, that we should let shine upon men, although 
they cannot receive all the message. But many who at 
one time hated the message have been convinced, and 
led to the Lord by the illumination of the Spirit which 
they perceived in the lives of God's saints. Their minds 
were much beclouded by the smoke of the Dark Ages, 
but they were not so far out of harmony that they could 
not be guided by the Spirit of God. They took knowledge 
of Jesus and learned of him. 

Nothing in either of the texts referred to guarantees 
that the world would receive the message, either from our 
Lord Jesus or from his followers. We are, nevertheless, 
to let our light shine as he let his light shine, though 
the darkness comprehend it not. The thought seems to be 
that, while some may resist the light, because their deeds 
are evil, nevertheless, there are others by whom the message 
may be differently received. Therefore, we are to 
"let our light so shine before men that they may see our 
good works," whether they account for these works properly 
or evilly. Some may appreciate and see. Those 
who opposed our Lord were not of the common people, 
but of those who specially claimed to be the people of 
God, the Scribes and Pharisees, who were not living up 
to their own recognized standards. These felt reproved. 



They realized that Jesus' teaching was of a higher order. 

Thus we find it today. Those who are most opposed 
to the message of Truth are the church elders, ministers, 
Sunday school superintendents. The brighter light of 
the Truth casts their own into the darkness to such a 
degree that they are reproved by the light. It makes 
their own standards appear to greater disadvantage. 
They also perceive our superior manner of living. They 
are then filled with envy. The Jews who delivered 
Christ to Pilate were envious; they were in a very wrong 
attitude of heart. 

So with those who hate us. The light, however, has 
an influence. They may discern what is the right doctrine. 
There are some who take no stand at all, but 
nevertheless they see partly. Those who have "been with 
Jesus" commend themselves to this class, in spite of all 
the adverse influences. And so the Apostle Peter called 
attention to the fact that some who see our good works 
will glorify God, in the day of visitation, even though 
they do not become followers now. The effect in the end 
will demonstrate that the whole work was not in vain— 
that some will accept Christ now and that the influence 
of these lives will be something for the world in the future. 

It should be true to a certain extent that all those who 
are intimately associated with the members of the Body 
of Christ in the present life— before he is proclaimed 
King of the whole world— should be able to recognize 
the largeness and grandeur of character in those whom 
the Lord is choosing for this place of honor in the affairs 
of men. They should be able to take knowledge of them 
that they have been with Jesus— should see in them the 
spirit of a sound mind. 



R4746 : page 23 

REGARDING THE WORD FEAR 

"Their fear toward me is taught by 
the precepts of men."— Isaiah 29:13. 

WE UNDERSTAND the word fear to be the 

same whether it is used in one connection 

or another. There are different kinds of 

fear, just as there are different kinds of 

berries, different kinds of wagons, different 

kinds of animals. Fear is fear, whatever 

its motive or mainspring may be. There is 

a proper kind of fear and a proper kind of 

dread. And the proper fear carries this 

dread with it. For instance, if you were 

acquainted with a king or an emperor, you would say, I 

would dread to do anything that would hurt or offend 

him. And so with us. We should dread to do anything 

that would displease the Lord. 



Our Lord Jesus said, "Fear not them which kill the 
body; but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear; fear 
him who is able to destroy both soul and body in 
gehenna." This is a very important fear that we should 
have toward God. We should have a great appreciation 
of his highness and our own littleness. We should not 
go into his presence in prayer in any manner but the right 
one— the reverent one. We should have in mind that he 

R4747 : page 24 

is the great King. So in all of our dealings with the 
Lord, we understand that we should fear to do anything 
that would lessen this great reverence— taking heed that 
we do nothing that would do violence to this or grieve 
the holy Spirit wherewith we are sealed. 

Coming back to the text under consideration— "Their 
fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men." We 
understand that the Lord is pointing out here through 
the Prophet that there is a false kind of fear. As we 
have heard some Catholics say: If I would be approved 
of God, I must pray to some of the holy saints first, and 
then ask them to intercede with Mary, and then ask Mary 
to intercede with the Son. They have a fear that the 
Father has not inculcated. It comes from the precepts 
of men. They have taken away some of the precious 
things of God and have substituted some of the "doctrines 
of devils," as certain Scriptures point out. 

THE LORD IS AT THE HELM 

In the text— "Say ye not, a confederacy, to all them to 
whom this people shall say, a confederacy, neither fear 
ye their fear, nor be afraid" (Isa. 8:12)— the fear here 
we understand to be some fear that would be leading 
people, especially leaders, to cry out for a Church Federation 
—that unless this took place, there would be great 
danger. The Lord's people know that he is at the helm 
and that he knows how to direct such matters and that 
they should not join such a Federation. The word Federation 
here might be understood to mean more than 
merely Church Federation, perhaps. We are to "fear 
not their fear"; that is to say, be not fearful as they are 
fearful. The Lord's people are to understand that their 
safety is not dependent upon human power, but that if 
they have given their hearts to the Lord they should seek 
to please him in all their ways, and to remember that he 
is able to make all things work out for their good. 

Dreading they know not what, the Federation of Labor 
is led on by their fear of the Federation of Trusts. In 
this they are influenced by the dangers they fear. But 
the Lord's people are not to thus fear. They are to commit 
their ways and interests to him and to walk by faith 
and to recognize that he will make all things work together 
for good to them, giving them the necessary direction 
and instruction and encouragement to the end. 



As to the attitude that we should take toward these 
Federations: sympathetically, we may see that Federation 
is necessary for the maintenance of these earthly 
institutions and thus there is a measure of excuse to those 
that would take this stand, along the lines of business 
or society or socialism. At the same time our sympathies 
should be regulated by the Divine Word. 

It behooves all those who see the end to stand as clear 
as possible from all these entanglements, and to be helpful 
in respect to all who might be willing to receive their 
counsel. Their sympathy might lead them to say to 
labor unions, for instance, "We see your difficulty. We 
see that you have maintained a standing by means of your 
organizations. We sympathize with you in your position, 
to a certain extent; nevertheless, instead of averting the 
calamities, in the end your organization will help to involve 
you in trouble, no doubt, and will help to involve 
others in trouble." 

The Lord's people know the Truth which makes free. 
They are to seek to stand up for the Truth in respect to 
God, his character, his brethren, doing good to all men 
as they have opportunity. 



R4747 : page 24 

THE RANSOM AND THE CHURCH 

"The Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself 
a Ransom for all."— 1 Tim. 2:6. 

THE word Ransom is used in the Scriptures in 

two different senses. The one is represented 

in the above text. The other reads, "I will 

Ransom them from the power of the grave." 

(Hosea 13:14). In the latter, the word Ransom 

signifies to recover from the grave, to 

deliver from the grave. As to the word 

Ransom in the first text, we understand it to 

refer to a Ransom-price, the Ransom-price 

of one man, the Ransom-price furnished 

by "the man Christ Jesus." Our Lord laid down 

that Ransom-price during the three and a half years between 

his consecration at Jordan and his death at Calvary; 

but he did not apply it at that time (but later when 

"he appeared in the presence of God for us," the Church 

class), nor has he yet applied it for the whole world. He 

will, however, apply it for the world "in due time." He 

is now imputing of his merit to a small class, so that they 

may be acceptable to the Father and have the privilege 

of participating in his sufferings— "filling up that which 

is behind of the afflictions of Christ, for his Body's sake" 

—that they may have fellowship with him also in his 

great glory, in his great Office as Mediator between God 

and men. 



Thus the Church will have a share with her Lord in 
the sufferings of the present time that she may be a part 
of the Sin-Offering. This does not imply that they will 
have a share in the Ransom-price, because one man is the 
Ransom-price, and not many men. The Church's share, 
therefore, as a part of the Sin-Offering is not to be confounded 
with our Lord's work as a Ransom-price. Even 
in the Sin-Offering the Church does not offer the Sin-Offering. 
The High Priest offered the bullock, and the 
High Priest also offered the goat. It is not that the High 
Priest offered the bullock and the under-priests offered 
the goat— as though we offer or sacrifice ourselves. The 
utmost that we can do is to consecrate ourselves to be 
willing sacrifices. It then remains for the High Priest to 
come forth and impute of his merit in order to make an 
acceptable sacrifice of this class represented by the "goat." 
Thus it is seen that we do not share in the Sin-Offering 
in the sense as does our Lord. The High Priest's offering 
was of two parts, the "bullock" and the "goat"— the 
bullock representing his own person and the goat that of 
his followers. 

OUR PART IN THE SIN-OFFERING A FAVOR 

Some one might inquire, Where, then, does the Church 
appear? We answer that the Church does not appear in 
the "goat"; but the consecrated human being is represented 
in the "goat" which was presented. When the 
sacrifice is made (the offering of the High Priest having 
been accepted), we become members of the High Priest, 
his under-priests. From that on, as his members, we 
have a participation with him in everything that is good, 
sacrificially and otherwise. But we have no personal 
identity in the Holy. It is the New Creature that is represented 
in the Holy, though not the New Creature as 
separate and apart from the High Priest, but as coming 
in under his robe, under his merit, as a member of his 
Body, according to the Divine arrangement. 

Following out this thought: It is nowhere represented 
that we, the Church, will follow our Lord into the Most 
Holy as under-priests and there sprinkle our blood as the 
Lord sprinkled his blood. On the contrary, it was the 

R4747 : page 25 

High Priest who sprinkled the blood of the bullock and 
who, later, sprinkled the blood of the goat as that of his 
own Body. So we, as individuals, have nothing to do 
with that. Our individuality is lost as we become members 
of the Body of Christ and take his name. We are, 
therefore, to share his glory and his work. 

"WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM" 

We do not mean, however, that we will have no individuality 
beyond the veil, because the Scriptures assure 



us that we shall be like him. The thought is that we will 
have no individuality in respect to the glorious Office. 
There is but the one Melchisedec Priest. All others are 
lost sight of. There will be the Priestly and Kingly Office 
and we shall share in all of it, in our relationship to him 
who is "the Head over all things to the Church, which is 
his Body." As individuals, therefore, we have nothing to 
do in the sacrificing. Any association that we have in 
the work of Sin-Offering, from the Divine standpoint, is 
all accredited to and included in the work of Christ— it is 
his work. 

The participation of the Church in the Sin-Offering 
for the world is not due to any necessity that has arisen; 
but owing merely to the Divine arrangement, which permits 
us to come in with Christ and share in his glorious 
higher nature and work. The matter of suffering is 
purely a matter of favor for the Church, and entirely unnecessary. 
Jesus' death alone is all that was necessary 
for the release of the world from the Divine sentence of 
death. 

It is, as we see, highly important that we keep clearly 
in mind the difference between our work of presenting 
our bodies as living sacrifices and our Lord's work, as 
the great High Priest, in offering us sacrificially. The 
two matters are distinctly separate, as shown in the type. 
The goat was brought to the door of the Tabernacle and 
tied, picturing the Covenant of Sacrifice which we make. 
But the goat had not yet been offered and no one but the 
High Priest was qualified to make the sacrifice. The 
work of the High Priest in sacrificing the goat was the 
only sacrifice, in the proper sense of the word. 

Even after the presentation of ourselves and the 
Father's acceptance, and after we have become New 
Creatures and are members of his Body, and, therefore, 
members of the Royal Priesthood, there is a continuous 
work— the presenting of ourselves daily. So the Lord 
Jesus has continued the offering all through this Gospel 

R4748 : page 25 

Age. He will finally complete this at the end of the 
Gospel Age, when the offering will all be finished as one 
sacrifice and the New Creatures will all be admitted as 
members of the glorified Body. 



R4748 : page 25 

THE HARVEST WORK IN AFRICA 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

At last I am able to report to you on the mission 
which has brought me to this part of the world. I have 
just returned from a tour through Nyassaland, which has 
occupied altogether close on four months. My experiences 



have been many and varied. I have traversed the 
African forest at midnight, slept in all sorts of queer 
places and traveled in all kinds of conveyances, from an 
ocean steamer down to a native canoe, and from a modern 
railway carriage to a hammock slung on a pole and carried 
on the shoulders of the natives. 

It is not of my personal experiences, however, that 
I wish to speak, except in so far as these bear upon the 
harvest work in this part of the world. That there is a 
work of considerable magnitude in Nyassaland there is no 
denying. Hundreds, nay thousands, of natives of that 
country have left the Livingstonia Mission and have 
joined what is known here as the "Society Church," and 
in some villages the churches and schools of the aforementioned 
Mission are almost deserted and their work 
practically destroyed by the advent of the harvest message. 

Within a radius of thirty miles of Bandawe there are 
close on one hundred churches in as many villages and 
thousands of natives owning allegiance to Present Truth. 
Each little company has its own Church building, a 
wattle and daub structure erected by the native brethren 
themselves. Some of these structures are of considerable 
dimensions; the Church at Chifira (the village where 
the harvest message was first preached) being about 100 
feet long by 30 wide. As the natives sit on the floor, the 
seating accommodation of these buildings is greater than 
ours. On the occasion of my visit to Chifira I estimated 
the audience I addressed at between five and six hundred 
natives. 

Each Church has also its own organization modeled 
upon the recommendations of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. 
6. They are served by elders and deacons and I found 
nine brothers acting in a general way as pastors and 
teachers. These brothers are stationed in different parts 
of the country and act as instructors to the brethren in 
their various districts, preaching and expounding the 
Truth. Most of these pastors have had some instruction 
themselves from Mr. Booth, but not all; yet all have a 
fair grasp of the elementary features of the Plan. There 
is no literature in the vernacular and the brethren are dependent 
for their spiritual food on the preaching of these 
teachers and their elders. This is unfortunate, as in the 
nature of things these prominent brethren are none too 
well equipped for their task. 

The number of brethren who speak English is comparatively 
small and those able to read it are even fewer. 
Many claim that ability, but a few minutes' conversation 
with them, or a simple text in reading, soon displays their 
ignorance. A translation of some of the more important 
tracts into the native language would be of great service 
in Nyassaland. 

This would be a work of some difficulty, however, as 
these brethren are drawn from various tribes and speak 
no fewer than three different languages, namely, Chiuyanja, 
Chitonga and Chitumbuha. The former language 
(Chiuyanja) is the native dialect of the south and is 



read and spoken by all educated natives throughout the 
country, but the great majority of the interested are 
poorly educated and speak only one of the other two 
tongues. 

And now, having spoken of the magnitude of the work, 
permit me to give my impressions of its spiritual value. 
While in Nyassaland I found some things to encourage 
and some that discouraged me in the attitude of the 
brethren towards the Truth. Many of them appear to be 
filled with a strong desire for a more intimate acquaintance 
with God's Word and some have already a very fair 
grasp of the Truth. But in all there is manifest a spirit 
of cupidity and self-seeking that is not in harmony with 
their profession. This is not, I trust, evil speaking, nor 
am I presuming to sit in judgment on brethren in Christ. 
They stand or fall to their own Master. I am simply 
seeking to present a true report of the conditions which 
I found to exist in Nyassaland, that you may be rightly 
informed with regard to the blessed harvest work in 
that country. 

R4748 : page 26 

The leading brethren and myself did not quite see eye 
to eye on financial arrangements. They were disappointed 
when I assured them that the Society could not 
lend its support in any way to an educational work, providing 
school books and teachers for instruction of the 
young in the English language and native dialects. This 
is one of the methods pursued by other missions in the 
district and doubtless they thought our work would be 
similar. I pointed out that our work was the gathering 
of the Lord's saints together out of Babylon and their 
instruction in the Word of the Lord only. 

Some of them seemed to think also that I had come 
out with a pocketful of money to endow all the pastors 
and teachers and give them lucrative employment under 
the Society. I had to disabuse their minds of that idea. 
One brother was anxious to marry and proposed that I 
furnish him with the wherewithal to buy his wife (a 
custom that prevails in that country). I advised him 
to wait till he had saved sufficient to get him out of one 
difficulty before venturing into another. Finally he reduced 
his demands down to the level of an old shirt, 
which, needless to say, he did not get. I regret to say 
that almost in every case where I had dealings with individual 
brethren their interviews ended with an appeal 
for financial assistance in some shape or form. 

I was the recipient of much kindness from them when 
I first appeared in their midst. They loaded me with 
presents of food, provided me with a native house and 
vied with each other for the privilege of carrying me 
about in the machila. But I soon found that their gifts 
were bestowed with an end in view. Before leaving 
Chifira I was asked to pay for the house I had been invited 
to occupy. I paid up. Many of those who had 



shown me kindness proposed that I should sign their 
labor certificate, a document indicating that they had 
worked for me for one month and were therefore entitled 
to a reduction of three shillings in their hut tax. 
Even with the more prominent brethren, whom I proposed 
to recommend as teachers of the volumes, there was 
a spirit of bargaining that was not the spirit of 
consecration. 

I am not condemning these brethren altogether. 
While these circumstances are regrettable, we must not 
expect too much from a people so lately rescued from 
barbarism. They are more or less grown up children 
and have all the weaknesses of children and must be dealt 
with as such. 

The natives are naturally indolent. The white men 
have taken their country and they look upon every white 
man as a mine of wealth upon which they can draw for 
all their needs. 

Mr. Booth's influence is markedly manifest on the 
work in Nyassaland. The brethren generally do not keep 
the seventh day as a sabbath, but I found the teachers 
with strong leanings that way. These opinions were 
strengthened by the teaching of Mr. Booth, that only 
those who kept the sabbath had the harvest message. 
Also since going to America he has been sending a copy 
of the Seventh Day Baptist Year Book along with a ce5 
note to all teachers reputed to be keeping the seventh 
day sabbath. I did what I could to present the Truth on 
this question and was enabled by the grace of God to 
deliver at least some of them from bondage. 

While in Nyassaland I called upon the Governor of the 
Protectorate and the president of the West Nyassa 
Province, where most of the brethren are located. I 
found both of these in a tolerant attitude toward the 
work. Viewed at first with some misapprehension, the 
spread of the work has proved the groundlessness of their 
fears. The Government has no opposition to offer to our 
work so long as the natives are law-abiding. 

Your letter, with powers of attorney, was awaiting me 
on my return to Durban. It will be impossible for me to 
lay claim to the title deeds of the Shiloh Mission Station 
until my return to that country. 

That station, however, is now in our hands, with a 
native brother, Alexander Makwinja, in charge. I 
stayed there for some time while waiting for a connection 
for Bandawe. 

As I indicated to you in a previous letter this property 
at Chihunda is of questionable value. The brick 
chapel is an irretrievable ruin. The teachers' houses 
have no existence now, unless these describe a few grass 
huts erected by the few natives who have taken up their 
residence on the land. If so, these have been put up by 
the natives and are their property. 

I do not know where the workshop is, unless it be a 
dilapidated building now used as a church building, where 
a half dozen natives and their wives meet daily for 



prayers and service. There is an attendance of about 
twenty on Sundays. 

This building is very much in need of repairs. The 
roof is stayed from the floor, the walls bulge outwards 
and were the stays removed the whole structure would 
certainly collapse. The only building of any real value is 

R4749 : page 26 

the house and it, too, is fast falling into decay. It is a 
four, not five-room structure, unless, perhaps, the kitchen 
is included, bringing the number of apartments up to 
five. This house could be repaired and made habitable if 
it would be worth while to spend money on it. 

The Shiloh Station is hundreds of miles removed from 
the center of interest in the Truth. It is fully a week's 
journey from Bandawe, and the number of interested in 
the neighborhood can be counted on one's fingers. 

The general impression which I have formed from my 
visit to Nyassaland is that the work among the African 
natives cannot hope to rise above the level of a restitution 
work. Doubtless there may be eminent exceptions, 
but, generally speaking, they have the greatest difficulty 
in appreciating spiritual things. Their minds are untrained. 
Unlike the Asiatics, they have had no philosophy 
of religion (even of error) in the past to direct their 
minds toward God, and while they readily grasp the rudimentary 
features of the Plan, I doubt if many of them 
appreciate their spiritual significance. The keeping of 
a sabbath and the preference of immersion over sprinkling 
as a Scriptural mode of baptism are tangible things 
which their minds can lay hold of and retain, but the 
spiritual meaning underlying these is something which it 
would take a long time to impart to any but a favored 
few. 

This work is too great, however, to be neglected 
and following the suggestions made by you before I left 
Scotland, I have divided the part of the country where 
the brethren are located into six different districts and 
would recommend the appointment of native brethren as 
teachers under the Society, they to visit these districts 
in rotation, spending sufficient time in each village to 
go through one of the volumes with the class at that village, 
then passing on to the next. The brethren whose 
names I am giving have a fair grasp of the Truth; they 
are able to speak and read English. They have all read 
at least the first three volumes of DAWN and are capable 
of interpreting them in the native dialect for the benefit 
of their less favored brethren. They are also clear on 
the sabbath question. 

Since this question had been exalted into the position 
of an essential I was forced to deal with it as such and to 

R4749 : page 27 

consider in making recommendations only such brethren 



as could agree that the keeping of the seventh day was 
not essential to Christians. 

I shall provide these brothers with forms on which 
they shall report to me at the end of each month regarding 
the meetings held and the volumes studied. As their 
time will be wholly devoted to the work I have indicated 
that the Society will provide them with ce 1 ($5) per 
month for their maintenance. This sum is adequate for 
all their needs. 

I shall also supervise and direct their work and render 
such assistance as is in my power. I propose soon to 
set one of the brethren to work to translate some of the 
more important tracts into Chitonga (the majority of 
the brethren in Nyassaland speak that dialect) and I myself 
hope to provide a glossary for the volumes which will 
bring most of the difficult words in these books within the 
comprehension of those who have even a smattering of 
the English language. 

My thought is that this work could be better carried 
on from Durban than by taking up residence in 
Nyassaland. 

To settle in that country would not, in my judgment, 
be the wisest course. It is impossible, even if it were 
desirable, to live as the natives do. To take up one's 
residence in a native house is simply tempting Providence. 
Shiloh Station is too far removed from the center of interest 
to be of any greater service than a rest house on 
the way to meet the brethren. 

To build in the interested district would mean a considerable 
expenditure of money and of even more precious 
time, as it is necessary first to make the bricks before you 
can build your house. 

The language difficulty requires also to be considered. 
It would take a considerable time to acquire such a 
knowledge of any one of the three languages spoken by 
the native brethren as would enable me to address them 
in their own tongue and even were that accomplished 
there would still remain the other two dialects 
unconquered. 

For these and other reasons I would recommend that 
my headquarters be situated in the south, preferably in 
Durban, where I can give my attention to the very promising 
work going on here among the whites. While keeping 
in touch with Nyassaland, as already suggested, and 
making the aforementioned provision for the continuance 
of the Lord's work there, I could visit that country 
at least once a year as long as the opportunities for harvest 
service remain with us and seek by my presence and 
instruction to encourage the brethren and further the 
Lord's cause there. 

Meanwhile I would counsel the establishment of an 
African Agency in Durban, the publication of the sermons 
in South African newspapers (which I hope shortly 
to accomplish, having received the papers and forms forwarded 
by the Lecture Bureau) and the general advancement 
of the Lord's work in the various South African 



towns as opportunity offers. I shall write you later, 
giving further suggestions regarding the establishment of 
an agency in Durban with an estimate of probable 
cost. 

I am grateful to our Heavenly Father, who has 
brought me through all my varied experiences with 
health and strength and I feel confident that he will 
bless my humble efforts to serve him and his dear flock 
and that wherein I may have erred, even there his wisdom 
shall overrule and cause all things to work out for 
his glory and the good of his children. 

I enclose herewith one or two photographs of Shiloh 
Station, which will give you some idea of its appearance. 
Praying the Lord's guidance for his work, and with much 
love to yourself, dear brother, I am, 

Your co-laborer in the harvest service, 

WM. W. JOHNSTON. 



R4749 : page 27 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

WOMAN'S POSITION IN CHURCH AND HOME 

QUESTION-In view of the fact that St. Paul 
speaks of no other woman than Rahab 
(Hebrews 11), when mentioning the Ancient 
Worthies, how does the woman have an 
equal chance in the race for the new nature 
and for the prize of the "high calling"? 

Answer.— We fail to see any place where 
the Scriptures discriminate against women. 
They have the opportunity in this Gospel 
Age of being joint-heirs with Christ, in 
which there is no distinction of sex, color or race. 

There is nothing in the Scriptures that militates against 
woman. That the Lord chooses that the mouthpieces of 
the Church shall be men is his own affair. No one would 
have a right to question the Lord's will in this matter— 
whether the Lord would wish men of sixty or young 
men, or women of a certain age or none at all. God may 
do what he will with his own. But we do see a reason 
why he makes a choice. Woman is a figure of the Church 
and man is a figure of the Head of the Church. So we 
are told that woman should not be a teacher in the Church, 
but man should be the teacher. 

And even outside of the Scriptural question, in human 
affairs, we see no way in which a woman's interests are 
endangered, because every woman is either a sister of a 
man or the mother of a man or the daughter of a man. 
Hence the two sexes are so intimately related that it is 
unnecessary, for instance, that the whole family should 
go to the polls to vote, but the family is represented by 
the man and thus all have share in whatever shall be done 



in a city or town or country. 

If this were otherwise we could imagine a very unsatisfactory 
condition indeed. It would imply that man had 
lost one of the very prerogatives which is an element of 
manhood. On the other hand, it would imply a dereliction 
on the part of the woman. The Apostle reminds us 
of a woman's sphere. And any mother whose son does 
not respect her should keep very quiet. She has that child 
during all the years of infancy and youth. And if in all 
those years she does not command respect from that child, 
she is to blame. 

We believe that if women would get the proper focus 
on this matter there would be an end to woman-suffrage. 
They would feel that they had a duty at home. There are 
exceptions to every rule. But Christian parents have said 
to us, If I had known the Truth sooner, I would have 
known how to be a better father, a better mother; but I 
was not taught anything as to the responsibilities upon me 
as a parent and what was meant by the proper training 
of a child. One mother said to me, "When my children 
were very young I was intent upon making money. I 
was slaving hard with my husband to do this. We have 
gotten some money, but I lost the opportunity of training 
my children, and if I would train them differently now 
I would practically have to kill them." "Yes," we told 
her, "in view of all the facts, you will have to be considerate 
of the children and try by example and precept, 

R4750 : page 28 

rather than by force, to get them into a proper condition." 
We told her that if she would try to force her opinions 
upon them she would likely force them into rebellion. 

One of her particular points was that she was violently 
opposed to marriage. We told her that she was likely to 
drive them to the opposite extreme; that she would better 
allow them to have beaus, etc., and encourage them to 
come to her and seek advice, etc. But no, she did not do 
that. The result was that one daughter married a man 
who afterward went to prison. Then she wished she had 
taken a more moderate course, which she has been doing 
with the others. 



PROVING ALL THINGS 

Question.— Will you kindly explain what the Apostle 
meant by this text: "Prove all things; hold fast that 
which is good"?— I Thess. 5:21. 

Answer.— Proving all things would signify the testing 
of them. But we could not take the words all things in 
the very broad sense, for this would involve an absurdity. 
We have not time to test all things in the absolute sense; 
for instance, we have not time to test all kinds of foods, 
nor even all kinds of breakfast foods that are advertised. 



Neither would it be wise to do so. Nor does it refer to 
all things along other lines we might mention. Evidently 
such was not the Apostle's intention. What, then, did the 
Apostle mean? Did he mean to prove everything in the 
Scriptures? We answer, No; for, at the time he wrote 
this, the Scriptures were not yet canonized. The different 
books of the old Scriptures were not then equally 
acceptable to the Church. We do not know a better guide 
or standard than the Word of God by which to prove 
things; but to our understanding the Apostle did not have 
any of these things specially in mind. It seems to us 
that he meant, Use your judgment, your reason, in respect 
to everything. 

The Lord does not wish his people to be guided in 
any sense as a horse with a bit, or as a ship with a 
rudder. But he appeals to their minds and judgment, 
not only through the Scriptures, but also through their 
experiences in life— through his providences. We learn 
certain lessons respecting God from our daily living, or 
we ought to do so. If we have proved that certain courses 
of conduct are injurious, we should profit by these experiences. 
If we have made a mistake, we should profit 
by the mistake. If we have had some blessing, we should 
profit by that. We should not be swayed by what some 
one desires us to do, but we should "count the cost," as 
Jesus says. We should be guided by reason, seeking to 
read the will of God through the providences of life, its 
experiences, and through the Word of God. To our 
understanding, therefore, the Apostle meant by this statement 
that God's people should be reasonable, rational 
people, and should use their very best judgment as to 
what they accept or reject. 

To give an illustration: Suppose someone had come 
to those of the early Church, before they had the Bible, 
before they had the Scriptures, and had said to them, 
"Your God intends to torture eternally nine hundred and 
ninety-nine out of every thousand of his creatures. This 
is a revelation from God." 

These persons should and would have rejected such 
teaching as being contrary to all that the Church knew 
about God. 

If anyone tells us something derogatory to the character 
of another we should reject it and decline to hear unless 
proved by Scriptural methods. And no time should 
be wasted on the matter, believing nothing derogatory until 
it is forced upon us. The Lord's people should not 
receive what they may hear without proper examination. 
They should prove what they hear and should use good 
judgment as to what is supported by the Scriptures. The 
end for which they should prove what they hear is that 
they may hold fast everything that stands the test applied 
by the Divine Word and proves to be in accord with the 
holy Spirit; and whatever will not stand these tests 
should be promptly rejected by them. 



Question.— We have been asked the meaning of the 
Scripture, "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, evil shall go 
forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall 
be raised up from the coast of the earth."— Jer. 25:32. 

Answer.— We understand that the word coasts might, 
in a general way, mean the outward parts. It might be 
understood literally. Another suggestion is that it might 
be that portion of society nearest the "sea." And as the 
"sea" represents the masses that are ready to intrude 
upon society, so we suggest that it represents society being 
encroached upon by that lawless element. 

Communication between nations is now a very simple 
matter in comparison with what it was a few years ago. The 
Lord has brought the kingdoms together— practically unified 
them by making them generally dependent upon one 
another. Whatever affects interests in one quarter affects 
interests in other quarters. A little while ago the failure 
of a bank in one place would not have affected a bank 
at another place. The great inventions now due in the 
end of the Age are helping in this work of quick communication 
and enlightenment of the nations. 



Question.— Why are faith, hope and love linked together 
as Christian graces by the Apostle Paul? 

Answer.— Faith, Hope and Love are very properly 
linked together as the Christian graces. We suggest that 
the Apostle had in mind that the Church had faith even 
before it had partaken of the spirit of love. Subsequently 
the "work of faith" became a "labor of love" and not 
merely a work of faith. They also had the "patience of 
hope"; they were not getting their rewards immediately. 
But they were willing to go on and wait for their reward. 
The patience of hope was necessary to keep them going, 
as it will continue to be necessary until the works of faith 
and labors of love meet their reward in the fulfilment of 
the Lord's promise. We can surely agree that they are 
all linked together in every way. 



Question.— When do we reach the condition of perfection 
mentioned in this text: "The God of all grace, who 
hath called us unto his eternal glory by Jesus Christ, after 
that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, stablish, 
strengthen, settle you."— I Pet. 5:10. 

Answer.— The construction of the sentence, we think, 
would naturally lead us to suppose that God would stablish, 
strengthen, settle his children after they were perfected 
through suffering. This suffering awhile takes in 
all of our Christian experiences. It does not mean that 
we suffer awhile and that then we get to a place where 
we suffer nothing. The very noblest of Christians have 
suffered more as they progressed. Thus it was with our 



Lord. He suffered most of all at the end of his career. 

So on the whole we are perfected by means of this suffering, 

as we reach the mark of perfect love in this present 

life and continue to progress. We think that the suffering 

takes in all of the present life's experiences. So 

the thought is, apparently, After ye have suffered awhile 

(and thus been made perfect), he will "strengthen, stablish, 

settle you." We all agree that we will not be actually 

perfect until we attain the resurrection change. 

R4750 : page 29 

Question.— Why is a lamb used to symbolize our Lord? 

Answer.— In some illustrations our Lord is symbolized 
by a lion, as representing his strong qualities. He is the 
Lion of the tribe of Judah— the Strong One of that tribe. 
We are not, however, to conclude that the strong qualities 
of the lion are all the qualities that our Lord possessed. 
He had the qualities manifested by the lamb— its 
meekness and unsuspicion and gentleness. In this way 
the lamb represents our Lord. "He is led as a lamb to 
the slaughter and as a sheep is dumb before her shearers, 
so he openeth not his mouth."— Isa. 53:7. 

Question.— Why did John use this expression, "Behold, 
the Lamb of God"? What is the import of the word 
behold in this expression? 

Answer.— When John made this statement it no doubt 
produced surprise amongst those who heard. They were 
unable to appreciate what he meant. He was a prophet- 
one of the greatest of the prophets, our Lord said— and 
he was speaking prophetically. Look, see, behold, there 
standeth the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of 
the world! Even John did not know in what sense Jesus 
was the Lamb of God. The Jews offered the typical sacrifice 
every year; but no Jew had the least idea what it 
meant. No Jew understood, for "had they known they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory." 

We read in the Scriptures that, after John had made 
this declaration respecting Jesus, "Behold the Lamb of 
God," two of his disciples sought Jesus and inquired 
where he lived, and afterward became his disciples. They 
had been with John because he was a reformer. But 
when John declared that there was one among them 
greater than he, the latchet of whose shoe he was not 
worthy to unloose, they wondered who was this Great 
One. So they kept on the lookout. Then they began to 
discern in some sense of the word that this gentle One, 
this unapproved One, this uncombative One was he who 
should take away the sins of the people. There was 
merely John's word for it, but they believed him to be a 
prophet of the Lord and as soon as they had this intimation, 
that Jesus was the Lamb of God, that he was 
greater than John himself, they left John and became the 
disciples of Jesus. Others did not appreciate these things 
so much and remained with John, perhaps becoming the 
disciples of Jesus after John was dead. 



We might consider John's words as an allusion to the 
Passover Lamb, if this had been at the Passover season 
of the year, at the time of the killing of the lamb; but 
it was at the opposite end of the year— at the time of our 
Lord's birthday, in October. The evidences are clear 
that our Lord's ministry was three and a half years long 
and that he was crucified at the Passover time, and it was 
when he was just thirty years old that he offered himself 
at Jordan. 



R4751 : page 29 

"HEIRS OF GOD" 

Question.— What is meant by the phrase, "Heirs of 
God"? 

Answer.— This use of the word heirs is not the ordinary 
or common one. We are heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ our Lord in the sense that God 
has a great gift to bestow. He does not bestow this gift 
by testament; whereas most property is given by testament 
or will, the death of the testator being necessary in 
order that the gift may be received. 

In life insurance there are different kinds of policies- 
life policies and endowment policies. So, in this case, 
God has in his possession to give away the divine nature 
and the honors of the Kingdom. First he promised that 
he would bestow them upon his Son as a gift, if he would 
show certain obedience. On account of this obedience 
God hath highly exalted him. And so, according to promise 
also, when we become obedient unto death we become 
sharers in this promise. 

In the other case, where the death of the testator is 
spoken of, Jesus has human life, restitution, to give. He 
was not in a position to give this when he was a man. 
As long as he was a man he needed this life himself. But, 
in obedience to the Father's will, he laid his human life 
down. He did so as a bequest, as a testator of this estate 
that he had at his disposal. These rights of eternal 
life were, of course, his by right and he has never forfeited 
nor exchanged them, but maintained them. He 
stated that he had authority to lay down his life and 
authority to take it up again. 



R4751 : page 29 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL:- 

Your remarks in the January 1 TOWER in regard to 1914 
are very sensible. There is no flaw in the time prophecies 
concerning 1914 as set forth in the DAWNS, but I would like to 



see an article from your pen on the subject— "What can we say 
we KNOW about 1914, and what do we merely infer or guess?" 

There are only two things stated in the time prophecies 
concerning 1914. One is that the lease of power granted to 
the Gentile nations expires then, and the other that the Harvest 
Period of the Gospel Age ends there. Every thing in 
addition to these two bare facts is only an inference or guess 
founded on these facts. 

The Scriptures nowhere declare that the time of trouble 
either begins or ends in 1914, nor that the saints, the Bride 
class, will all be taken away at that time. These are only 
inferences, and no difference how reasonable these inferences 
seem to us, we cannot know whether they are correct or not 
until after that date is past. The case is the same with all 
that has been claimed for 1914, with the exception of the two 
things mentioned above. 

The fact that God's lease of power to the Gentile nations 
expires in 1914 does not necessarily imply that they will all 
fall to pieces in that year. Gentile nations existed for centuries 
before God gave them a lease of power; and as for 
anything we actually know they may continue to exist for 
a short time after that lease expires. Both of these events 
the time prophecies show are due in 1914— namely, the 
expiration of the Gentile lease and the completion of the 
Harvest Period; and yet nothing may happen in that year 
which the daily papers would specially record. The affairs 
of the world might apparently go on uninterrupted just the 
same as before. 

On the other hand, our inferences may all prove to be 
correct, improbable as they now appear to the world, for 
the Scriptures state, over and over again, that the overthrow 
of Babylon is to come suddenly. But we need to keep 
our heads level and not say we know things which in reality 
we only infer or guess. 

The earthly phase of the Kingdom will be established later 
than 1914, thus leaving a period after the expiration of the 
Gentile lease for the fall of the nations and the gradual establishment 
of the Kingdom on earth. As it appears now 
this period will be necessary, for several important events, 
such as the gathering of the Jews in Palestine; the attack on 
them there by God (Ezek. 38), the miraculous overthrow 
of Gog, which will demonstrate to the world that Christ's 
Kingdom has come (Ezek. 38:23; 39:21). It also gives time 
for the preaching of the Elisha class, whoever they may prove 
to be. 

The only thing plainly prophesied in regard to the Elisha 
class is that they are to take up the preaching of the Gospel 
of the Kingdom when the Elijah class cease preaching, and it 
seems that that must be done after 1914. 

Loyally yours in our dear Redeemer and King, 
DAVID P. JACKSON. 

R4751 : page 30 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 
The December 15th issue of THE TOWER is at hand, together 



with its annual report. I am moved with wonder, 
admiration and thanksgiving for the masterful management 
our Lord has shown in the conduct of his harvest work for 
the past year and his executive ability as evidenced in his 
choice of servants in that work. 

No other organization on earth could have accomplished 
such a work with ten times the amount expended. Compare 
one large denomination, I have in mind, with $3,500,000 
for missions and the work accomplished. From a business 
standpoint it should make them ashamed. Nothing but the 
spirit of love and sacrifice could have done it. It makes us 
all glad that we have had ever so small a share in such a 
work, and only wish all of us had a fuller appreciation of 
the immense returns on the money— from a purely business 
standpoint. This report should certainly inspire every co-laborer 
with such confidence in the Lord's direction of the 
Society's affairs that they would gladly entrust all available 
funds to you for the work. 

I desire to express again my love and confidence and 
assure you of heartiest co-operation to the extent of my 
ability, as the Lord permits, for the coming year, which 
looks to me to be the one of grandest opportunities yet. 

Faithfully your brother, H. S. HOLWAY.-Cal. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I have just finished reading the January 1 TOWER. How 
it revives and energizes to renewed vigor and zeal! More 
determined to do with our might what our hands find to 
do, while yet it is day. 

The Australian account of the doings of the fallen angels 
recalls a brief interview with you at the Put-in-Bay dock 
just as the boats were leaving for Cleveland and Toledo at 
the close of that memorable convention. The convention 
had the Vow as its basis, and also your expectations that as 
in our Lord's case the cause of the Truth went down in 
apparent disgrace, so might we expect that the servant be 
not above his Master. As then blasphemy was considered 
a crime worthy of death, so now public opinion lays great 
stress upon morality, and while the world is not strictly 
hewing to the line, it is certainly expecting it of those professing 
to be the Lord's people. 

As then accusation against our Lord was false, so might 
we expect to be falsely accused of immoral conduct, and 
thus the cause of the Truth come to an apparently ignominious 
defeat. 

In this connection I had briefly related how, on coming 
home from Mansfield Convention, I had made the Vow my 
own and how the Lord has been pleased to use me in helping 
others to see; and how it had been my blessed privilege, at 
the Put-in-Bay Convention, to give a talk on "Consecration 
and the Vow," to a number of Kentucky friends assembled 
in an upper room in Hotel Victory, and how nearly every 
one in that room (I think there were thirteen) got down 
on their knees and vowed that Vow unto the Lord and then 



and there subscribed their signatures in witness thereof. 

You asked me to write you a brief account of this— that 
perhaps the publishing of it in THE TOWER might be helpful 
to others. I shrank from this— do not know why. 

I was not among the first to take the Vow, but was FOR 
it and TALKED it and REASONED in its favor with the friends, 
though I did not make it my own until our talk with you 
at Mansfield, and then— oh, the PEACE that was mine! 

On my return home at midnight, alone in the room (as 
far as human eye could see) on my knees I vowed a closer 
walk with God. I cannot describe the peace, contentment— 
the feeling of having done that which was pleasing to my 
Heavenly Father. I felt that I had his approval, and as 
though heavenly visitors were present saying, "Amen; well 
done!" 

If this be the means of bringing others "Nearer, My God, 
to Thee," I shall feel that I have redeemed the time. 

Hymn 208, to my mind, is the Vow in different words, 
but the same in spirit and intent. How any can object to 
the Vow and yet sing that hymn, I cannot understand. 

My heart goes out to you, dear Brother, for all your loving 
service to the household of faith, and daily our prayers 
ascend in behalf of you and all the dear Israel of God, that 
we all be kept by power Divine. 

Your brother in the Lord, E. W. V. KUEHN. 



R4752 : page 30 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Brother has ten acres of land located in Colorado, 

about four miles west of the Palisades, close to the foothills. 
The Brother would like to sell this and turn the proceeds 
over to the Watch Tower B. and T. Society for use in 
the harvest work. He asked my advice and I suggested that 
he turn it over to you to dispose of, as you have had experience 
with other deals of a similar nature. 

This particular piece of land is not irrigated, and, of 
course, at the present time is not good for anything except 
from a speculative standpoint. Land next to this piece, and 
of the same character, is being held at $400 per acre. This 
land is just above an irrigating ditch, and the Government 
has been planning to put in another ditch; but has not gotten 
around to it as yet. When the Government does so it 
will greatly increase the value of the land. 

Kindly let me know if the matter appeals to you, and if 
so, if you would like to have the papers connected with it. 

With Christian love and greetings, I remain, 

Yours in his service, . 



We have accepted this kind donation with hearty appreciation. 
Whoever finds for us a purchaser for the land will be 
a sharer in the contribution and its reward. The land is reputed 



to be very rich. 



DEAR SIR:- 

I write to say that I have finished reading the book, 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Series 1, which you so kindly 
sent me. 

I am glad to inform you that a huge burden has been taken 
off my mind and I feel as if I had new life. I may say that 
after reading some books I got from the Adventists, I was 
absolutely convinced that the Bible is real and true. God's 
Plan, as set forth by them, seemed beautiful, until I thought 
of the untold millions who would perish and who never 
have had a real chance. Then the thought that, after two 
thousand years of hard work, sorrow and cruel deaths, everybody 
was wrong in their worship and that they, too, would 
perish, and that all this had been wasted labor, made me lose 
heart in life, and all that goes with it. 

I thank God that he has heard my prayer and at last I 
begin to see light. Of course, I must get the six books and 
study them with the Bible carefully, and I have no doubt 
it will require my reading them over several times. But I 
trust I shall come out with absolute peace and be established 
in the Truth. 

I wish you to please send me the six volumes bound in 
full leather, as quoted in your list, price $3, plus 60 cents 
postage. I will keep the book you sent me, to lend to others 
and I herewith send you $5 as payment for same. The money 
which is over and above the price I wish you to keep to help 
defray expenses for books and tracts you give away— gratis. 
I have perhaps written rather fully, but I believe you will 
be interested to know the peace and joy I have derived from 
what you teach. 

Yours truly, HARRY DUNCAN. -Cuba. 



page 30 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We desire to have our names registered as having taken 
"the Vow." In the Fall of 1908 some tracts were thrown 
in our yard in Birmingham, Ala.— "Earthquakes in Prophecy," 
"Tongues of Fire," "In the Evil Day" and "Filthiness of 
Flesh and Spirit." These had a charm for us that nothing ever 
had before. 

Then we moved to La Grange, Ga., and there a Brother 
came with the first three volumes of DAWN. We bought 
them, read the first volume and started the second, but became 
confused in regard to the Spiritual Kingdom. 

At the time I was a member of the Baptist Church and 
'phoned my Pastor in regard to them— what wonderful books 
I had gotten hold of and asked his advice in regard to the 
Spiritual Kingdom. There were no Bible Students there for 
us to confer with. He said that if I wanted to I could read 



the books, but if they bothered me, I had better not read 
them. We put them aside. 

In 1909, June, we removed to Texas. We were not there 
very long until Sister Lentz and Sister Marion Sturgess called, 
and we bought the six volumes. Now we are thankful and 
can say that the entire plan is so beautiful to us. We cannot 
thank you too much, dear Pastor, and desire your prayers 
that we may come off more than conquerors. 

Yours in his service, E. T. HOLLINGED 

LILLIAN B.HEARD. 

page 3 1 

BELOVED PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

The article in the recent issue of THE WATCH TOWER, 
under the heading, "Blessing God and Cursing Men," has 
been such a great help to me that I cannot refrain from 
writing to tell you how much it has signified as having a 
place in my course in the School of Christ. And yet I do 
not see how I can fully tell you my appreciation for its effect 
upon me. 

I am greatly rejoiced when falling into different 
testings to have such a full-length mirror show me just how 
Mister E. P. McKissick looks. And oh I am so disgusted 
with him! To show how deceitful the human heart is— the 
day that I read that blessed article I had been making use 
of a person's name in business. For fear that I would say 
anything to injure him I was mentally praying to guard 
against it at the time. But when I read such a gook analytical 
treatise of cursing men, I saw that I had said more than I 
should. 

When I was a boy I liked to fish for eels. If you have ever had 
any experience in that line you will recall what slippery things 
they are. They will squirm out of one's grip when doing the 
best to hold them, unless by experience and education one 
learns just how to hold them; and then it requires all of one's 
concentration and strength to do so. Meantime they exude 
slime that, quickly hardening, tangles the line in an almost 
hopeless tangle. Now you have as good a description of my 
tongue as I can give. Please pray that I may succeed by 
experience and education in this wonderful school to hold 
my tongue on all occasions, unless it be solely to edification. 

Our Ecclesia here, three in number, send greetings and 
love to you. You are made the subject of our earnest pleadings 
at the Throne of Grace. We seem to realize in some measure 
God's Chosen People's inquiring of a Gentile "What of 
the night?" (Isaiah 21:11,12); the action of the Missouri 
Synod of the Lutheran Church declaring against the sermons 
being published in the newspapers of the country; the 
noting by labor organs in their news that October witnessed 
more strikes and other disturbances than any previous 
month; and the contribution of $100,000 to the Committee on 
Church Federation at the recent Episcopalian Conference 
in Cincinnati, by J. P. Morgan, reputed to be the world's 
greatest organizer and wealthiest man— this and more will 
have an effect of great import upon the harvest work and 



the Body now so rapidly nearing her deliverance. 

The modern chief priests, elders and pharisaical laymen 
must be stirred in their jealous hatred to the depth of human 
passions and their venom must of necessity be looked for— 
heartless, cruel, and powerful, because permitted only in this 
their hour of darkness. 

We look for messenger ministrations to strengthen you 
and all the called, chosen and faithful. Strength for the 
moment ever comes from God, into whose hand we have committed 
the future. We are more thankful than we have 
ability to express that the presence of our adorable Lord 
gives us the understanding, and that we see so much of grand 
prophecy unroll with such accuracy before our astonished 
eyes. We long to be clothed upon with powers to most fittingly 
worship, praise and serve him who bought us with his 
own precious blood, and his and our Father, who planned 
it all. 

Your servant, E. P. McKissick. 



MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

Greetings in the name of our Lord— the Chief Reaper, and 
very best wishes for the new year— 1911. 

Your Christmas letter to Colporteurs was received several 
days ago and is very much appreciated, being so full of loving 
sympathy and encouragement. Please accept my hearty 
thanks for this further evidence of your interest in our spiritual 
welfare, and I trust the daily perusal of the contents of 
these volumes shall continue to be a source of comfort and 
strength as in the past. 

I notice in reading Annual Report for 1910, as contained in 
December 15 TOWER, you say, "Only in the Colporteuring of 
the SCRIPTURE STUDIES are we disappointed," and further you 
state that if any Colporteur may think he sees a reason for 
the decline you will be glad to hear from such. 

Now, in regard to my own little share in the work I do 
see a reason. It is this: I have had so many opportunities 
to water the seed sown by previous Colporteurs, and to uphold 
the Truth in the face of opposition, therefore cannot make as 
many calls in a day. I call on many who have at least one 
volume in their possession and my time is thus taken up. For 
instance, I call at a home, make my introductory remarks, and 
the lady may ask me in. On showing the work she exclaims, 
"Oh I have the work, all six volumes, but have been told not 
to read them, etc., etc." 

I may find this woman very conscientious, and giving evidence 
of being a sincere Christian, but fearful of being led 
into greater confusion than she confesses she is already in. 
Therefore, I try to encourage her to read the books, and at 
the close of our little visit she may remark that she will begin 
at once, or perhaps she thanks me for calling and asks me 
to call again. But, perhaps, a very brief call would suffice in such 
cases to be followed by another little visit after the person has 
had time to read. 

I should indeed be glad for any suggestions you can give 



us along this line, for those of us working in cities which have 
been colporteured several times find so many books already on 
hand. I have spent the past four months here in Allegheny, 
and have found the work very interesting, though I have not 
put out a great many books. Have had many blessed experiences 
in meeting with the dear friends of our Home Ecclesia 
and rejoice in seeing the love and harmony manifested. "Blest 
be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love." Your brief 
visit (Dec. 9) was much appreciated by us all, and we are 
looking forward now to another season of fellowship with you 
and many of the Lord's dear people on Feb. 19, D.V. "The 
Lord bless thee and keep thee." 

Much Christian love, in which my brother and sister join. 

Your sister by his grace, EMMA L. BRICKER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I desire to express to you my increasing love for the Truth 
and joy in the Lord's service; also an increasing appreciation 
of your labor of love on behalf of the household of faith. 

In our service as Pilgrims we often hear of incidents which 
would be of interest to all the dear friends, had we time and 
opportunity to make them known to all. 

Recently an incident came to my attention which, I think, 
might be of interest. A dear Brother, who has been in the 
Colporteur work for a number of years, experienced some 
difficulty in disposing of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, owing 
to a great deal of prejudice. 

He tried canvassing for the HEAVENLY MANNA with considerable 
success. About a year later he went over the same 
territory with the STUDIES. He was delighted to learn that 
the HEAVENLY MANNA had since borne rich fruit. One family 
had become so much interested in the daily reading that 
they had sent to headquarters for a set of the volumes, and 
also called the attention of a neighbor to them, and he had 
also sent to secure a set of the volumes. As a result, the 
two families were reading with much interest. 

The Brother further advised that in nearly every home 
where he had previously sold the MANNA he was now able 
to dispose of the volumes of STUDIES, some taking one, others 
three and still others the full set of six volumes. 

He related several instances in which the purchaser of the 
MANNA had been advised never to have anything to do with 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, but that, after reading the 
HEAVENLY MANNA and being assured that the STUDIES were 
from the same pen, they were glad, indeed, to purchase them, 
remarking that if these were in harmony with the thoughts 
presented in the copy of HEAVENLY MANNA, surely they must 
be good books. 

They rejoiced to meet the Colporteur again, and desired to 
know if he could arrange for some meetings to be held at 
their home. The Brother was glad to comply, giving a series 
of Chart Talks, and organized a class which now meets regularly, 
with an average attendance of from eight to twelve. 

As a further result of these meetings, three of these 



friends attended Celoron Convention, and two of them symbolized 
their consecration by immersion— as a result of the 
sale of one HEAVENLY MANNA. 
Your brother in the glorious hope , Pilgrim. 



*Some of the friends follow the plan of using Brother Russell's 
sermon text of the week, which the majority of them get through the 
newspapers. 



CHECK UP CAREFULLY 

It is very important that all of the friends receiving shipments, 
especially volunteer matter. PEOPLES PULPIT and 
EVERYBODY'S PAPER announcing lectures, check up carefully 
the quantity and advise us promptly the total number received. 
This is our only check against our printers, and 
prompt advice will assist us greatly in keeping records 
straight. We solicit your co-operation in this, as well as in 
other respects. Advise us promptly of all discrepancies in 
quality, quantity, or time of arrival. 



page 33 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 35 

Leading Sheep Astray 35 

Fertility of Palestine 36 

Disowns Fanciful Speculations 36 

Reply to Cardinal Gibbons' Sermon 37 

Counterfeiting the True Church 38 

Are There Protestant Counterfeits? 39 

Royal Priesthood Composed of Saints 

Regardless of Denomination 39 

191 1-The Memorial Supper-1911 40 

Lifted by Whirlwind Out of Sight 41 

Elisha Successor to Elijah 42 

Elisha Considered Typical 42 

Defeat Through Drunkenness 43 

Melchisedec and Aaron as Types 44 

God's Perfect Peace (Poem) 44 

Taking Heed to Our Hearts 45 

Interesting Questions 46 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 47 

Brother Russell's Foreign Itinerary 47 

page 34 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



PITTSBURG, N.S., PA., FEB. 19 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony, 10 o'clock, and 
discourse for the interested at 7:30 p.m. in Bible House 
Chapel, 610 Arch St. Lecture for the Public in Carnegie 
Hall, Federal and Ohio Sts., at 3 p.m. 

FALL RIVER, MASS., FEB. 26 

Morning Rally at 10:30 and discourse for the interested 
at 7:30 p.m. in Music Hall, 37 Franklin St. Public discourse 
at 3 p.m. in the Academy of Music, Main St. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 5 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock in 
the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening Question Meeting at 
7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 
Public at 3 p.m. Topic: A Century-Old Sinner (Isa. 65:20), in 
the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. 
Felix St. 



"INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION" 

While this Association has its Head Office in Brooklyn, it 
cannot properly be said to be of Brooklyn. Being international, 
it is of every nation and city where there are classes 
in affiliation in Bible study, etc. In advertising meetings have 
this in mind. Your local meeting is a class of Bible Students 
of your own, and are members also of the "International 



Bible Students Association." And meetings may be said to 
be under the Association's auspices— but not "of Brooklyn." 

The newspaper Syndicate request that Brother Russell's 
name be not identified in any manner with your local meetings 
nor with the names of the Pilgrims. They believe that 
this course will be to the advantage of the general work we 
are desirous to forward. 



When writing to us, if your question relates to anything 
you have read, cite issue, page and paragraph and particularize 
the point of your difficulty. 

Give your full address in every letter, in some manner indicating 
the writer's sex. 



FRAUDULENT SOLICITORS-$5 REWARD 

We learn of some dear friends of THE WATCH TOWER 
having been imposed upon by persons misrepresenting themselves 
as brethren. Our readers must learn to take care of 
their pocketbooks and monies, over which they are the stewards. 
Ordinarily it should not be difficult in conversation to 
know a child of God from a worldling. Those unwilling to 
talk religion, so that we might become acquainted with them, 
we would best reject as being doubtful disciples of our 
Master. 

We have lately, however, heard of some who solicited 
money in the name of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society. We wish to have it distinctly understood that nobody, 
any place, under any circumstances, is authorized by 
the Society so to do. And we hereby authorize any policeman 
or anybody of authority to arrest such mendicants as 
frauds. And we offer $5 each for their conviction. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for March follow: (1) 281; 
(2) 135; (3) 95; (4) 145; (5) 208; (6) 152; (7) 325; 
(8) 138; (9) 165; (10) 160; (11) 129; (12) 93; 
(13) 87; (14) 327; (15) 109; (16) 279; (17) 291; 
(18) 46; (19) 255; (20) 176; (21) 50; (22) 283; 
(23) 105; (24) 333; (25) 178; (26) 60; (27) 222; 
(28) 224; (29) 177; (30) 213; (31) 214. 



R4752 : page 35 



VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

LEADING SHEEP ASTRAY 

WE HAVE already noted that at the Chicago 
Stock Yards they have what they call a 
bullock that meets the animals for the 
slaughter, tosses his head and gallops 
before them along a narrow passage 
leading to the slaughter. He has 
a niche into which he knows to 
turn aside, while the animals following 
him butt each other ahead into the slaughter 
pen. 

It appears that at St. Louis they have a goat which 
serves a similar role towards the sheep. When a flock 
of sheep has been sold and it is to be transferred to the 
purchaser's pen a white billy-goat (that is said to chew 
tobacco with a relish) is trained to lead the sheep. He 
enters their pen, looks around upon them serenely and 
compassionately, and then, as though saying, "I sympathize 
with you; you are not being rightly treated; I will 
lead you to a better place," he stamps his foot, tosses 
his head, gives a snort and rushes out of the pen followed 
by the sheep. He leads them into the pen of the 
slaughterers. 

The Lord likens his people to sheep. They are frequently 
less worldly wise than the goat class. All the 
more they need to take heed to the voice of the Shepherd 
and not to follow goats everywhere under any pretext. 
Failure to give heed to the Shepherd is an evidence 
of unfitness for the special purpose for which he is now 
selecting his "little flock." Of these it is written that 
they will not heed the voice of strangers, but know the 
voice of the Shepherd. 

It seems natural for the goats to be leaders, and the 
sheep must be on their guard and discriminate, and follow 
none except those who have the sheep character of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, etc.— those who follow 
the Chief Shepherd's footsteps. If any have been doing 
otherwise let them take heed in time and rearrange matters. 
None should be in the Eldership of any class of 
Bible Students who does not give evidence of having 
been with Jesus and learned of him in doctrine, and been 
developed in the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. 
"My sheep hear my voice and they follow me. A stranger 
will they not follow, but will flee from him." 



REFORMATION BY SURGERY 

"The wonders performed by surgery constantly increase, 
and perhaps in no direction has the beneficence 
of the science been so much demonstrated as in the direction 
of making mental and moral cures through surgical 



operations. From time to time a number of cases 
have been reported whereby— with an operation on the 
head, removing some depression from the brain, or perhaps 
opening the skull to allow greater brain expansion- 
backward and vicious boys have been given normal mental 
and moral conditions and a fair chance in life. 

"Edward E. Grimmell, when 14 years of age, received 
a blow on the head from a picket, which fractured the 
skull and left a discernible depression. His parents paid 
little or no attention to the incident, but the boy grew up 
and from time to time showed criminal tendencies. He 
made little progress at school and was vicious, and was 
frequently the subject of police attention. After serving 
three terms in State's prison he was finally arrested and 
tried for forgery. He did not deny any of the facts, and 
his counsel contended that his criminal impulses were the 
result of injuries to the head. 

RELEASE OF PRESSURE ON BRAIN CHANGED COURSE 
OF MAN'S LIFE 

"The Judge did not place credence in the claim made 
in his behalf, considered him a clever professional crook, 
dangerous to the community, and sentenced him to the 
Dannemora prison. The man begged the prison surgeon 
to perform an operation, saying he desired to lead 
a decent life, but could not resist the opportunity to commit 
crime whenever he had a chance. He preferred 
death to a continued career of crime, such as he felt he 
was doomed to have. He finally attracted the attention 
of an eminent surgeon of Boston, who performed the operation, 
relieved the pressure on the brain and changed 
the whole tendency of the man's thought and action, and 
from having the most perverse and criminal nature prior 
to the operation, he has since become, to all appearances, 
a moral man of the highest impulses. 

"It has been found that surgical operations, removing 
adenoids and other growths of nose and throat, allowing 
proper breathing, has changed many cases of stupid 
children into bright and active ones. Crime comes 
ordinarily through an abnormal physical condition; viciousness 
is considerably the result of ignorance through 
the presence of abnormal conditions."— Plattsburg Sentinel. 



If accidents to the skull can produce degradation of 
morals, who will deny that the shape of the brain of the 
child is largely influenced by heredity— particularly by 

R4752 : page 36 

the mother? This agrees with the Scriptural declaration, 
I was born in sin, shapen in iniquity; in sin did my 
mother conceive me.— Psa. 51:5. 
Who will deny, further, that the father has much to 



do with the child's physical vitality and vigor of constitution? 
But additionally he is largely responsible for the 
mother's surroundings and mental condition during the 
period of gestation. Injustice, harshness, cruel words 
at such a time from anybody, but particularly from the 
husband, would arouse in the mind of the mother grievous 

R4753 : page 36 

thoughts, gloomy thoughts, anger, hatred, etc., sure 
more or less to leave their impress upon the child she is 
carrying. 

No one should be more generous to the weaknesses 
and vices of humanity than the parents; but all should 
have a measure of sympathy. While enforcing law and 
order let us remember that in the whole human family 
a reign of sin and death is in progress. And let us 
sympathetically do all in our power to promote righteousness 
and to be helpful to those who are in still greater 
difficulty than themselves along these lines. 

Not only do such thoughts give us great charity 
toward all, but they cause us the more reverently to 
look up to God as the only One competent to fully release 
the groaning creation. Looking into his Word we perceive 
that the entire Plan of Salvation for the race is 
along the lines of uplift from mental and physical weaknesses 
to full perfection in God's likeness. And while 
praising the Almighty for this generous Plan soon to 
be put into operation for the world at the Second Coming 
of Messiah and the establishment of his Kingdom 
(Acts 3:19-21), let us also note with joy our own privileges 
—our "high calling of God in Christ Jesus." 



FERTILITY OF PALESTINE 

Prof. Richard Gottheil, of Columbia University, the 
director of the American school of archaeology in Jerusalem, 
believes that the time will soon come when Palestine 
will be in fact what the Hebrew Scriptures say in 
poetry it was at one time— "a land flowing with milk and 
honey." The professor admits that changes will have to 
come before the ideal is realized, but he believes that 
the changes will come. 

When a friend suggested that there would have to 
be a change in the soil, as well as in the government, he 
replied that appearances were often deceitful in Turkey 
as well as America, and that what appeared to be rock 
on the hillsides of Judea was really a fertilizer in rock 
form. Prof. Gottheil is a truthful man, but a truthful 
man is sometimes called upon to explain statements 
which seem contrary to facts, and this is the explanation 
he made: 

"The soil of Palestine is peculiar. It is remarkably 
fertile, as the primitive methods of cultivation show. 



If so much can grow as does grow with the mere scratching 
which the ground receives, how much might be produced 
if western methods were employed? I have seen 
trees growing where there was absolutely no dirt visible, 
but in some way the roots had reached the soil and they 
had obtained a foothold, which enables them to grow and 
bear fruit. 

PREDICTS GREAT FUTURE 

"But what is more remarkable still is the fact that 
there is in the rocks which one sees on these hillsides, 
chemical properties which correspond with those ingredients 
in the best fertilizers, and these rocks decompose 
from time to time, so that what seems so forbidding from 
an agricultural point of view is really going back into 
the soil as manure. There is an institution in Jerusalem, 
founded to give work to poor Hebrews, whose manager 
actually pounds up the soil, not waiting for it to decompose, 
and he produces very fine crops as a result of this 
mixture. Several cases might be cited where hillsides 
may be made to bear, not exactly forests, but a sufficient 
number of trees to prove my contention that a great 
future awaits this country, when conditions now prevalent 
are changed; and they will be changed; a new 
spirit is in the air, and in the government as well." 



TO MAKE EDEN BLOOM AGAIN 

Sir John Jackson has obtained the contract for the 
construction of the first dam in the irrigation works designed 
by Sir William Willcox for the Turkish Government, 
with the object of again making an Eden of 
Mesopotamia. 

Sir William Wilcox, who has been engaged in surveying 
the land between the Tigris and the Euphrates, 
in 1908 predicted that this vast territory, now an arid 
waste infested by swamps, but showing traces of ancient 
irrigation canals, would again blossom as the rose, provided 
that works, of which this dam is the first, be carried 
out. 



DISOWNS FANCIFUL SPECULATIONS 

Brother W. H. Bundy has forwarded to us a mimeographed 
three-page article speculating in regard to time 
prophecies and implying that the writer has some foreknowledge 
of the contents of STUDIES Volume VII., and 
that his presentations are in line therewith. Brother 
Bundy is credited with having presented these fanciful 
interpretations. His letter below denies all relationship 
to the article. 



As for the Seventh Volume, the Editor can assure 
the readers that nobody knows what its contents will be, 
for not a word of it has yet been written. While our 
hands are so full of important work, and while the 
Church evidently needs to study more deeply the Six 
Volumes already possessed, we cannot consider it to be 
the Lord's will to turn aside from work in hand and 
pressing, to take up the writing of the Seventh Volume. 
No doubt in his own due time the Lord will give us the 
time and everything else necessary for an exposition of 
Revelation, if it be his will that we should thus serve his 
Church. 

Our advice to the dear friends everywhere is to accept 
nothing in a way of Scriptural exposition as ours, 
except what is published by our Society or over our 
signature. 

Brother Bundy's letter denying the fanciful, prophetic 
interpretations, follows: 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

This is the fourth letter of this kind I have received 
lately and I feel that I would be glad to have some way 
of assuring the friends that I have no sympathy for 
speculations, but endeavor always to confine myself to 
the Scriptural teachings of the six volumes of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES and THE WATCH TOWER. There is no 
foundation for thinking I ever presented such fanciful 
teachings suggested in the enclosed letter and I fear my 
name is confounded with some other Pilgrim. Can you 
recommend some way whereby I can clear myself, if you 
think it advisable? It grieves me to think any of his little 
ones could suppose I would act so unwisely and so 
contrary to your admonitions. I love you! God bless 
you! In much gratitude. 

Your Brother, W. H. BUNDY. 



R4753 : page 37 

REPLY TO CARDINAL GIBBONS' SERMON 

[FROM THE "OVERLAND MONTHLY"] 

CARDINAL GIBBONS' sermon, widely published, 
attracted a great deal of attention 
amongst Protestants as well as Catholics. 
What will Protestantism say to this? was 
the query. We have heard but one Protestant 
response, and that, properly enough, 
from the pen of the best and most widely 
known Protestant minister in the world- 
Pastor Russell of Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
New York:— 

PASTOR RUSSELL CONGRATULATES THE CARDINAL 



It falls to my lot to respond to Cardinal Gibbons' sermon 
on "A Plea for United Christendom," in which he 
urges very forcefully that there is but one Church, and 
that, therefore, all Protestants should abandon their sectarian 
attitude and join the Roman Catholic Church. The 
reply falls to my lot, because, although I stand free and 
independent of all Protestant sects and parties, my brethren 
of the ministry in various denominations of Protestantism 
would find it rather awkward and difficult to 
acknowledge that there is but one true Church, and, in 
the same breath to acknowledge that their denomination 
is no more that one church than is any other sect. 

I am very pleased with Cardinal Gibbons' kindly moderation 
in the handling of the subject. It contrasts very 
forcibly with the terrible times of the past, when Roman 
Catholics on the one hand and various Protestant sects on 
the other, waged an indirect and internecine strife to the 
death in the name of God and of our Redeemer and of 
righteousness. Surely what all intelligent people need 
is to abandon foolish prejudices, hypocrisies and superstitions 
of the past, and to come together as true followers 
of the Nazarene. Everything which points in this 
direction is to be appreciated, whether coming from the 
lips of Cardinal Gibbons or from others. Surely we 
should all desire the Truth, and desiring it, should seek 
it in God's Word, of which the Master said, "Thy Word 
is Truth." 

AGREES WITH CARDINAL GIBBONS 

I am pleased to say that I agree most heartily with 
Cardinal Gibbons' presentation in almost every particular. 
Unquestionably sectarianism is wholly out of accord 
with the teachings of the Scriptures. Assuredly St. 
Paul rebuked the Corinthian brethren because they presented 
a divided front, saying, I am of Paul; I am of 
Apollos; I am of Peter, etc. St. Paul's reply to this was 
that it was proof or carnality, of fleshly minds, and proof 
of an unspiritual state. All Christians are coming to 
realize this— Catholic and Protestant— although it is but 
a few years since some claimed that sectarianism was a 
positive advantage; that it led to a greater zeal and 
energy in the Divine service than if all were agreed. 

R4754 : page 37 

All who are conversant with history understand 
what I mean when I say that God has been pleased to 
permit an illustration of— first a united Christendom, and, 
secondly, a divided Christendom. For long centuries 
there was practically but one Church in Europe, the Roman 
Catholic. The results were surely not at all that 
could have been desired. That unity of Church brought 
neither secular nor religious education, nor did it bring 
to the world the Millennium promised as the great desideratum 



of humanity. Rather in that long period we see 
that ignorance and superstition held the reins. During 
the last few centuries we have had the opportunity of 
testing the division of Christendom into various sects and 
parties. While the results are not satisfactory, while the 
condition is not what God's Word prompts us to desire 
and expect, this divided condition has certainly tended 
toward greater freedom of thought, greater liberty from 
ignorance and superstition. 

So, then, when we think of the Church, both Catholics 
and Protestants agree that we should not desire such a 
unity as prevailed during the period in history known 
as "the dark ages." The unity we seek and pray for is a 
knowledge-enlightened and more sanctified unity, which 
will not require to be maintained through the arm of 
civilized power, and the rack and thumb-screw and stake. 
Our prayers and desires should go up for the kind of liberty 
mentioned in the Bible— "the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free"— "the liberty of the sons of God." 

THE PERPLEXING QUESTION 

So, then, dissatisfied with the sectarian divisions, and 
strife, and equally dissatisfied with the compulsory union 
of the past, and, convinced, nevertheless, that the Bible 
teaches the unity of the Church, we ask, How may this 
Scriptural unity be attained— the unity of the Spirit in 
the bonds of peace and love, which maintains its own liberty 
and grants the same to others? Where shall we 
find; how shall we obtain; by what process shall we accomplish 
this unity? 

We agree with the Cardinal that our Lord speaks of 
himself in the Scriptures as the one Shepherd of the one 
flock of this Age and the Supervisor of the one fold. 
We agree that there is but the one Church, for whom 
the Master prayed during his dying hour— "That they all 
may be one in us." We agree also that the Apostle 
speaks of the one Church, likening it to a human body, 
over which there is the one Head, and of which all are 
members. We agree that there are not many bodies, 
but one; not many heads, but One. We agree, also, that 
there is but the one true Vine of the Father's right-hand 
planting, and that this refers to Christ, the parent stock, 
and to his true members, the branches. We agree, also, 
that as there is only one Lord, so there is but one faith, 
and, additionally, that there is but one baptism. 

Agreeing with all these Scriptural premises laid down 
by Cardinal Gibbons, we must, nevertheless, dispute his 
conclusions, that this one Church which Christ declared 
he would build upon the rock of Truth, and which would 
grow to a glorious temple composed of living stones, of 
which St. Peter was one, is the Roman Church, just as 
we disagree with our Baptist friends when they tell us 
that the Baptist Church is the one Church. Equally we 
disagree with our Presbyterian and Methodist, Lutheran 
and Congregational systems when they each protest that 



they fill these requirements— that they are the one 
Church. 

Our contention is that every one who turns his back 
upon sin; who accepts of Jesus as his Redeemer and 
Savior, and who approaches the Father in full consecration 
through Jesus, and who receives the begetting of 
the holy Spirit of God— all such are the brethren of 
Jesus and sons of God, whether they join the Roman 
Catholic, the Congregational, the Methodist, Baptist, 
Presbyterian or other human systems. Our contention is 
that none of these human systems, Catholic or Protestant, 
is recognized by the Bible— none of them is recognized 
by God. They are all human institutions— originated 
by men and maintained by men; sometimes good 
men and sometimes bad men have had to do with their 
organization and maintenance. 

Indeed, we hold that such a reformed, consecrated 
believer is equally a child of God in whatever denomination 
he may be, or if he be outside of all denominational 
walls or creeds. It is our contention that the various 
creeds of Christendom have been so many stumbling 

R4754 : page 38 

blocks and hindrances to honest souls who sought their 
God and the light of his Word. True, they may have 
assisted in some particulars, as well as they may have 
done injury in other respects. All the same, none of 
these institutions has Divine authority. None of them 
is sanctioned by the Word of God, the Bible. They are 
one and all built upon false assumptions. 

WHICH IS THE TRUE CHURCH? 

According to the Bible we may all find the answer 
we are seeking— an explanation of what and where is the 
true Church. In the Scriptures it is described as "the 
Church of the First-borns, whose names are written in 
heaven." (Heb. 12:23.) Will our Protestant friends 
claim that their Church roll corresponds to that written 
in Heaven in the Lamb's Book of Life? Would Christian 
friends of any denomination dare to make such a 
claim? Most assuredly, No. We all realize that at very 
most the various sects and parties of Christendom are 
composed of wheat and tares, and that, so far as human 
judgment can discern, the tares are vastly in the majority. 

The Scriptures declare that the Lord knoweth them 
that are his! The intimation is that no one but the Lord 
certainly, truly, knows which are the true sheep and 
which are the goats in sheep's clothing. We are exhorted 
not to judge one another. "Condemn not that 
ye be not condemned." Each heart is Scripturally exhorted 
to have its own fellowship with God, not through 
synods or presbyteries, not through priests or popes. 
Every branch is to be vitally united to the Vine; every 
Christian, every member of the true Church, is to be 



vitally united to Christ. 

In that very parable our Lord declares that every 
branch in him that bears not fruitage of the Spirit in love, 
the Father will cut off from membership. Thus, from the 
standpoint of Divine wisdom and knowledge the Church 
of Christ on the earth is composed only of saints— only of 
those who have fled away from sin, who by faith have 
laid hold upon the Redeemer and who have consecrated 
their lives unto death in the Divine service— and of these 
only such as maintain this standing and bring forth the 
peaceable fruits of righteousness. 

So, then, without attempting a personal identification 
of the branches of the Vine, we may surely know that 
they are very few. We may surely know that the nominal 
membership of the various sects contain comparatively 
few of these saintly ones, who alone have Divine 
recognition as being "the Church of the First-borns 
whose names are written in heaven"— fruit-bearing 
branches in the true Vine, living stones in the temple of 
God imbued with the holy Spirit, active members in the 
Spirit-begotten Body of Christ. 

To this conclusion the words of Scripture agree, assuring 
us that "strait is the gate, and narrow is the way 
which leadeth unto life, and few there be that go in 
thereat." They assure us again that these favored few 
number not many great, not many rich or learned, but 
chiefly the poor of this world, rich in faith, heirs of the 
Kingdom. They assure us that this Kingdom class must 
all be footstep followers of Jesus; as he said, "If any 
one would be my disciple, let him deny himself and take 
up his cross and follow me, that where I am, there shall 
my disciple be." And again he said, "Fear not, little 
flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." 

CHRISTIAN UNION NEVER LOST 

From this standpoint we perceive that the great 
masses, Catholic and Protestant, are not, and never were, 
the Church of Christ; they deceive themselves. They 
have been children of this world, not spirit begotten New 
Creatures in Christ; they have not been living stones in 
the temple, not branches of the true Vine, not members 
of the "little flock." They have been worldly people with 
religious sentiments and good desires who misunderstood 
that great teaching of the Bible— that only the 
sanctified are in Christ Jesus, called to be saints. What 
has been done by these large numbers of well-meaning 
but mistaken people in the way of organizing churches, 
lodges, banks, etc., had nothing whatever to do with the 
great organization which God effected eighteen centuries 
ago, and which has persisted as a unit in the world ever 
since. 

The true Church has never been divided, because each 
member of it is united with the Lord, the Head, and, 
through him, united to every other "member of his 



Body, which is the Church," the "little flock." In this 
one Church, there has always been maintained one Lord 
Jesus, one faith, his Word of promise, one baptism— the 
baptism of consecration into his death— to suffer with 
him that, by and by, we may reign with him. 

THE HIDDEN MYSTERY 

Does some one say, Where is the history of this 
Church? We answer, in the language of the Apostles, 
that "the world knoweth us not, even as it knew him 
not." The world of Jesus' day were the professed religionists; 
yet they knew not the great religious Teacher 

R4755 : page 38 

and Redeemer whom God had sent, and they crucified 
him. Similarly all the way down, the great religious 
teachers of the various systems have not known, have 
not recognized the "members of the Body of Christ" a 
bit more than the Jews recognized the Head of that 
Body. 

This is the very point which St. Paul emphasized. He 
declares that the fact, as well as the philosophy, of the 
Church being members of Christ is to the world— both 
the religious and the irreligious world— a Hidden Mystery; 
it is outside of their philosophy, their theory, their 
understanding. Hence it is that the most saintly characters, 
both in Catholicism and Protestantism, have been 
martyrs, as Jesus was, as St. Stephen was, as all the 
Apostles were, and all the faithful during the intermediate 
centuries were, and as some may yet be if an outward 
union be effected such as once prevailed— in the 
"Dark Ages." 

COUNTERFEITING THE TRUE CHURCH 

If now we declare that, to a certain extent, the true 
Church has been counterfeited, both by Catholics and 
Protestants, let no one take offense and suppose that we 
are wishing to speak unkindly. We do not charge that 
these counterfeits of the true Church were made knowingly 
or intentionally, but merely that the Church, coming 
under the control of brilliant minds not spirit-begotten, 
not heaven-enlightened, misread the Word of God, 
misinterpreted it, and followed their misinterpretations. 

Notice, for instance, the Roman Catholic Church. 
The average Roman Catholic does not know that he is not 
a member of the Church. But Cardinal Gibbons will not 
deny it, nor will any of the ecclesiastics. Their teaching, 
most explicitly, is that the Church is composed of 
the Pope and the other religious instructors, and that the 
common people are not members of the Church, but, as 
they style them, "children of the Church." 

Thus, the Catholic Church appropriates to itself the 
words of Jesus respecting the "little flock," etc.; they 



apply those Scriptures to the clergy, and not to the congregation. 
This is the secret of Papacy's great mistake. 

R4755 : page 39 

In their ecclesiastical system they have a counterfeit of 
the true Church. And because the Scriptures declare that 
the Lord's faithful "little flock," "the Church of the living 
God whose names are written in heaven," will reign 
with Christ, therefore Papacy claims, on the strength of 
that promise, the right to reign with imperial power and 
heavenly authority over its kingdoms of earth. And it 
has been Papacy's endeavor to carry out this erroneous 
reasoning, and to make good its counterfeit of the true 
Church and her work, that has led to so many grievous 
difficulties, persecutions, wars, turmoils. 

THE TRUE REIGN OF THE SAINTS 

If Papacy has the counterfeit of the true Church and 
the counterfeit of the true reign, what does the Bible 
teach respecting the genuine? This: That the faithfulness 
of the unknown, disesteemed, rejected of men, 
saintly followers in Jesus' footsteps, constitutes their 
schooling, testing, preparation for a share in the Kingdom 
with Christ their Lord. 

When the full number of the elect Church, predestinated 
of the Father, shall have been thus gathered out of 
the world and finally glorified— then the Kingdom to 
which they are heirs will be established, and they shall 
be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, King of kings 
and Lord of lords. His Kingdom will rule the world, not 
by guns or swords, not by racks or burning at the stake 
and inquisitionary torments, but by heavenly power, 
which then will have full control of earth's affairs. 

CHILDREN OF THE CHURCH 

What our Catholic friends have is merely a foreshadowing 
—or, shall I use the harsher word counterfeit 
—of the Truth respecting the Church as a mother and 
certain children. The Scriptures teach that, in the new 
order of things, when Christ shall take to himself his 
great power and institute his Messianic Kingdom for the 
blessing and uplifting of mankind, he will have a Bride 
-the Church-"The Bride, the Lamb's Wife." (Rev. 21:9.) 
And the Scriptures further represent that the 
glorified Jesus, who is the heavenly Bridegroom, and the 
glorified Church, who is the heavenly Bride, will, figuratively, 
beget children. That is to say, all through the 
thousand years of the reign of righteousness the glorified 
Jesus will be the everlasting Father, or Giver of everlasting 
life, on the earthly plane to Adam, and all of his 
children who will accept it on the terms of the Kingdom. 
Then the Church will be the mother or nourisher and 
caretaker of all mankind to uplift them, instruct them, 



develop them, in the ways of righteousness— to bring as 
many as will prove willing up to the full perfection of 
human nature and life everlasting. All refusing this uplift 
and rejecting the grace of God will be destroyed in 
the Second Death. St. Peter tells us that their destruction 
will be similar to that of the brute beast that perisheth. 
-2 Pet. 2:12. 

ARE THERE PROTESTANT COUNTERFEITS? 

Although Protestants repudiate the Roman Catholic 
idea that the clergy alone constitute the Church, and that 
the people are the children of the Church, nevertheless 
in many denominations we see this insidious error in a 
slightly different form. This is notably true of the 
Episcopal Church, which puts everything in the way of 
government into the hands of the clergy and treats the 
laity, to a considerable degree, as though they were 
children unable to comprehend spiritual things. The 
Methodist Episcopal Church follows closely in the same 
line of procedure. The Presbyterian and Lutheran systems 
also quite particularly differentiate the clergy from 
the laity, even though the laity be given some apparent 
recognition on the ecclesiastical boards. This is done 
usually for a reward or for the purpose of securing financial 
or legal advice. But the laity is not supposed to have 
an equal standing with the clergy in respect to spiritual 
things. 

Congregationalists and Baptists and Disciples most 
nearly recognize an equality between the clergy and laity 
and that the entire Church of God, whoever they may 
be, are a Royal Priesthood. Yet even with these congregational 
bodies there is an attempt made to separate between 
clergy and laity, and to hold all the spiritual power 
and authority in the hands of the clergy. This is done 
along financial lines in the Congregational Church 
through the so-called Congregational Union. 

In the Baptist Church the ministers combine in what 
is known as a Baptist Ministers' Association, which holds 
the reins over the people as parents over children, and 
tells them whom they may call for a Pastor and whom 
not— whom the Association is willing to ordain as their 
Pastor, and whom it will refuse. Thus the same spirit is 
manifested in all these earthly systems, and by it they 
are all distinctly differentiated from the true Church 
and her Scriptural regulations, which declare, All ye are 
brethren— and One is your Master, even Christ, and One 
is your Pope, or Father, even God. 

ROYAL PRIESTHOOD COMPOSED OF SAINTS REGARDLESS 
OF DENOMINATION 

So, then, we ask Cardinal Gibbons to consider with 
us the Scriptural teaching which we have presented, 
namely, that the Royal Priesthood is composed exclusively 
of saints, regardless of whether they belong to 



their clergy or laity, or are to be found elsewhere— "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his." We ask the Cardinal 
to consider that this one Church is indivisible; that the 
Heavenly Father is the Husbandman of this true Vine; 
that he does not suffer any to remain as branches, members, 
of the true Church unless they bring forth the true 
fruit of the Vine. 

We ask the Cardinal to consider the Scriptural teaching 
that this saintly class, already vitally united with 
Jesus, is now the espoused virgin class mentioned by 
St. Paul (2 Cor. 1 1:3), and that they are waiting for 
the completion of their number, when the Heavenly 
Bridegroom, at his Second Coming, will receive them to 
himself in glory. By the power of the First Resurrection 
they will be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye, and be with their Lord and be like him. Then, as the 
Scriptures declare, will come the marriage of the Lamb, 
"for his Wife hath made herself ready." And shortly 
after that will come the Messianic Kingdom and the 
Times of Regeneration mentioned by our Lord, when his 
faithful will sit with him in the Throne, and the regeneration 
of Adam's race, the giving to them of new 
life from the Life-Giver, will begin. 

As for the great and prosperous human institutions 
which are more or less duplicating the Lord's Kingdom 
all over the world, these also, in the Scriptures, are called 
vines— the vine of the earth, in contrast with the Vine 
of the Heavenly Father's right-hand planting. It is not 
for us to determine how much good and how much harm 
these earthly churches, vines of the earth, have accomplished. 
That the Lord will declare in his own season, 
but he tells us that the grapes borne by these vines- 
anger, malice, hatred, envy strife, evil-speaking, etc.— 
will overflow the wine-press of the wrath of God in the 
near future, and bring upon the world that great time of 
trouble, which all may see upon the horizon and which, 
the Lord declares, will be such a time of trouble as the 
world has never known.— Daniel 12:1; Matt. 24:21. 



R4756 : page 40 

19 11 -THE MEMORIAL SUPPER- 19 11 

AGAIN we are approaching the anniversary 

of our dear Redeemer's crucifixion; once 

more we remind our readers of the lesson 

which years have taught many of us, 

namely, that for some unexplainable reason 

the Lord's consecrated people experience 

special trials and testings at this particular 

season— corresponding to our 

Lord's time of heaviness and sorrow, and 

the time of special testing amongst the 

early disciples. It was shortly before he went up to 



Jerusalem, foreknowing the crucifixion, that he explained 
it to the Apostles. It was then that he declared that 
only those who eat his flesh and drink his blood have 
life in them. Many of his close followers said, "This 
is a hard saying; who can receive it?" and walked no 
more with him.— John 6:60. 

Shortly after, when telling the twelve of his approaching 
crucifixion, St. Peter brought upon himself a 
rebuke by saying, Far be it from thee, Lord. This thing 
shall not happen unto thee. But Jesus answered him, 
saying, Get thee behind me, Adversary, for thou savorest 
not of the things of God, but of the things of men. 
(Matt.l6:22,23.) Your suggestions and advice are contrary 
to the Divine Program; it is necessary that the 
Son of man suffer sacrificially, that he might enter into 
his glory and accomplish his appointed work as the 
Savior of the Church and of the world— whosoever wills. 

Later on, near the climax, we remember the special 
trial upon Judas, and how his love of money led him to 
oppose the anointing of the Master for his burial, and 
later on led him to sell that Master for thirty pieces of 
silver, and, later on, to betray him with a kiss. Still 
later we remember how all the disciples were disconcerted 
by the arrest of their Master and by his evident 
willingness to be arrested, so that they "all forsook him 
and fled." (Mark 14:50.) We remember how, still 
later, the noble St. Peter was overtaken in a serious 
fault and denied his Lord and Master, even with cursing. 

Perhaps we partly imagine a parallel of testing on 
the Lord's people at this season of the year. And perhaps 
it is real and appropriate that the members of the 
Body of Christ should, in this particular at this season, 
have special trials, peculiar difficulties, testings of faith, 
obedience and loyalty. 

THE LENTEN OR FASTING SEASON 

It would appear that thoughts along the line above 
suggested came to others long ago and led to the appointment 
of the Lenten Season as a time of special fasting 
and prayer amongst the consecrated ones of the 
Lord's family. Certain it is that for long centuries this 
fasting has been in observance in the Roman Church, 
in the English Church, in the German Church, and, to 
some extent, in others. 

Although with the majority fasting has become a 
mere outward form and ceremony, without heart appreciation, 
and, therefore, not pleasing to the Lord, nevertheless 
we believe that some fasted from the best of 
motives in olden times, and that some still so fast. It 
is not for us to judge and individually condemn anybody, 
yet many, we are sure, will confess to just what 
we have charged in an indefinite way. It is impossible, 
of course, for any laws or regulations to be made which 
will govern the heart— they can scarcely govern the flesh, 
even in the most casual manner. 



We do not approve of set rules and laws governing 
such matters. The suggestions should be quite sufficient 
for all those who heartily desire to practise abstemiousness 
in respect to diet. We have the Master's suggestion 
that after his departure his followers would fast. Several 
instances of such fastings are recorded in the Scriptures, 
and these may be considered proper examples for 
the Lord's followers, none of whom are under law, under 
command, in respect to meats or drinks or other earthly 
ordinances. 

A measure of self-restraint in fasting is valuable to 
us physically, as well as spiritually— and particularly in 
the Spring of the year. The stronger foods necessary 
for the cold weather of winter are less necessary, as the 
weather becomes milder. Much of the Spring sickness 
is undoubtedly due to over-eating and may be considerably 
corrected by the observance of a measurable fast- 
restraint from the eating of dainties and rich food. And 
when the system is clogged with over-supply of nourishment, 
the brain becomes more stupid, impairing the 
higher mental powers, and particularly including those 
which connect us appreciatively with heavenly and spiritual 
things. 

We throw out these suggestions without any desire 
to put a yoke or a law upon anybody, but wishing each to 
fast and pray according to the dictates of his own conscience 
and to receive spiritual blessings according to 
the degree of his fellowship with the Lord in this and 
in every matter. 

THE DATE OF THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 

As we have previously remarked, our Lord gave no 
intimation such as many dear Christian people have 
imagined— namely, that the Memorial Supper should be 
celebrated weekly, monthly, bi-monthly, tri-monthly. 
Most evidently the Supper was instituted by all of the 
Jewish arrangements as an annual observance— to take 
the place of the Passover Type. There was a definiteness 
about the date of the type which would not necessarily 
attach to our celebration of the antitype. The 
type was intended to specifically mark the exact date 
on which our Lord would be crucified. Hence great 
particularity on the part of the Jews was appropriate. 
Now that the great fact of Jesus' death is a thing of 
the past, there seems not to be as great necessity for 
particularity as to the exactness of a day and an hour. 

Hence we see no objection to the custom followed 
by Episcopalians, Catholics and Lutherans of celebrating 
the Friday and the Sunday nearest to the anniversary 
of our Lord's death and resurrection, as Good Friday 
and Easter Sunday. Indeed, something may be said in 
favor of their custom, as it permits the anniversary to 
harmonize with the days of the week. However, for 
over thirty years we have been accustomed to observe 
this Memorial— the nearest that we know to its exact 



anniversary, according to the Jewish reckoning of time- 
on the preceding evening of the 14th day of the Jewish 
Month Nisan. In view of this long custom, and the 
fact that some might not see clearly any advantage of a 
change; in view of the fact also that some might become 
confused and think that they were following an error, 
it is our preference. We advise, therefore, that the exact 
date, according to the Jewish calendar, be followed. 

This year the new moon of the Spring Equinox appears 
March 30th, thus constituting it the First day of 
the First Month, Jewish time. Our Lord was crucified 
on the 14th day of the First Month, which this year 
will be April 12th. But the Memorial Supper, commemorative 
of his death, was celebrated on the evening 
preceding and therefore we, according to our previous 
custom, recommend that all, with one heart and one 
mind, unite in celebrating the great Redeemer's death on 
Tuesday night, April 1 1th, after six o'clock. Even then, 
of course, we will not all be able to celebrate at the same 

R4756 : page 41 

hour, because of differences of time; but the celebration 
will be very nearly at the same hour all over the 
world. The thought of this general fellowship will add 
to the joy and solemnity of the occasion. We recommend 
that all who love the Lord and are fully consecrated 
to do his will, even unto death, join in this celebration, 
which means so much to all of us. 

It first of all reminds us of our dear Redeemer's sacrifice 
on behalf of his Church and on behalf of all the 
families of the earth. It reminds us, secondly, that we 
have vowed unto the Lord to walk in his steps, to suffer 
with him, to drink of his cup, to be baptized with his baptism 
of death. Of course, the breaking of the bread 
and the sipping of the cup, memorially, is far less important 
than our participation in the realities, of which 
they are merely a figure. We must in our minds and 
hearts feed upon the broken body of Jesus and realize 
by faith that we partake first of all, imputedly, of justification 
of our flesh through him and that, through him, 

R4757 : page 41 

comes all our hopes of a future life. 

Secondly, as represented by his cup, we must share 
his sorrows, be partakers of the sufferings of Christ, fill 
up that which is behind of his afflictions, in walking 
faithfully in his footsteps— even unto death. The cup 
which the Father poured for the Master he drank. And 
by the grace of God we are privileged to share in his 
cup; for if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with 
him. And if we escape the sufferings of Christ and 
fail to become living sacrifices with him, we will thereby 
also be escaping the glorious privileges of his Kingdom. 

We are giving this timely notice because some of our 



readers live in remote Australia and China. 



R4757 : page 41 

LIFTED BY WHIRLWIND OUT OF SIGHT 
EXPERIENCES OF ELIJAH THE PROPHET 
--II KINGS 2:1-11. -MARCH 5.- 

"Enoch walked with God and he was not."— Genesis 5:24. 

THE Bible tells of three notable men who disappeared 

—God took them. One of these, 

Enoch, we are told, did not die. Another 

of them, Moses, we are told, died and was 

buried. Of the third one, the special subject 

of our lesson, it is not stated whether he 

died or not. But it is our understanding 

that he did die. 

The heaven to which Elijah was taken 
by a whirlwind was the aerial heaven, in 
which the birds fly. His taking away after this manner 
was in order to complete the typical features of his life, 
as we shall see. That neither he nor Enoch went to 
heaven, in the sense of passing into the heavenly or spiritual 
state and into the presence of God, is clearly testified 
to by Jesus, who declared, "No man hath ascended up to 
heaven, save he who came down from heaven, even the 
Son of man." (John 3:13.) Although of Enoch it is declared 
that he was translated that he should not see death, 
it is not stated that he was translated to heaven. And 
our Lord's words assure us that he was not. Where he 
now is no man knows. We can merely by faith accept 
the fact. 

The object served in the translation of Enoch probably 
is to show by and by that it was quite possible for God to 
have maintained our race in life perpetually— that only 
because of sin was it necessary for Adam and his family 
to die; that when sin and death shall be abolished by 
Messiah during his Kingdom, and when the willing and 
obedient of mankind shall have been brought to human 
perfection again, they will never need to die. The 
preservation of Enoch, an imperfect man, for five thousand 
years, by Divine power, will be an evidence to mankind 
and an assistance to their faith while the work of 
restitution will be progressing. Enoch himself is one of 
those Ancient Worthies who, during the Millennium, will 
be one of the "princes" or rulers in the earth, representatives 
of Messiah's invisible Kingdom. "Instead of thy 
fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make 
princes in all the earth."— Psalm 45:16. 

ELIJAH A TYPE OF THE CHURCH 



As Melchisedec (a King and Priest at the time) represented 
or typified the Church in glory, so Bible students 
understand that Elijah, the Prophet, typified or represented 
the Church in the flesh— this side the vail— from 
Jesus to the present. Thus long after Elijah's death God, 
through the Prophet, declared to Israel, Behold, I send 
you Elijah the Prophet before the great and notable day 
of the Lord, and if he do not turn the hearts of the 
Fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, 
then the earth shall be smitten with a curse— a time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation. 
(Malachi 4:5,6.) John the Baptist, as the forerunner of 
Jesus in the flesh, typified this greater Elijah (the Church 
in the flesh), the forerunner of the Messiah of glory. As 
John the Baptist did not succeed in bringing the people 
into harmony with the fathers (Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob, etc.), so likewise the Church in the flesh, as God 
foresaw, has not been successful in bringing peace to the 
world. 

As John the Baptist's failure with Israel was followed 
by the overthrow of their national polity in A.D. 70, so, 
we believe, the failure of his antitype, the Church in the 
flesh, to bring in harmony and righteousness, is by Divine 
intention to be followed by the world-wide trouble which 
will humble man and prepare the way for the establishment 
of the Messianic Kingdom in power and great glory. 

CAUGHT UP IN A WHIRLWIND 

Many Christians have not noticed that there is not 
only a difference between the heavenly salvation, which 
God has provided for the Church, and the earthly restitution 
(Acts 3:19-21) which God has provided for the 
world, but additionally there are two distinct classes of 
the Church brought to our attention in the Bible. First, 
we have the faithful Royal Priesthood styled "The Body 
of Christ," of which Jesus is the Head. These have the 
promise that they shall sit with Christ in his throne and 
be judges of the world during the Messianic Kingdom. 
The other class of saved ones on the spirit plane, the 
Scriptures designate as a "great company, whose number 
no one knows." (Rev. 7:9.) These are different from the 
elect, whose number is positively fixed by Divine predestination 
—one hundred and forty-four thousand. As that 
company is Scripturally styled a "little flock" and a "royal 
priesthood," so the "great company" in the Bible is styled 
antitypical Levites. While the elect sit upon the Throne 
with Christ, this secondary class of the saved will serve 
before the Throne. While the saintly few will wear 
crowns of glory, the greater company of their brethren, 
before the Throne, will have no crowns, but instead have 
palms of victory. While the elect are the living stones of 
the temple of God soon to be brought together in the 

R4757 : page 42 



"first resurrection," to be the meeting-place between God 
and men for a thousand years, the "great company," the 
Levitical class, are neither living stones nor pillars in 
this Temple, though they will be blessed with the glorious 
opportunity of serving God in this Temple day and night. 

Having located Elijah as the type of the "elect" class, 
Bible Students are inclined to consider Elisha as probably 
a typical character; also a representative of the greater 
spiritual class, the antitypical Levites. It was toward the 
close of Elijah's experience that Elisha became his servant 
and companion. The various instances in which 
Elijah suggested to Elisha that he should tarry behind are 
supposed to represent the trials and difficulties in the pathway 
of the Church here, which will suggest to the "great 
company," the Elisha class, that they continue not to follow 
their more zealous brethren of the Elijah class. These 
various stoppages and suggestions represent sifting or 
separating work, and all who continue on may be understood 
to belong to the Elisha class. Any falling away are 
not of either class. 

CHARIOTS AND HORSEMEN OF FIRE 

If these interpretations of Elijah as a type be correct, 
the lesson is that the close of the Church's career in the 
flesh will come suddenly, abruptly. The fiery chariot may 
prove to be fiery trials or sharp persecutions, separating 
between the Elijah and the Elisha classes. The whirlwind 
which carried up Elijah to heaven is a type or 
figure, very uniformly used in the Scriptures to represent 
great confusion and strife— a cyclone. 

The denouement will not be entirely unexpected, either 
by the Elisha class or by the sons of the prophets, who 
would represent here a respectable class of Bible students 
who have not made a full consecration of their lives to 
the Lord, and who will not be eligible to the heavenly condition 
as members either of the Elijah or the Elisha 
class. 



R4757 : page 42 

ELISHA SUCCESSOR TO ELIJAH 

-II. KINGS 4:25-37.-MARCH 12.- 

"The gift of God is eternal life through 
Jesus Christ our Lord."— Romans 6:23. 

OUR lesson follows in order the one of a week 
ago. Elisha was with Elijah until the whirlwind 
separated them and took Elijah out of 
sight. His mantle dropped to Elisha and 
Elisha's prayer was answered that a double 



portion of Elijah's spirit might rest upon 

him and that he might take up, in a measure, 

the work of Elijah as a teacher. Using the 

mantle to smite the river Jordan, the same 

miracle occurred to him as to Elijah. He 

passed over safely. On the other side of Jordan he began 

his career as a prophet. At Jericho the supply of water 

came from a brackish stream, unpalatable and unhealthful. 

Elisha went to the fountain and there performed a miracle 

similar to the one performed by Moses at the Wells of 

R4758 : page 42 

Moses at Marah. To this day the spring is known as 
Elisha's Fountain. 

Again we read that one of these "sons of the prophets," 
or students, died and that his widowed mother was 
in want and that the Prophet Elisha helped her to exercise 
faith. She had a cruse of oil, which increased in supply 
as she poured it from vessel to vessel until she had sufficient 
for all her debts. Several other miracles of a restorationary 
character are noted, the most prominent of 
which is related in our lesson, namely, the restoration of 
a boy to life and health. The thing connected with 
Elisha's experiences which has attracted to him world-wide 
attention and general reprobation was his cursing of 
forty-two youths. These were children in the sense that 
every person is by the Law considered a child until 
twenty -one years of age— they had been mocking Elisha, 
crying, "Go up, thou bald head." Your Master, Elijah, 
went up to heaven in a whirlwind. Why do not you go 
also? You are a bald head, or one who has lost his master. 
You are not fit to pose as a prophet nor to be compared 
to Elijah. (This is our paraphrase.) 

Elisha did not swear at the children; when we read 
that he cursed them the proper thought is that he condemned 
them, just as Jesus said to some with most kindly 
art, "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees," etc. So 
Elisha pronounced woe or blight upon those youths of 
various ages who taunted him. He declared that something 
would befall them. Divine Justice would square accounts 
and vindicate him. Forthwith two she bears came 
upon the rabble, put them to flight, and forty-two of the 
mob were torn and wounded— more or less. Opponents of 
the Bible read into this that forty-two children were 
killed, but nothing of the kind is stated. 

We are to remember that the Israelites under the 
leadership of their King Ahab and Queen Jezebel had 
been turned to idolatry, and that although the Prophet 
Elijah had re-established the true religion, the King and 
Queen and the majority of the people merely tolerated it. 

The youths who had tiraded against Elisha were 
probably the young men and boys of Jericho, a hoodlum 
set ranging in years from ten to twenty, who had followed 
the Prophet, taunting him and, doubtless at the instigation 
of their parents, seemed to destroy his influence. The 



Divine judgment following the Prophet's denunciation 
was doubtless intended as a just rebuke and a profitable 
lesson for those torn and for their parents and for all who 
heard about it. 

ELISHA CONSIDERED TYPICAL 

Our interest in this story of Elisha's experiences after 
Elijah was taken away increases as we consider the fact 
that he, like Elijah, was quite a positive and typical character. 
We have already intimated a correspondency between 
Elijah and the antitypical priests and between 
Elisha and the antitypical Levites of the Gospel Age. 
Elisha may also typify the Ancient Worthies, into whose 
hands the instruction and blessing of the world will be 
placed at the inauguration of Messiah's Kingdom: 
"Princes in all the earth." From this standpoint we 
might think of Elisha representing the secondary class of 
the spirit-begotten ones first, and that his crossing of Jordan 
represents the death of this class of antitypical Levites. 
With this view the after progress of Elisha and his 
work of judgment and restitution already referred to correspond 
well with what we should expect at the inauguration 
of Messiah's Kingdom under the "princes." The 
healing of the water-spring would well represent the healing 
of the stream of Truth. For long centuries error and 
superstition, combined with Satan's great falsehood, Ye 
shall not surely die, have made the waters of Truth brackish, 
unpalatable, unhealthful. The putting of the salt into 
the Fountain or Spring symbolically represents the cleansing 
from untruth and error, through the co-operation of 
the Church in glory, which, while here, is appropriately 
styled, "the salt of the earth." The healing of the stream 
of Truth will come from the glorified Church, although it 

R4758 : page 43 

will come through the Ancient Worthies as a part of the 
New Covenant blessings then to come to the world of 
mankind through the Jews. This is also what St. Paul 
calls to our attention in Romans 1 1:25-33. 

The "death in the pottage" will be effectually offset by 
the blessings of the Lord through his glorified Kingdom. 
The earth shall yield her increase. The wilderness shall 
blossom as the rose. Streams shall break forth in the 
desert. The blessing of the Lord will be everywhere- 
represented symbolically by the sons of the Prophets. 
These were some who separated themselves from the 
idolatries of their land and who gladly gave heed to the 
teachings of the Prophets, prophesying themselves, as 
their followers. 

The blessing upon the widow's cruse of oil has symbolical 
signification, in proportion as we realize the value 
of the oil to the people of that time. It was not only a 
part of their food, but their general medicine and furnished 
them their light. What came through the prophets, 



therefore, is a very beautiful picture of restitution blessings, 
which may be expected in due time and which will 
come to all the worthy. 

The restoration of life to the dead is to be one of the 
great features of the New Dispensation— Messiah's Kingdom. 
And this power will be exercised doubtless through 
the "princes" of that time, typified, we believe, by Elisha. 
Those most to be favored will be those who will most 
thoroughly appreciate and best receive the "princes," 
represented by Elisha, even as the parents of this child 
whom Elisha raised from the dead had made gracious provision 
for the prophet's comfort. 

The judgment upon the opposers of the Elisha class, 
typified by the tearing of the forty-two, would seem to tell 
of disciplinary judgments which, during Messiah's Kingdom, 
will be promptly executed against all opponents of 
the Divine arrangements. The assurance of the Scriptures 
is, "When the judgments of the Lord are abroad in 
the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness"; "Judgment shall be laid to the line and 
righteousness to the plummet." 



R4758 : page 43 

DEFEAT THROUGH DRUNKENNESS 

-I. KINGS 20: 12-21. -MARCH 19.- 

"It is not for kings to drink wine; nor 
for princes strong drink."— Proverbs 31:4. 

TODAY'S lesson recounts an invasion of the 
land of Israel by King Benhadad, over-lord 
of Syria, who had under him thirty-two 
kings of Syria and a large army of invasion. 
Warfare in those days, of course, 
was very different from what it is today. 
The numbers in conflict were fewer and 
their weapons inferior. Their motive was 
plunder. They would take back with them, 
not only the gold and silver and other valuables 
but fruits, grains, etc. 

Our day witnesses a considerable advance along the 
lines of diplomacy. Wars and invasions now are always 
based upon some philanthropic motive— to free people 
from bad government, or to compel them to pay their 
debts, or to open up their country to civilization, or to 
give them more responsible and representative government, 
or greater freedom of religion. Robbery and pillage, 
by an invading army, are reprobated. Whatever is 
taken from the conquered people must be obtained in a 
different manner— by the levying of an indemnity fund, 
amounting to far more than could be stolen by the looting 
processes. All this speaks to us of a higher moral sense, 



even though much relating to it be hypocrisy. The 

very need for the hypocrisy implies that, with a considerable 

number, there are qualms of conscience on the 

subject. 

THE BATTLE WAS THE LORD'S, AND OF COURSE HE WON 

Benhadad sent his demands to King Ahab saying, 
"Thy silver and thy gold are mine; thy wives and thy 
children, even the goodliest of thine." King Ahab, recognizing 
the greatness of the army and his own unpreparedness 
for resisting them, answered, "My Lord, O 
King, according to thy saying, I am thine, I and all that 
I have." But when the invader broadened his demands 
and included with it the wealth of all the nobles of Israel, 
their wives and their children, etc., resistance was 
aroused and the message went back that the additional 
demands would not be granted. Thereupon the invaders 
set the battle array against the walls of Israel's capital, 
Samaria. 

At this juncture God sent a Prophet to Israel's King, 
informing him that he would deliver the invaders into 
his hand and give him a great victory. The astonished 
Ahab asked by whom would the battle be waged against 
the host. The answer was that at the command the 
princes of the provinces should fight under Ahab's direction, 
supported by the militia. By this signal victory 
God would demonstrate his power by protecting the nation 
with whom he had made the Law Covenant. He 
would revive their faith and loyalty. 

The Divine order was followed. Two hundred and 
thirty-two princes, or chiefs, of the people at noon passed 
out of the gates of the city, followed by seven thousand 
militia— a small number wherewith to meet a host. 
Apparently this was poor generalship; but the Lord was 
the General and overruled the results. King Benhadad 
and his associates had been drinking and were amused 
by the sallying forth of the battle army from the gateway. 
The Syrians were ordered to capture the men alive. 

R4759 : page 43 

But this they did not do. Soon the Syrian forces were 
in disorder and completely routed. Humanly speaking, 
the battle was lost by Benhadad's over-confidence, and 
particularly by his indulgence in intoxicating liquors. 

LESSONS WHICH WE MAY DRAW 

The honest, the holy, the reverential of mankind, who 
seek peace and righteousness may be likened to Israel, to 
God's people. Benhadad and his thirty-two kings and 
their armies would correspond to Satan and his various 
hosts of unrighteousness. We may name these hosts as 
we please. To some, one portion, and to others, other 
portions of these hosts are the more reprehensible. 



Many of these kings may represent various trusts which, 
by manipulation of life's necessities, are attacking the 
welfare of the people. Others of these kings may represent 
political grafters. Others may represent various 
vices which prey upon the public, including intemperance. 
The forces thus set in battle array against the public are 
appalling, especially when the wealth at their command 
is considered. 

The demands of these various "interests" come first 
upon the honorable and well-meaning public servants. 
These, like Ahab, would be inclined to submit, even ignominiously, 
if thereby the public would be safeguarded. 
But when the demands broaden, and it is evident that 
general pillage is the intention, the voice of the Lord 

R4759 : page 44 

should be heard and heeded, and a stout resistance should 
be made. 

As with Ahab, the resistance should not be defensive 
merely. The call is for the princes, the chiefs of the 
people, who love righteousness, to go out first to do battle 
with all iniquitous invaders of the rights, happiness 
and interests of the people. And these princes or leaders 
who stand for righteousness should be ably seconded by 
all the courageous and efficient of the people who love the 
same standards. 

KING ALCOHOL RECENTLY SUFFERING NUMEROUS 
DEFEATS 

Every man and woman should have positive convictions 
respecting every question of right and wrong, and 
they should have the courage to take their stand on the 
side of right. Christians, of course, should expend their 
activities mainly along the higher lines, which others do 
not so clearly see and could not so well serve. But in 
every question of right and wrong, equity and inequity, 
every child of God should be a positive force for 
righteousness. 

Amongst the most powerful foes of righteousness is 
King Alcohol, who has recently been suffering numerous 
defeats and admits being badly crippled and fearful. 

Not long since the streets of Chicago witnessed a 
novel parade, which at first was headed by General F. 
D. Grant, Major-General of the United States Army. 
Later he withdrew from the ranks and reviewed the 
marchers for nearly two hours, frequently doffing his hat. 
The General evidently wished to give his moral support 
as against drunkenness. 

The Springfield Republican, commenting, said, "The 
sudden and unexpected prominence of General F. D. 
Grant, as a possible Prohibition candidate for the Presidency, 
is explained by his alleged statement in an interview, 
If I could, by offering my body as a sacrifice, free 
this country from this fell cancer, the Demon Drink, I 



would thank the Almighty for the privilege of doing it. 
If I had the greatest appointive power in the country, 
no man would ever get even the smallest appointment 
from me unless he showed proof of his absolute 
teetotalism.'" 



R4759 : page 44 

MELCHISEDEC AND AARON AS TYPES 

THERE was really but one priest— the High 
Priest. The under-priests were merely 
representatives of the High Priest. So 
with Christ, the Great Priest of the future. 
The association of the under-priests 
with the Lord recognizes him as the Head 
and the under-priests as his members, and 
the "great company" as the servants of 
this Great Priest. 

God's work for the world is future. 
The only work yet accomplished is the providing of the 
priesthood and the qualification of the Great Priest and 
his members and his servants for the work of instructing, 
healing and uplifting mankind during the thousand years 
of Messiah's reign. 

During the Gospel Age the getting ready of the Great 
Priest, Head and members, has required of them sacrifice. 
As the Apostle declares, "I beseech you, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies living 
sacrifices, holy and acceptable." The sacrifice of the 
Head was acceptable because of his perfection. And 
all the sacrifices which he subsequently offers, represented 
in his members, are likewise acceptable to the 
Father, because the merit of the Head Priest is imputed 
to the other sacrifices. 

THE AARONIC PRIESTHOOD CONTRASTED WITH THE 
MELCHISEDEC PRIESTHOOD 

Two priesthoods are set before us in the Scriptures, 
the Aaronic and the Melchisedec. Both typify The 
Christ— Head and Body. The Aaronic pictures the sufferings 
of Christ, but shows nothing of the glory and 
reign, except as these were symbolized in the garments 
of glory and beauty. The Melchisedec Priest represents 
merely the future of The Christ, after the sacrificing 
shall have been finished and all the members of the Body 
completed. 

The work of the Priest may be viewed from these 
two standpoints. His sacrificing is the most important 
in one sense, because all of his future work is based upon 
these sacrifices. But in another sense the sacrificings 
are merely a preparation for the great work which will 
follow. The Priest must first offer sacrifice, in order 



to become worthy of his own exaltation to the Priestly 
Office and glory; and, secondly, he must have the merit 
of that sacrifice wherewith to satisfy Justice on behalf 
of the sins of the world, in order that, as the Glorified 
Priest, he may have the full right to stand as Mediator 
between God and mankind— to bless the latter and uplift 
them during the thousand years of his reign as the 
Melchisedec Priest— a priest upon his Throne. 

The Apostle declares that Messiah is a Priest after 
the order of Melchisedec, and not after the order of 
Aaron (Heb. 7:21); for if he were on earth, he could 
not be a priest. The significance here is that Jesus, being 
of the Tribe of Judah, and not of the Tribe of Levi, 
could not have served as a priest under the Mosaic Law, 
which gave this office to Aaron and his sons forever. 
Aaron and his sons, however, as a priesthood typified the 
preparatory feature of Messiah's priesthood— the sacrificial 
preparation. Messiah's claim to priestly functions 
is not, therefore, to be expected from the Aaronic line, 
for the Scriptures expressly declare, "I have sworn; I 
will not repent; Thou art a priest ever after the order 
of Melchisedec." (Heb. 7:21.) The Priest here referred 
to is the glorified Messiah, Head and Body, at the conclusion 
of this Gospel Age, when the consecrating and sacrificing 
will be at an end and the glorious Priestly Office, 
serving the world of mankind, will begin. 



R4760 : page 44 

GOD'S PERFECT PEACE 

"Like a river glorious is God's perfect peace, 
Over all victorious in its glad increase. 
Perfect; yet it floweth fuller every day; 
Perfect; yet it groweth deeper all the way. 
Stayed upon Jehovah, hearts are truly blest, 
Finding, as he promised, perfect peace and rest. 

"Hidden in the hollow of his blessed hand, 
Never foe can follow, never traitor stand; 
Not a surge of worry, not a shade of care, 
Not a blast of hurry toucheth spirit there. 
Stayed upon Jehovah, hearts are truly blest, 
Finding, as he promised, perfect peace and rest. 

"Every joy or trial cometh from above, 
Traced upon our dial by the Sun of love. 
We may trust him solely, all for us to do; 
They who trust him wholly, find him wholly true. 
Stayed upon Jehovah, hearts are truly blest, 
Finding, as he promised, perfect peace and rest." 



R4759 : page 45 

TAKING HEED TO OUR HEARTS 

"Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and evil speaking 
be put away from you, with all malice."— Ephesians 4:31. 

THIS list of dis-graces seems to have a connection 

or relationship, the one to the 

other, and usually, it is presumed, the relationship 

is inbred. The Apostle speaks 

in one place of a danger of having a root 

of bitterness spring up, and thereby many 

being defiled. In this case he seems to 

indicate how defilement grows from such 

a root of bitterness, and what would be the 

evil results from permitting such a root to 

grow. Bitterness is frequently represented by brackish 

water— not pure water, but alkaline, unpalatable. In 

the text under consideration it seems to represent first 

the heart condition. And so, if the fountain become defiled 

or impure, the thoughts, words and actions will be 

impure— brackish. 

The thought seems to be to take heed to our hearts— 
not to have an ungenerous sentiment. And if such intrude, 
it must be immediately repulsed, just as we would 
resist anything contagious. And so we must resist 
everything of bitterness of spirit, not only anger toward 
a person, but even a disposition to criticize, or find fault 
with anything he would do. This is the place to watch 
our hearts. As soon as the bitter spirit has found place, 
all the faults of that person will be exaggerated and all 
his good qualities minimized. Then would come an 
angry feeling, a bitter spirit of opposition. The angry 
feeling persisted in would immediately lead to hatred 
for the individual. 

The person would not merely feel indignant, but the 
feeling would grow to a positive dislike. It is the growing 
of a feeling of bitterness which will develop into a 
plant which will do much harm. Next would come the 
disposition to speak evil of that person. Naturally that 
which people do not love is that which they hate. And 
then comes the condition of malice, a resentful feeling— 

R4760 : page 45 

not only willingness to speak evil, but a willingness to 
do them some injury, and to feel glad if some injury 
befalls them. And thus the evil goes on. 

The influence of all this is to stifle the New Creature, 
to mortify the New Creature. As every victory of the 
spirit over the flesh is a victory of the New Creature 
over the old creature, so any victory of the flesh over the 
spirit is a victory of the old creature over the New 
Creature. 



THE SCRIPTURES ARE A MIRROR 

To get a proper view of ourselves seems to be a most 
necessary thing to any reformation movement in connection 
with ourselves. It was not until we saw ourselves 
without strength that we appreciated the great offer of 
God to draw us to himself, reconciling us through the 
merit of his Son. The Scriptures are a mirror. So if we 
are living in the right attitude it will be proper to take 
a look into the mirror every day and see what manner 
of persons we are. Our Lord's prayer is, "Forgive us 
our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against 
us." 

We are to be in a right attitude of mind. The very 
suggestion, Is there anyone against whom I have trespassed, 
or who has trespassed against me, ought to be 
enough, so that if we find any trace of unforgiveness we 
should eradicate it, put it away. The roots of bitterness 
would not only be put away, but hindered, if the very first 
sign of such a feeling were heeded and dealt with. If 
any one found that he had gotten into such a condition of 
heart, he should think, How does the Lord view such a 
condition; how impossible it would be for him to have 
love for one who has such a disposition? Anyone who 
really loves God would be so shocked at the picture he 
would thus get in the looking-glass of God's Word that 
he would immediately want to ask forgiveness and go 
forthwith to the one he had wronged. If the wrong had 
proceeded to anger, evil-speaking, then this should all be 
overcome, nullified. If the matter had gone so far, and 
no one else knew it, then this would be the end of the 
matter. 

But since anger and bitterness are entirely out of 
order, the flesh should be humiliated in some manner. 
For instance, on going to the person one had been acting 
bitterly against the latter should be told that he had 
thought bitterly of him, but that he should have left the 
matter in God's hand. It is our belief that some make a 
mistake in not giving themselves a correction in 
righteousness. "Well," they may say, "I will stop it and 
not do this thing again." When that is done, it is our 
opinion that the flesh is being fostered and encouraged. 
A special blessing comes to those who chasten themselves, 
judge themselves. As the Apostle says, "If we would 
judge ourselves, we should not be judged of the Lord."— 
I Cor. 11:31. 

In this connection we are reminded of the story that 
is told of a man who was driving along the road and saw 
a beggar and then said, "I will give this man twenty-five 
cents; it is Christmas morning." Then he thought, 
"I won't; I will give him a penny." As this thought came 
he thought how mean he was. He thought that he should 
have given him the quarter, should have allowed the 
generous impulse to have sway. Then he said to himself, 
"Give that man a dollar— make it four-fold." So he gave 
him a dollar, and was out seventy-five cents. 



Using that same principle or illustration, we believe 
that it is most advisable for the Lord's people to judge 
themselves— not after the manner of our Catholic friends, 
who would say, "Now go and pray so many hours," or, 
"Wear something uncomfortable," or "Take a whip and 
lash your back." But it would be wise to judge ourselves 
in a more rational way. A certain kind of penance tends 
to produce fruit of an acceptable kind. 



R4760 : page 45 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

Question.— In Romans 5:18, we read, "As by the 
offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, 
even so by the righteousness of one the free gift 
came upon all men unto justification of life." When 
will this "free gift" be applied for all? 

Answer.— Aside from the "household of faith," dealt 
with in this Gospel Age, we understand that this free 
gift will come to the world in the next— the Messianic- 
Age, but that, as a gift, it will have certain conditions 
attached to it, just as the gift of grace to the Church has 
certain conditions attached to it. In our case, it is to 
take up the cross of sacrifice and follow our Head; otherwise, 
it does not apply to us. But for the world after 
the close of this Age, the great High Priest will appear 
in the presence of God and will sprinkle the blood upon 
the mercy-seat a second time; and that, so far as Jesus 
is concerned, will fulfil all demands of Justice, and the 
whole world will be turned over to the Redeemer. 

The method by which he will bestow this great gift 
is a matter that is associated with responsibility. We 
are guaranteed that a full opportunity will reach all, but 
that opportunity will be under the terms of the New 

R4760 : page 46 

Covenant for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 
It will be first applied to the Ancient Worthies; they will 
get the blessings and privileges of the New Covenant 
immediately. After that it will be, "to the Jew first," 
because for his long waiting for such a Kingdom, and his 
waiting for such a Kingdom will be rewarded with the 
joy and blessing which he will at that time enter into. 

However, it will not stop with the Jew; but all mankind 
will be privileged to come into these blessings, and 
thus they will be blessing themselves through the Seed 
of Abraham. While it is true that the Seed of Abraham 
will bless the world, this is particularly true of the 
Spiritual Seed which will bless all; yet the strict reading 
of the text would imply that "In thy Seed will all the 
nations or families of the earth bless themselves." They 
will bless themselves by coming under the New Covenant 



arrangements; just as the Jews were not blessed by the 
Covenant which Moses mediated, immediately after they 
said, "All these things will we do," but not until they 
came voluntarily under its terms; so, the acceptance of 
the New Covenant by whosoever will accept it and will 
comply with its conditions, will ensure to them eternal 
life— and this they will get only by obedience to that 
Covenant. Thus the gift which they receive will not 
be their gift at once, as with the Ancient Worthies. It 
will be their gift and will be attainable as they come 
into harmony with the Lord during the thousand years 
of Messiah's reign by their compliance with the terms 
of the New Covenant. 



Question.— When will the obedient of the world be 
entitled to eternal life and when will they receive it? 

The obedient of the world will get their life under 
the terms of the New Covenant, and will begin to receive 
it just as soon as they begin to obey; in proportion 
as they do this they will get a little more and a 
little more life, and so on. The whole thousand years 
will be for the purpose of giving life to the world and 
they will receive more and more of it as they progress 
in the right way: "He will swallow up death in victory." 
-Isa. 25:8. 

It will be a gradual work; as they come into the 
terms of the New Covenant they will be blessed with 
life: "The man which doeth those things shall live by 
them." (Rom. 10:5.) They will come to perfection 
gradually, as they keep the Law. There will be no 
death there; there will be no occasion for death. But 
as Adam needed to be tried and to be tested, so will it 
be with those who reach the end of the Mediatorial reign; 
they will be tested as to whether they are worthy to keep 
this life. God applies the various temptations or tests 
so as to demonstrate whether or not they are worthy of 
eternal life; and all who do not give way under the 
testing, "shall not perish, but have everlasting life." — 
John 3:16. 



R4761 : page 46 

Question.— Is Christ the Advocate for the "great company, 
as well as for the "little flock"? If so, will he be 
the Advocate of the "great company" during the time of 
trouble, until they shall have been made white by the 
blood of the Lamb? 

Answer.— Yes. The "great company" is part of the 
Church of the First-born. In the type, the "passed-over" 
ones, the Church of the First-born, were represented in 
the whole family of Levi. They took the place of Israel's 
first-born, who were spared through the blood of the lamb. 



We keep our garments unspotted by the blood of the antitypical 
Lamb— "the blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanseth 
us from all sin." Evidently "the great tribulation" 
through which the "great company" will pass will take 
place before the Mediator takes the Kingdom, hence they 
are not now under him as a Mediator, but must be under 
him while he is now holding the office of Advocate. 

The "great company" are not distinctly recognized anywhere, 
save in an incidental way. For instance, when 
Rebecca became the bride of Isaac, her two maids also 
became part of the family; but no particular notice is 
taken of them. In connection with the Church, it is 
stated that those that followed her are her servants. 
This is particularly shown in the illustration given in 
Psalm 45. 



TRIBULATION-THEN EXALTATION 

Question.— Are the Lord's people more awkward than 
others, more quarrelsome, or more injurious to their 
neighbors that they should have tribulation; or why does 
the Lord say, "In the world ye shall have tribulation"? 

Answer.— We believe the Lord's own answer to the 
question is that himself and all of his true followers 
would have tribulation in the world because "the darkness 
hateth the light." We do not mean that all but the 
saintly are vicious or unkind. We know that there are 
many well-intentioned people. The thought is that there 
would be such inharmony between God's people and those 
of the world that there would be continual disapprobation 
manifested by the worldly toward the saintly. Some 
of the world would hate righteousness while others would 
be so out of sympathy with the light that they would not 
give God's people the defense or assistance which they 
would otherwise be willing to give. 

We think it quite true that those who are looking for 
the coming Kingdom must expect their peace, not from 
the worldly, but from another quarter. "In the world 
ye shall have tribulation." We also believe that part of 
our tribulation in the world is because we are being more 
and more transformed; hence we do not find the satisfaction 
in the world that we otherwise would and that others 
find. Our chief business is to keep our bodies under and 
restrain our natural appetites. The opposition of ourselves 
—the warring against our human nature and the 
misunderstandings of others— all these combine to make 
our tribulation in the world. 



FIGHTING THE GOOD FIGHT OF FAITH 

Question.— What is the connection between the first 
and the latter part of this text, "Be of good cheer; I 



have overcome the world"? 

Answer.— We have before us a very remarkable 
proposition in the Lord's call. We are called to be children 
of God, sons of the Highest, joint-heirs with Christ, 
his Son, in the Kingdom work. Instead of this bringing 
us great honor among men in the present life, it brings 
the very reverse— persecution, tribulation. God's people 
have persecution because they have consecrated their 
lives to him. The tribulation would naturally lead them 
to disappointment and to feel that God's favor is not 
with them. 

Hence it is quite necessary for them to have some 
such encouragement as the words of our text, as though 
the Lord had said, Do not allow these tribulations to 
make you discouraged; remember that I am the Captain 
of your salvation; remember that I have gone before 
you; remember my degradation before obtaining a share 
in this Kingdom; remember that although entirely without 
sin I endured great contradiction of sinners against 
myself. These things should be an assurance to you of 
the greatness of the coming Kingdom; that the glories 
far outweigh any sacrifices you may endure. Furthermore, 

R4761 : page 47 

in every trial and difficulty you may have my 
succor. In every tribulation I will provide a way of 
escape. Fight a good fight. Think of the joys and 
honors and privileges which will be yours if you are 
faithful to the end. "We shall be kings and priests unto 
God and reign with Christ a thousand years." 



WHICH WEARS THE ROBE? 

Question.— Is the robe of Christ's righteousness worn 
by the New Creature or the Old Creature? 

Answer.— The answer can be approached from either 
standpoint; for instance, we might say that the New 
Creature needs no robe, never having sinned, but that 
the flesh, which is imperfect, needs the robe as a covering 
for its blemishes. 

But while the answer is correct it would not be correct 
to say that the Old Creature needs the robe, for 
those who wear the robe are dead as Old Creatures, and 
have their standing with God only as New Creatures, 
"Old things have passed away; behold all things have 
become new."— 2 Cor. 5:17. 

So, then, it is the New Creature only that is recognized 
of God, and invited to the wedding, and granted 
the wedding garment, the robe of Christ's righteousness. 
The New Creature needs this robe, not for itself, 
but as a covering for its flesh. The fleshly will is dead, 
but the fleshly body is the New Creature's only body at 
the present time while it waits for its new body in the 



"first resurrection." "Reckon ye your bodies dead indeed 
unto sin, but alive toward God through Jesus Christ." 



page 47 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study IV., V.— The New Creation Predestinated. 
—The Organization of the New Creation. 

MARCH 5 

(26) Apply illustration of the "King's Own" to the New 
Creation. P. 179, par. 2. 

(27) To what were these foreknown ones (Rom. 8:29) 
predestinated? to escape eternal torment? P. 180, par. 1,2. 

(28) What is God's purpose in calling the New Creation, 
and what qualifications does he require? P. 181. 

(29) Explain why Romans 8:28-30 is so generally misunderstood 
and give the proper interpretation of this passage. 

P. 182, par. 1,2. 

(30) Paraphrase the Apostle's argument in Romans 8:3 1,32, 
P. 183. 

(31) What is the argument in Romans 8:33,34? P. 184, par. 1. 

MARCH 12 

(32) Is it possible for anything, or any other creature, to 
separate us from the love of God and our Redeemer? P. 184, 
par. 2. 

(33) Who alone can separate us from that love? 

(34) In the "making of our calling and election sure" what 
three important steps belong to God? P. 185, par. 1. 

(35) What important steps must be taken by the elect? 
P. 185, par. 2. 

(36) How may we analyze the essential heart-likeness to 
God's dear Son? P. 186, par. 1. 

(37) Show how the fruits of the Spirit, mentioned in Gal. 5:22,23, 
are but different manifestations of Love. P. 186, par. 2. 

(38) What was our attitude in starting upon the race-course 
for the prize of the High Calling? P. 186, par. 3; P. 187, 
par. 1, first part. 

MARCH 19 

(39) How does our experience in the race differ from our 
Lord's? P. 187, par. 1, last part. 

(40) If we divide the race-course into four quarters, what 
would be our attitude toward the Mark (love) in the first 
quarter? P. 187, par. 2. 

(41) What is our attitude when nearing the second quarter? 
P. 187, par. 3. 

(42) How do we designate the third quarter? P. 188, par. 1. 

(43) What is the fourth or final quarter mark of our race? 



P. 189, par. 1. 

(44) What is the climax of perfect love, and when should 
we expect to reach it? P. 190, par. 1, first part. 

MARCH 26 

(45) When will our experiences begin to correspond with 
our Lord's? P. 190, par. 1, last part. 

(46) What will be the nature of the temptations or testings 
after we have reached the Mark? P. 190, par. 2. 

(47) Name some of the evidences that we are the children 
of God. P. 191, par. 1. 

(48) How should we recognize each other as members of 
the New Creation? P. 191, par. 2. 

(49) What warnings and encouragement are found in 
Matt. 24:24? P. 191, par. 3; P. 192. 

(50) Cite a good illustration of the necessity for effort and 
overcoming in the character-building required of the New 
Creation. P. 192, par. 2. 



R4761 : page 47 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S FOREIGN ITINERARY 

NEW YORK, LONDON, BERLIN, ETC. 

Leave New York Tuesday, March 7th, 9 a.m., steamer Prinz 
Friedrich Wilhelm; arrive Plymouth about 13th or 14th. 
London— March 19 (Sunday), at London Tabernacle; subject 
for public discourse, "Two Salvations, But No 
Second Chance." 

March 20 (Monday), leave for Barmen, Germany. 
Barmen— March 21 (Tuesday), arrive prepared for meetings 
according to times and trains; leave at night for 
Vienna. 

Vienna— March 22 (Wednesday), afternoon or evening meeting 
one for Jews. 

Budapest— March 23 (Thursday), one or more meetings for 
Jews; leave on night train for Lemberg. 
Lemberg— March 24 (Friday), one or two meetings for 
Jews; leave at night for Berlin. 

Berlin— March 25 (Saturday), arrive at Berlin; possibly 
evening meeting. 

March 26 (Sunday), two services at Berlin; one for 
Jews; leave on night train for Copenhagen. 
Copenhagen— March 27 (Monday), hold two meetings; leave 
on afternoon boat for Stockholm. 

Stockholm— March 28 (Tuesday), hold two meetings; one 
public and one for the interested; leave at night for next 
two appointments. 

London— April 2 (Sunday), meeting at "London Tabernacle" 
at the regular hour; evening meeting at Royal Albert 
Hall. 
Edinburgh— April 4 (Tuesday), two meetings, both under 



auspices of International Bible Students Association. 
Glasgow— April 5 (Wednesday), two meetings, under the 
auspices of the International Bible Students Association. 
Belfast— April 6 (Thursday), meeting under the auspices of 
the I.B.S.A. 

Dublin— April 7 (Friday), meeting under the auspices of the 
I.B.S.A. 

London— April 9 (Sunday), meeting in the "London Tabernacle" 
at usual hour; night meeting at Royal Albert 
Hall. 

April 11 (Tuesday), in "London Tabernacle"; Memorial 
Supper celebrated at 7 p.m. 

April 13 (Thursday), take night boat for Lens, France, 
via Dover-Calais. 

Lens, France— April 14 (Friday), I.B.S.A., etc. 
Denain, France— April 15 (Saturday), near Valenciennes; 
return at night to London. 

London— April 16 (Sunday), "London Tabernacle," two 
services. 

April 23, "London Tabernacle," two services. 
April 26, depart from London, Waterloo Station, at 9:25 
a.m. for Southampton and steamer Kron Prinz Wilhelm, 
due to arrive at New York May 2. 

Time will be apportioned to Liverpool, Manchester and 
sundry other large cities; timely notices will be sent. 



page 50 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 



the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, five 
vols; in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, four vols.; 
In Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform 
with English edition, prices the same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 each. 



page 49 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 51 

Danger Point in Germany Near 51 

Presbyterian Ministerial Unbelief 52 

The Mark of This Age 52 

Debts of the Civilized Nations 53 

Zionism in Prophecy 54 

What Christ, as Our Advocate, Imputes 54 

Our Lord's Righteousness as a Man 
and His Right to Human Life in 

Hands of Justice 55 

"Love Not the World" 56 

The Love to Be Desired 57 

Can Evil Befall the New Creature? 58 

A Holy Nation Pictured 59 

General Naaman's Leprosy Cured 60 

Surrounded by Heavenly Hosts 61 

Divine Love's Consummation (Poem) 62 

What "Corrupt Communication" Signifies 62 



Some Interesting Letters 63 

page 50 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 5 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock in 
the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening Question Meeting at 
7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 



Public at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette 
Ave. and St. Felix St. 



PLEASE ACCEPT BRO. RUSSELL'S THANKS 

Brother Russell's birthday brought a shower of telegrams 
and loads of letters and cards. He highly appreciates these 
evidences of the love of the dear friends in every quarter. 
He would have delight in answering each personally, but the 
interests of the general work forbid. He requests that the 
dear friends accept THE WATCH TOWER twice a month as his 
answers to their letters. 



"EVERYBODY'S PAPER" 

This title will take the place of PEOPLES PULPIT for use in 
announcing Pilgrim Meetings and for the "Bible Extension 
Course," of which we have advised all INT. BIBLE STUDENTS 
CLASSES. The PEOPLES PULPIT will continue. Reply to Cardinal 
Gibbons will appear in it. 



PEOPLES PULPIT (1911) VOLUNTEER MATTER 

This year's Volunteer Matter, we believe, will be equal to, 
if it does not excel, that of any previous year in its effectiveness 
for the dissemination of Present Truth. We are placing 
printing orders in various parts of the country for the quicker 
and less expensive filling of your orders. 

We trust that the different classes and individuals desirous 
of promoting this service will send us in promptly memorandum 
of the total amount they promise to use prudently, wisely, 
free. 

Give address very explicitly. We will divide the total order 
when large into two or more shipments, and advise you fully. 



R4762 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

DANGER POINT IN GERMANY NEAR 

YEARS ago the German Emperor, although 
ostensibly the Head of a Protestant Church, 
found it necessary to conciliate the representatives 
of the Centrist-Catholic Party, 
which previously had been decreed by his 
Government to be the "powers of darkness." 
By now the Socialists and other 



radical parties in Parliament are numerically 
so strong and so opposed to the Kaiser's 
schemes that his Government policies would 
fail without the Catholic support. 

Socialists in the Reichstag (Parliament) twit the 
Emperor and the Catholics with the suggestion that as 
the Catholics were once officially known as the "powers 
of darkness," and opposed to the Government which 
represents the Divine will, so their coming into power 
with the Government should be understood as a return 
of Divine favor toward them; and that now that Socialists 
are coming into power, this should be regarded by 
the Emperor and all as the latest manifestation of Divine 
will. 

The Emperor is seeking to impress the people with the 
thought that they are his subjects, and that he is responsible 
to God for their government. Thus politics and 
religion are more strongly than ever united. And the 
Pope's wishes become practically the law in Germany. 

Meanwhile the present Pope is asserting himself 
against what he styles modernism— Higher Critical 
Infidelity, etc. He has recently issued an edict that all 
ministers of the Catholic Church shall be examined and 
sworn as respects their loyalty to the Bible and to the 
Church of Rome— the tests extending even to theological 
students, and requiring of them an oath annually. 

The Catholic priests of Germany receive support from 
the German Treasury, as do the Protestant ministers. 
The latter are resenting the Pope's demands, while the 
Emperor inclines to support them. Thus a new cause of 
friction is introduced into German affairs. The Emperor 
must stand by the Catholic party in Parliament, in order 
to have passed his schemes for a great navy and militarism 
in general. 

The Socialists and Liberals in Parliament are demanding 
separation of Church and State, such as we have in 
the United States; such as has recently been established 
in France and Portugal. 

The conflict between Parliament, the law-making body, 
and the Emperor and his Executive Board of Administration 
of Government grows in intensity. The Emperor's 
pronouncement that he reigns not by the will of the German 
people, but by the grace of God, is publicly declared 
in Parliament to be an attack upon the people and their 
Parliament. The theory opposed to the Emperor is that 
he holds his authority in the State of Prussia by the gift 
of the people there, and that his title as Emperor of all 
the Germans came to him from the German Parliament, 
which, having created him an Emperor, is his Superior 
and fully qualified to take from him the Emperorship, and, 
if it choose, to create a Republic. 

Dr. David recently declared in Parliament that the 
Kaiser had written into the "gold book" of the German 
people, as intended for eternity, the message, "by Divine 
right I am King; hence, am responsible to the Lord alone. 
The weighty responsibility, therefore, which the King 



bears for his people gives him the right to expect faithful 
co-operation on the part of his subjects." 

"But," said Dr. David, "we are no subjects. We are 
free citizens of a State. The people gave the Prussian 
King his crown in the battles of liberty, and, as for the 
crown of the Empire, the matter is clear that the Kaiser 
received it from the Reichstag" (Parliament). 

Another representative, Ledebour, said that German 
citizenship is standing face to face with a question of 
destiny. "Perhaps this question is being raised for the 
last time," he continued... ."We could fight our 
battle alone, and the result would be that all the men of 
people's parties who disdain the Divine right of kings, 
etc., would ultimately come on our side. If we (Socialists) 
fight together with you (Liberals) we will still 
maintain our aims. We hold fast to our Republican demands. 
As in other lands, so in Germany. Republicanism 
must be fully developed. The spirit of the times, which 
the Kaiser had declared pernicious, must be victorious. 
...If you will fight with us, we will ultimately win. And 
if the world were full of devils, we would, nevertheless, 
succeed." 

The approaching issue in Germany is equal and unlimited 
franchise to rich and poor alike. The Socialists 
believe that this point gained will mean a peaceable 
revolution in Germany. Others fear that rather than 
permit the Parliament to be thus freed from the imperial 
control, the Emperor, acting upon his claim of Divine 
right to reign, would put the country under imperial law 
without a Parliament, and reign as an autocrat. It is 
further feared that such a move would mean civil strife, 
anarchy, bloodshed. All seem agreed that the issue 
between the Kaiser and the people cannot long be deferred 
of solution. 

R4762 : page 52 

The German Chancellor is quoted as using the following 
language: "The revolutionary character of the Socialist 
Party becomes more pronounced and brutal in its 
character. Dr. Carl Liebknecht, a Social-Democrat of 
the Prussian Diet, in an address delivered in the United 
States recently, said that the conditions in Germany were 
such as might cause the German Crown to be blown 
away in a single night, just as was the case with Portugal. 
Our nation must have a clear answer to expressions of 
such character. The Socialists and all those teaching 
the masses that prosperity can come to them only after 
the overthrow of the present form of government, are 
responsible when the masses draw practical conclusions 
from such teachings. For this reason I hold the Socialists 
responsible for the excesses that were recently committed 
and the strife in Moabit, Berlin, and elsewhere. 
'Whoever sows wind will reap a whirlwind.'" 



CONSCIENCE IN ACCUSATION 

It is a fact that in their offensive tactics many of our 
public men are deficient either in conscience or in manner, 
or in both. They make charges against their opponents 
recklessly. They say things which they cannot 
prove and which it is only charitable to their intellectuals 
to assume they do not believe. 

It seems to be the idea that if you throw enough mud 
some of it will stick, and none of it will spatter yourself; 
that if you throw enough clubs some will land, and none 
return, boomerang fashion, on your own head. 

We say this notion is wrong. We believe that men 
who are careless in their words are equally careless in 
their acts. The man who, without justification, calls 
another a rogue is the man who will bear watching, for 
too often he credits the other man with the same motives 
that control himself, and assumes that the other man has 
done what, with the same opportunities, he would do 
himself. 

Bearing false witness, however, is more than an unfavorable 
symptom. It is itself an offense almost equal- 
in the scales of eternal justice probably held entirely 
equal— to the offense charged. 

The habit is not even good politics. It goes against 
average human nature, which is sportsmanlike and fair; 
and even the brutalized atmosphere of the ringside instinctively 
hisses the foul blow. What does it profit one 
to exhibit himself as a man eager to win, regardless of 
everything else? There is real chivalry in human nature. 
Every manifestation of it has a universal response. Why 
should it be considered bad politics? 

Maybe we are wrong, but our theory is that conscienceless 
accusation derives as much from ignorance as 
from malice. Many public men conduct campaigns on 
personalities because they have not qualified to conduct 
them on issues. It is easier to accuse, to clamor, to rail, 
than it is to get clear to the bottom of a political or 
economic issue, understand it yourself, and then so present 
it that others can understand it. 

The most sobering thing in the world is adequate 
knowledge of a subject, an appraisal of it from all sides. 
Those who achieve this knowledge necessarily speak 
words of truth and soberness. They have neither the inclination 
nor the time to utter anything else.— New York 
Evening Mail. 



The lack of conscientiousness noted by the Mail 
amongst politicians seems equally noticeable amongst 
theologians and others who, in professing the name of 
Christ, imply that they respect the standards of God's 
Word, while their words and conduct give the lie to their 
professions. 



PRESBYTERIAN MINISTERIAL UNBELIEF 

The New York Presbytery not long since licensed 
Rev. N. M. Thomas to preach the Gospel as representative 
of the Presbyterian denomination. The vote granting 
the license was thirty-four against ten who protested 
—and the ten are not active Pastors in charge 
of Churches. The mental attitude of the Presbyterian 
Ministers of the New York Presbytery is, therefore, reflected 
in the faith of Rev. Thomas, which may be judged 
from the following items of protest:— 

"He did not accept the authority of Holy Scripture as 
the only infallible rule of faith and practise as sufficient 
to finally determine his faith. This appeared in his repeated 

R4763 : page 52 

refusals to affirm his faith in the Virgin birth of 

Christ, the raising of Lazarus from the dead and the raising 

of Christ's own body from the grave. 

"Second, in answer to questions, he twice declared his 
readiness to lead a congregation in the repetition of the 
Apostles' Creed, including the phrase 'born of the Virgin 
Mary,' which he had told the Presbytery that he really 
did not believe." 

From this it appears that it is no longer Presbyterian 
doctrines in New York that we have a sinless Savior— 
"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." (Heb. 7:26.) 
Indeed, it is safe to assume that these ministers 
are Higher Critics who have no use for the Bible, and do 
not believe in Jesus as a Savior, because they have abandoned 
the theory that man fell from God's image and 
likeness and needed to be redeemed. They have probably 
all accepted the Evolution theory that Father Adam 
sprang from a monkey, and that his race has been doing 
nobly since and needs no Redeemer. They would probably 
acknowledge Jesus as a noble sample of manhood for 
his time, but not up to our day and standards, which are 
to be sought rather amongst college professors. 

Is it any wonder that Christian character, unsupported 
by a message recognized as Divine and upheld merely by 
expediency, is crumbling everywhere? What will the end 
be? The majority of Presbyterians will follow their 
leaders and soon Christendom en mass will be without 
God and without hope. Faith in a nature god and in laws 
of nature can have no such influence upon heart and life 
as has faith in a personal God, a personal Redeemer, a 
personal salvation and an inspired Bible. 

Thank God that the terrible confusion and anarchy 
which the Scriptures show to be imminent will be speedily 
followed by the inauguration of the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son, a reign of righteousness backed by power 
Divine, as well as by Love and Justice. In that strenuous 



hour nature as a god will not succor and faith in the God 
of nature will not comfort. But evidently, as the Scriptures 
show, all the "blind eyes" will be opened; all the 
"deaf ears" will be unstopped; and the wisdom of man, 
in contrast with the wisdom of God, will be manifested as 
foolishness. 



THE MARK OF THIS AGE 

Judge Connine says: "The mark of this age is irreverence. 
Reverence and respect for age, for office, for intellectual 
attainments, for uprightness, ability and honor are 
on the wane. Some of the causes can be named; among 
them are encroachments by the executive branch of our 
States and Nation upon the legislative and judicial and the 
belittling, impugning and assailing the acts and motives 
of those in authority, particularly by the press. No 

R4763 : page 53 

motive is now clean, upright and honorable, no act found 
grand or commendable. Traveling with this is a growing 
irreverence for the law, and the end of all this is 
detriment and danger. 



Back of disrespect for human laws and customs lies 
disrespect for the Divine Law. And for this disrespect 
of the Bible, the Christian ministry, colleges, and seminaries 
are chiefly responsible. The colleges have led the 
way in teaching Higher Criticism, Infidelity and Evolution 
theories. They have within the last fifty years gradually 
molded the opinion of the ministry and generally 
educated classes to these anti-Biblical teachings. They 
were led on in this wrong course by the opinion that they 
were taking their stand for Truth as against ignorance 
and superstition. So far as their own minds were concerned 
they repudiated the creeds of the "dark ages," 
which they still laughingly profess to adhere to. And 
as the creeds were repudiated the Bible went with them, 
under the assumption that it was to blame for the absurdities 
of the creeds. All the same they have gradually, 
systematically undermined the Word of God as a Divine 
authority in the judgment of millions. 

A comparatively few ministers have known better 
than this. These have stuck to the Bible as the sheet-anchor 
of their faith. More or less clearly they have 
seen the conflict between the Bible and their creeds. Yet 
they have feared to mention it lest they should be identified 
with the Higher Critics and be considered faith-breakers. 
And some of them, alas, have shunned to declare 
the whole counsel of God, because of fear of losing 
their bread and butter and honorable name and standing. 



Their refraining from telling their people the Truth respecting 
the teachings of the Bible left their flocks in 
ignorance and just ready to fall into Higher Criticism or 
some of the bad religions which wrest the Scriptures, instead 
of interpreting them. 

All the same, the general shaking of the public faith, 
and especially that of the literary "upper-crust," is being 
reflected everywhere in the growingly prevalent spirit of 
irreverence above commented upon. Soon this will lead, 
as the Scriptures point out, toward atheism and toward 
anarchy— the great time of trouble Scripturally foretold 
as near. 

Those of us who realize the true situation should be 
doubly earnest in our outward manifestation of religion 
and upholding of the Bible, as well as in our heart appreciation 
of the Almighty and our worship of him and 
service of his cause. 



DEBTS OF CIVILIZED NATIONS 

The below figures show the public debts and annual 
interest charges of the principal nations of the world. 
These debts represent chiefly monies expended for war, 
war equipments, battleships, etc. The amounts continue 
to pile up year by year. 

The public scarcely understand the situation; they 
wonder to whom the amounts are owing and what can 
be done when pay-day comes. 

The wealthy know that these bonds represent their 
money and they feel satisfied to get even a small interest 
with such good security and no trouble. 

Of late, however, a certain fear is taking hold upon 
the rich— what if Socialism should gain control? And 
what if, by and by, the national treasury should go into 
bankruptcy and repudiate its bonds? 

Evidently the world needs just such a good, strong 
Government and just such wise and just laws as the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son will shortly bring to them. 
How significant is the Scriptural statement respecting 
that— "The desire of all nations shall come." (Hag. 2:7.) 
Following are the figures:— 

Annual Int. 
Public Debt. Charged. 

France $5,898,675,451 $186,802,380 

Russia 4,558,152,565 204,766,421 

German Empire 4,270,488,716 179,778,179 

Austria-Hungary 3,703,235,511 133,925,824 

United Kingdom 3,669,931,350 152,759,411 

Italy 2,602,299,757 96,941,138 

Spain 1,817,674,327 78,709,000 

British India 1,346,999,187 41,681,212 

Japan 1,287,604,261 76,283,536 

Australia 1,184,192,157 46,883,998 



United States 1,023,861,531 21,803,836 

Portugal 864,561,212 29,907,983 

Brazil 657,097,561 32,390,824 

Belgium 663,325,145 27,022,108 

China 601,916,605 92,375,017 

Turkey 527,983,636 36,494,753 

Argentine Republic 545,712,120 29,594,251 

These are all the nations whose public debts exceed 
$500,000,000, but every government on earth has been 
for years, and still is, borrowing to cover the deficits 
that are annually created by spending more money than 
the revenues will justify. They are compelled to issue 
bonds in order to make up the difference. It is a serious 
question how long this extravagance can be continued. 



FINANCIAL PROSPERITY AND RELIGIOUS DECLINE 

Newspaper reports tell us how great is the financial 
prosperity in Germany, as per the following clipping:— 

"Germany today is one of the most prosperous nations 
in the world, and both the farmers and mechanics, 
the land owners and the manufacturers, have shared the 
benefits of a protective tariff. Nowhere have the results 
of the protective policy been so conspicuous as in Germany. 
During the first ten years after it was adopted the 
national income increased 19 per cent.; during the last 
ten years it has increased 56 per cent. The aggregate 
incomes of persons who pay the income tax in Prussia 
increased during the last ten years from $725,000,000 to 
$1,650,000,000." 

But the reports tell us also of great religious decline 
there. Prof. Rudolph Martin, German philosopher and 
political prophet, refers to the decline in religion in Germany 
as remarkable and notes the almost complete disappearance 
of religious influence among the peoples of 
Europe. He considers it a striking symptom of this Age. 
He notes a growing anti-religious feeling and a profound 
indifference, with marks of hostility, toward the clergy. 

The professor asks what will take the place of religion 
in checking the inherent tendencies of mankind, 
when this indifference and opposition shall have gained 
a little further headway. He dreads the removal of such 
a potent safeguard and fears danger to humanity in 
general. 

Pointing to England as once the home of piety he 
declares that it is now drifting toward extreme worldliness. 

R4764 : page 53 

He remarks on the empty churches; declares that 
nine-tenths of the people never enter a house of worship, 
and that Sunday observance has given way to golf, tennis, 
bridge-poker and concerts. He wonders if the same 



is true of America. In Germany he sees that despite 

the Kaiser's pious utterances and his wife's pious utterances, 

the masses of the people are being alienated from 

the old forms of religious belief rapidly. What, he inquires, 

will be the effect? Will mankind sink into depths 

of wickedness? Will there be outbreaks of wrong-doing? 

The Scriptures answer, Yes; "there shall be a time 
of trouble such as never was since there was a nation." 



R4764 : page 54 

ZIONISM IN PROPHECY 

MANY of our readers are aware that on the 
Editor's return from Palestine last June he 
delivered a discourse entitled "Jerusalem." 
Many Jews were attracted by the theme 
and considerable interest amongst them was 
aroused. That sermon and several others 
were published in Jewish papers. Then 
came interviews with editors, etc., and, 
finally, an invitation to address a Jewish 
Mass Meeting at the New York Hippodrome, 
with signatures on three sheets of paper. 

Accordingly on Sunday, October 9, the Editor was 
met by a Committee of five prominent Hebrews, Brother 
Rutherford also accompanying us. The party went in 
automobiles. The meeting was an enthusiastic one. The 
number present was estimated at four thousand, and we 
were told that no finer representative class of Hebrews 
had ever before come together in one assemblage in New 
York. 

The address was well received, but apparently it was 
unfortunate that some of the pamphlets, entitled "Jewish 
Hopes and Prospects," were given away at the conclusion 
of the meeting. Some of the Jews, without recognizing 
that that pamphlet was gotten out for our Christian 
readers, considered that by it we were endeavoring to 
entrap the Jews into Christianity. And Christianity to 
the Jews, especially Catholicism, means many persecutions 
which have come against their people for many centuries. 
Some understood the matter aright. Others felt offended, 
and during the Editor's absence in Europe last fall he 
was attacked as a "missionary"— which, in the Jewish 
mind, means everything mean, underhanded. 

On our return from Europe in November we corrected 
the misunderstanding, so far as possible, through the 
Jewish newspapers. We informed them that we were 
not trying to "mission" the Jews, nor to make them members 
of either Catholic or Protestant Christian bodies. 
We were not even preaching Jesus to them. Our message 
was to the Jews as Jews, from Isaiah 40:1,2— "Comfort 
ye, comfort ye, my people; speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem; cry unto her that her appointed time is accomplished; 



that her iniquity is pardoned, for she hath received 
of the Lord's hand double." We declared that it 
was not our expectation that the Jews would return to 
Palestine as Christians. On the contrary, God's call and 
promises as respects Jerusalem are earthly promises to 
natural Israel. 

To a few who asked quite deeply we explained that our 
understanding is that the Messiah of Prophecy is a great 
spirit company composed of many members, including 
English, French, German, Jews, etc.; that God is gathering 
this Messianic company to heavenly glory from every 
nation, people, kindred and tongue, and that only the 
saintly will be in and of it. We explained: We do not 
understand that Christians in general, any more than 
Jews in general, will have part in that Messianic Body 
and that it would be the furthest from our thought to have 
the Jews get as mixed up on different matters as are the 
majority of Christian people. 

Since then several Jewish papers continue to publish 
our writings and we have had two more Jewish Mass 
Meetings. One of these was in Chicago. It was somewhat 
of a disappointment as to numbers, until we noticed 
that the Saturday on which it was held was a particularly 
unfavorable time. Many Jews expressed their disappointment 
in not being able to attend, because it would deprive 
them of their principal business day. Nevertheless the 
audience was estimated at fifteen hundred and we had 
excellent attention. 

Our last meeting with the Jews was held in Philadelphia. 
It was not at all advertised in the secular press. 
In other words, it was a Jewish meeting. Garrick Theatre 
was full to the limit, with about three hundred standing, 
when the police, following the fire ordinance, forbade 
others to enter, and several hundred were turned away 
disappointed. That meeting was the most enthusiastic 
held thus far with the Jewish people. Their confidence 
in the Editor seems to be growing. Zionism from a 
prophetic standpoint seems to stir the Jewish heart as the 
subject never did from a political viewpoint. 



R4764 : page 54 

WHAT CHRIST, AS OUR ADVOCATE, IMPUTES 

IN speaking of our Lord as our great Advocate, 
through whom we have justification, 
and considering what he does for us 
that makes us acceptable to the Father, a 
variety of expressions are sometimes heard. 
One may say that he imputes to us his life-rights. 
Another may say that he imputes 
to us his righteousness. Another may say 
that he imputes to us the merit of his 
sacrifice. Let us try to get this matter 



clearly before our minds. What is the thing that is 
really imputed? 

First of all, we suggest that what Christ imputes to 
us is not the heavenly nature nor the divine life nor the 
right to divine life. None of these things are imputed. 
These things come to us from the Father. To these things 
we are begotten by the holy Spirit. It is as the result of 
our becoming New Creatures that we have a right to 
these things. What our Lord Jesus, as our great Advocate, 
does for us is to make us acceptable sacrifices; because 
it is only upon our becoming acceptable sacrifices 
that we can present our bodies; this being done, the 
Father accepts them. "I beseech you therefore, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 
service."— Rom. 12:1. 

We see that our Lord Jesus was the first that responded 
to this call. We see that he was "holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners." We see that there 
was a merit in laying down that life which he had a right 
to retain. We see, on the other hand, that we who will 
to walk in his steps and to accept a share of that same 
call to enter into covenant relation with God by sacrifice, 
are imperfect; therefore, that we have no right to 
life, and having no right to an earthly life, we could not 
offer our earthly life in sacrifice to God. It is then— 
when we realize our condition— that we are drawn by 
Divine grace unto Christ and it is indicated to us that he 
has merit and is willing to appropriate of this to us, so as 
to make our sacrifices acceptable. 

It is not the Divine proposition that our sacrifices shall 
be set aside and counted as nothing. The Divine proposition, 
on the contrary, is: You have something, but it is 
imperfect. Now, if Jesus will appear as your Advocate, 
he has the ability to make your sacrifice acceptable— because 
he has the power of imputing to it of his merit. If 
you have the perfect mind, the perfect will, you have 
then, to begin with, the most important thing in my sight 
in the form of sacrifice. But the whole difficulty lies in 
the fact that you have imperfection inherited from your 
first parents. Christ will do something for you that will 
make your sacrifice acceptable to me. 

R4764 : page 55 

But what will he do for us? What will he give us? 
Will he give us his righteousness? No, if he gave away 
his righteousness he would not be righteous. He maintains 
his own righteousness. What, then, will he give us? 
We answer that he has already made the gift, so far as 
Justice is concerned. Eighteen centuries ago he appeared 
to satisfy the demands of Justice against our race. The 
demands of Justice were "A life for a life"— a ransom-price. 
He laid down his life a corresponding price. He 
did not, however, appropriate the merit of that life to 
the world. It is still his to control and to dispense. He 



did not, when he ascended up on high, appropriate that 
merit to the Church in the sense of giving it up. But he 
did impute, to all of those who willed to come unto the 
Father, a sufficiency of the merit of his sacrifice to make 
them whole and complete. 

How could he do this? Because he had a sufficiency 
of merit to have applied it, had he chosen so to do, for 
the satisfaction of the sins of the whole world. But instead 
of doing so, he has loaned the merit of that 
righteousness, and all the rights that go with it, to all 
those who, during this Age, desire to become his footstep-followers. 
So, when they take this position, he becomes 
their Advocate by virtue of the application of enough 
merit to cover all their defects. His merit appropriated 
to these imperfect sacrifices, makes each one of them 
acceptable to the Father. Thus each one of the Church 
is enabled to suffer with him— sharing of his cup 
and being baptized with him into death. When the 

R4765 : page 55 

Father begets them of the holy Spirit, they need the great 
Advocate to stand as their Advocate, and in every time of 
need he still stands ready. As the Apostle says, "If any 
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ, the Righteous."— I John 2:1. 

OUR LORD'S RIGHTEOUSNESS AS A MAN AND HIS RIGHT 
TO HUMAN LIFE IN THE HANDS OF JUSTICE 

What, then, was it that he gave? The answer is, that 
when he sacrificed himself he was righteous as a man. It 
was, then, that righteousness and consequently that right 
to human life that he possessed when he consecrated and 
then gave up. It is that which is in the hands of Justice. 
In this is included life-rights for all the world. And the 
basis was his own rights as a man. But he does not give 
those things up to us, but merely imputes to us the benefit 
of them. 

Suppose we had in the bank a thousand dollars, and 
suppose we said to the banker, "I wish to leave this in 
your hands in favor of certain notes which I am going to 
endorse." We then, accordingly, endorse notes for you. 
Now, our thousand dollars that was in the bank is merely 
a security. We are imputing the merit of that thousand 
dollars to you on the notes which we endorse. 

Thus Christ imputes to us his merit; and the great 
One to take note of this and act upon it is the Heavenly 
Father. The Father immediately accepts the sacrifice and 
the person is begotten of the holy Spirit and that person 
is reckoned, so far as his flesh is concerned, dead. This 
means that this merit of Jesus will continue to be imputed 
to such persons until they shall have either been born of 
the Spirit or become subjects of the Second Death. And 
so they must each one die, in one or the other way, that 
every bit of merit that was used in the case of any 



one of them will be released, to be used for the world in a 
different way; namely, to give them, under the terms of 
the New Covenant, the rights which Jesus sacrificed at 
Calvary. 

We have not a sufficiency of merit for the Father to 
accept it as a sacrifice. To illustrate: He that is guilty of 
the violation of one point of the Law, is guilty of the one 
hundred points. Any one with ninety-nine points in his 
favor would fail just as thoroughly as the one who had 
only fifty. 

Now, then, that is just the position of mankind as a 
race. Justice cannot accept anything but a perfect sacrifice. 
We might say that we are in various degrees of 
imperfection, and that we range all the way from twenty-five 
points to seventy-five points. What must be done to 
make us acceptable? The one with twenty-five points 
needs seventy-five points; and the one who has seventy-five 
points would just as much need the Advocate and just 
as much need the imputation of Christ's merit as the one 
with only twenty-five points; but he would not need so 
large an amount. The Lord placed the full amount in the 
hands of the Father, and then made it applicable to all 
such as recognize their need, and it is just as free to the 
one with twenty-five points of character as to the one 
with seventy-five points. 

The Church's sacrifice is not to get the world free, 
but to get herself into a sacrificial condition. In God's 
arrangement, in God's purpose, our sacrifice is not necessary 
for the world. Christ's sacrifice is all that is necessary 
for the satisfaction of Justice for the sins of the 
world. 

All this arrangement is purely for us, in order that 
we may, through it, have an opportunity of entering into 
the "high calling." But actually we are not anything, 
because the whole thing is arranged for us in the Father's 
hands. We add nothing to it. Our sacrificing is that we 
may suffer with the Lord; and, consequently, reign with 
him. "For unto you it is given in behalf of Christ, not 
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake."— 
Phil. 1:29. 

But one asks if in any way, either individually or collectively, 
the Church in any sense of the word purchases 
the heavenly inheritance. 

HOW THE SPIRITUAL NATURE IS OBTAINED 

The glory, honor and immortality which the Lord purposes 
to give to the Church, is not given free. Jesus never 
purchased for the Church the divine nature or any spiritual 
thing whatever. The only things that he did purchase 
were the human rights and the human nature. This which 
we get free, through the imputation of his merit, we may 
use and purchase with it that with which we may obtain 
the spiritual nature. This is the Father's "high calling." 
He invites us to make the exchange, or barter, giving up 
our all. 



In the case of our Lord, the matter is somewhat 
different. He received it as a reward, and besides, held a 
certain merit which he had to give away as he pleased. 
We make consecration, and are acceptable to God by 
means of the imputation of Christ's merit, which covers 
our imperfections, in order that we may share with our 
Lord in his great work of uplifting mankind and with a 
view of sharing with him his Kingdom glory, as members 
of his Body— members of the Royal Priesthood. 

Above we used the expression twenty-five, fifty and 
seventy-five points of character. We did not mean to 
say that principle is to be sacrificed, that good character 
is to be sacrificed. No; we used the word character in 
the sense of proper conditions or elements of character, 
elements of a proper human character. With the thought 
in mind that we have seventy-five elements of character 
and twenty-five that are blemished (and all humanity 
is blemished twenty-five, fifty or seventy-five points, as 
the case may be) we realize our helplessness, our necessity. 
Now this that our Lord imputes to us, is to make 

R4765 : page 56 

good our deficiency; then all that we have would stand 
for or represent a perfect human being— nothing more, 
nothing less. It was an imperfect human being the moment 
before; but the imputation of Christ's merit constituted 
it a perfect man or woman. 

The Divine terms upon which life might be enjoyed 
perpetually were the keeping of the Law; so any one who 
could keep the Law perfectly could have claimed life 
eternal— "The man that doeth those things shall live by 
them." (Rom. 10:5.) God had given this Law to the 
Jewish nation, whose typical sacrifices foreshadowed the 
real sin-offering. 

The middle wall of partition being broken down, there 
was an opportunity for each member of that race to 
present himself in sacrifice; none being totally depraved, 
all had some elements of character and possessed some 
degree of merit, even though not a sufficient degree to 
claim life under the Law. It was to such of these, then, 
as had willing minds and honest hearts, that Christ applied 
of his merit for the very purpose of enabling them 
to be sacrifices. God has no dealings with those who are 
rebellious in their minds; they are out of the list. Christ 
has not appeared for them at all, and has never proposed 
to do so. He is proposing to be the Advocate of those 
only who have first turned away from sin desiring to be 
in harmony with God. It is the man whose mind is fully 
submitted to God, and only such a one, who is being dealt 
with. 



R4765 : page 56 



"LOVE NOT THE WORLD" 

"Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with 
God? Whosoever, therefore, will be a friend of the world is 
the enemy of God."— James 4:4. 

THIS text brings to mind another one somewhat 

similar— "Love not the world, neither 

the things that are in the world; if any 

man love the world, the love of the Father 

is not in him." (I John 2:5.) From these 

Scriptures we should not get the thought 

that we are to have no worldly people as 

our friends, nor to have them consider us 

as their friends; otherwise it would imply 

that we were their enemies and they our 

enemies. But we are to be the enemies of none, and are, 

therefore, to be the friends of all. 

One can, however, scarcely read the above advice from 
two of the Lord's Apostles without having another Scripture 
suggested to his mind— and this, too, from the lips 
of our dear Lord himself— which at first sight may seem 
contradictory, viz., "God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.) 
The two, however, are not antagonistic, but are in full 
harmony when rightly understood. 

How, then, shall we understand that we are not to 
have friendship with the world, and yet are to love the 
world? The key is found in the word "world." As, for 
instance, if one should go into politics, he would find 
that politics is so interlaced with evil things that it would 
be practically impossible for him to engage in it without 
compromising his relationship with God. In former 
times no one could associate very much with any one in 
the world unless he were, more or less, in politics. Therefore, 
it would mean being in accord with sinful practices 
—not, perhaps, directly, but indirectly. 

Very few people know how political affairs are carried 

R4766 : page 56 

on. A man in politics forgets his conscience; he is 
almost compelled to "give and take" with others. Otherwise, 
the district or ward or state that he represents 
would proportionately lack representation, because he 
would be ignored; and anything that he would be inclined 
to say, would result in driving him out of politics, which 
would cause his ward or district or state to suffer injury. 
So, then, the broad thought connected with this text 
would be that God's people will recognize the things of 
the world in general, as being in opposition to the service 
of God, and that they are not in sympathy with the 
chicanery and methods of the Prince of this world. 

There is a worldly side to every question, every business; 
and for us to conform ourselves to these arrangements 



and to co-operate with them, would be sin on our 
part. Nevertheless, as the Apostle says, we cannot go 
out of the world, and must, more or less, have contact 
with worldly people. The proper course is, therefore, as 
indicated in the Scriptures, that the Lord's people walk 
circumspectly, seeking to keep themselves loyal to God 
and to all of his principles; seeking to separate themselves 
from the world and to be burning and shining 
lights that the world may see their good works and glorify 
their Father in heaven. 

WE ARE TO DO GOOD TO ALL MEN AS WE HAVE 
OPPORTUNITY 

If God so loved the world, even while they were yet 
sinners (Rom. 5:8), as to sacrifice the dearest treasure of 
his heart in order to redeem and save them, then such 
love and such benevolence toward the world on our part 
cannot be out of harmony with his will. Indeed, such is 
the direct teaching of the Word— "As you have therefore 
opportunity, do good to all men; love your enemies, do 
good to them that hate you; pray for them which despite fully 
use you and persecute you, that ye may be the children 
of your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh 
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good and sendeth 
rain on the just and on the unjust."— Gal. 6:10; 
Matt. 5:44-48. 

To love the world as God loves it, is not the sentiment 
against which the Apostles warn the Church. That is a 
grand and ennobling love which, without having the 
least fellowship with the impure, pities the fallen and 
longs for the time when they may be rescued from their 
degradation. The love which is worthy of our emulation 
is that which benevolently ignores personal antagonisms 
and animosities, and overleaping all selfish considerations 
and vengeful feelings, considers only the possibilities and 
the ways and means for peace and reformation and salvation. 

But the love of the world, the friendship of the world 
to which the Apostle refers, is the love of fellowship, 
which implies the partaking of its spirit— its aims, 
ambitions and hopes, and its methods of pursuing them. 
If any man love the world in this sense, surely the love 
of the Father is not in him. 

As children of God we have been called to a position 
of great favor and advantage. Our Heavenly Father has 
revealed to us his plans and purposes and has condescended 
to take us into his fellowship and active co-operation; 
and so grand and glorious and extensive is the outlook 
of the future that we are able to view the things of 
the present life in a vastly different light from that in 
which the world views them. 

So we are not to love the present order or arrangement, 

R4766 : page 57 

nor the things that are part and parcel of it, identified 



with it; but rather we are to love the Kingdom 
of God and its righteousness, for which we pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth." We are to 
love the world only in the sense of having sympathy with 
it, as our Heavenly Father has, while we are unsympathetic 
with its arrangements. 

According to God's arrangement, we must take our 
choice between the Divine friendship and fellowship, and 
worldly friendship and fellowship. The things which the 
Lord loves are distasteful to the world; and the things 
which the worldly love— evil deeds and evil thoughts- 
are an abomination to the Lord, and those who love and 
practice such things must lose the fellowship of the Lord 
and his spirit, must go into the outer darkness of the 
world. 



R4766 : page 57 

THE LOVE TO BE DESIRED 

"Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the Truth through 
the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that 

ye love one another with a pure 

heart fervently."— 1 Peter 1:22. 

THE word "souls" in this text stands, as 
usual, for the being, and not merely for the 
physical being, which is included. The 
purifying, therefore, refers to a thorough 
cleansing of the heart (the mind, the will, 
the actuating intentions, or motives), as the 
effect of such purification will be manifest 
in the outward life and conduct. 

We purify our souls— that is, our souls 
are purified (have been purified if we are 
saints)— by obedience to the Truth through the spirit; 
that is to imply that it is necessary for us to know the 
Truth; not necessarily that we know all truth, but necessary 
for us to know the great truth on this subject— the 
truth that God condemned sin; to know the truth that the 
whole world of mankind came under this condemnation; 
to know the truth that God has provided a way of escape 
from the condemnation that is upon the world; to know 
the truth that there is but one particular way in which 
any can avail themselves of this Divine provision, 
namely, that of being justified by faith in Christ, and 
taking up the cross and following in his footsteps. When 
we presented ourselves in spirit and in truth, through 
faith, our sins were forgiven; we were accepted as New 
Creatures in Christ; our souls were purified; we were 
started in a new career. 

In our text the Apostle proceeds to say that, having 
had this glorious transformation of character, through 
the knowledge of and obedience to the spirit of the Truth, 



we have learned to love the brethren with an "unfeigned 
love," a love that is genuine, without pretence— not merely 
an outward profession, to have a smile upon the face or 
to give a cordial grasp of the hand, but that through this 
spirit we have recognized that all who trust in the 
precious blood and are consecrated to the dear Redeemer, 
and are seeking to follow his leadings, are "brethren," 
regardless of race or color or education or poverty or 
homeliness. We have reached the point where our hearts 
are so full of the Spirit of the Master that we can truthfully 
say we love all the brethren with a love which is 
sincere and not at all feigned. 

Now, having gotten along thus far in the good way, 
the Apostle shows us that there is yet an advance step 
of love, and states what next we must do in order 
to keep our hearts pure: "See that ye love one another 
with a pure heart fervently." We must not only regard 
them as brethren and give them "unfeigned love," but 
should recognize the principle underlying our relationship 
to the Lord and their relationship to the Lord; how 
they, like ourselves, are New Creatures in Christ; and 
this should give us great sympathy and a desire to do 
everything we can to encourage them, to help them. 

DISINTERESTED LOVE-STRONG AND INTENSE 

This love is different from the other love— brotherly 
love. It is disinterested love; so warm, so intense, that 
we should be willing to lay down our lives for the 
brethren. This love is the kind exemplified in our 
Heavenly Father. While we were yet sinners he loved 
us. So the love of Jesus is unselfish, pure, benevolent; a 
love which undertakes to do good for us for our own 
sakes, not from a hope of getting anything from us. 

The Apostle proceeds to say that we should not only 
have this love, but that we should have it with fervency, 
warmth, ardor; not with a semi-indifference, but with a 
real interest in each other's welfare— the rich as well as 
the poor; the educated as well as the ignorant. Our love 
should go out to these as we see any lack in them that 
we could supply— rendering assistance of any kind; using 
always, of course, discretion, for love learns to be wise, 
and to take into consideration our motives while we 
endeavor to do them good. 

The Apostle suggests that we see to it that this is our 
own experience; not merely that it is a principle which 
we recognize, but that we should give heed to ourselves 
that this should be accomplished in us, in our own lives. 
It would not be natural to have that benevolence of mind 
which would practise forgiveness of those who trespass 
against us. But when we think of the fact that the whole 
race is fallen and degraded through heredity, it should 
make us sympathetic; if some are more depraved, we 
should have the more sympathy for them. As we think 
sympathetically along those lines, our sympathetic love 
will increase; as we practise sympathetic love the New 



Creature develops. 

Our Lord Jesus says, "Love one another, as I have 
loved you." Set this standard before you. Our love for 
the brethren might, at first, be merely obedience in following 
this command; but as we follow on, obeying the 
Divine command, our love increases, our sympathy expands. 
The Apostle says we must see to it that we do 
not neglect this. If we fail to heed this admonition we 
are not of the kind that the Father is choosing; for the 
Apostle also tells us that he predestinated that all those 

R4767 : page 57 

who should be members of the Body of Christ should be 
copies of him; copies in having an unfeigned and fervent 
love. 

STRENGTH IN THE LORD PROPORTIONATE TO KNOWLEDGE 
OF HIM 

No one can grow strong in the Lord unless he grows 
also in knowledge. We properly esteem most highly 
those whose love for the Lord and for his Truth are 
evidenced by their zeal in the study of his Word, and 
whose favor with God is manifested by their being guided 
more into the deep things of God. 

Nevertheless, the weaker ones of the household of 
faith are to be cared for and loved and helped that they 
may grow strong in the Lord. And just here the Apostle 
offers another word of counsel, saying, "We, then, that 
are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and 
not to please ourselves." (Rom. 15:1.) This does 

R4767 : page 58 

not imply that we should not expostulate with such a 
one and endeavor to help him get rid of his infirmity. 
This we should do, in the spirit of meekness and kindness, 
while we endure with gentleness the trial of our 
patience, not seeking to please ourselves, but rather to 
help a weaker brother or sister. "Let every one of us," 
as the Apostle enjoins, "please his neighbor [brother] 
for his good, to edification"— i.e., not by simply ignoring 
his fault as though we considered it all right, but, while 
kindly urging him to strive against it, still humbly and 
patiently submitting to the discomfort it brings to us. 

If this spirit prevails among the members of the Lord's 
Body, the members will all have a mutual love and a 
mutual care one for another— a care which seeks to encourage 
and strengthen all that is good and to discourage 
all that is unbecoming, and a love which throws its mantle 
over a deformity and endeavors to conceal a fault, 
rather than to expose the weaker brother to the reproach 
of others. 

For such self-sacrificing love how necessary is the 
spirit of humility and gentleness and patience and faith! 



How forceful are the Master's words, "Except ye be converted 
[from the spirit of the world to the Spirit of 
Christ] and become as little children [in meekness and 
teachableness], ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of 
heaven. "--Matt. 18:1-6. 



R4767 : page 58 

CAN EVIL BEFALL THE NEW CREATURE? 

"There shall no evil befall thee." (Psa. 91:10.) "Pilate took 
Jesus and scourged him. ...They crucified him and two others 
with him; on either side one, and 
Jesus in the midst."— John 19:1,18. 

SUCH combination of Scripture, apparently 

contradictory, is quite a stumbling-block 

to worldly people; and some of those who 

have inclinations toward the Lord, but 

have not much knowledge of his Word and 

Plan, experience all kinds of trouble in a 

vain attempt to reconcile them. To these 

God's Word is apparently proven to be untrue. 

Only from the standpoint of faith 

can it be recognized as always true and 

harmonious. Yet the standpoint of faith may not always 

be exactly the same. We might use the word "thee" in the 

text, as applying to the Lord (the New Creature) and 

the members of the Body (the New Creatures) and consider 

that the flesh is the great enemy, the great opponent, 

to be gotten rid of. Or we might think of the flesh as 

their earthly tabernacle for the time, and take the matter 

in a more figurative way. 

We, however, prefer to consider the New Creature 
entirely apart from the flesh. "No evil shall befall thee." 
Applying this to our Lord, we see that no evil befell him 
as a New Creature. All the things that happened to him 
were necessary. Without these he could not have fulfilled 
the calling that was given him. Similarly we, as New 
Creatures, as his followers, could never have attained to 
this calling except by the crucifixion of the Lord. "Mortify, 
therefore, your members which are upon the earth." 
-Col. 3:5. 

Our Lord's followers have to some extent lost the 
esteem of their friends and neighbors; they have been 
counted as the offscouring of the earth. They have been 
tested in every possible manner. These things were 
necessary for them; therefore, they were not evil. 

"THE CAPTAIN OF THEIR SALVATION MADE PERFECT 
THROUGH SUFFERINGS" 

Our Lord asked, "Ought not Christ to have suffered 
these things and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:26.) 



To be fitted for the priestly office to which he was called, 
our Lord must be proved beyond all peradventure. His 
loyalty was put to the extremest test in the Garden of 
Gethsemane. Possibly he himself did not realize the 
strength of his righteous character until brought face to 
face with this last trial. There he was tried and proved to 
the uttermost, and under the trial his character— always 
perfect to the full measure of its testing— gained, by Divine 
grace, its glorious perfection of completeness. 

Thus, through suffering, he learned obedience to the 
perfect will of God, down to the lowest depths of self-abnegation; 
and God permitted it so to be, because such 
proving was necessary, both for the development and the 
manifestation of that perfection of character which would 
be worthy of the high exaltation to which he was called. 

And so we also must suffer if we would be footstep-followers 
of the Lamb. Character cannot be developed 
wholly without trial. It is like a plant; at first it is very 
tender; it needs an abundance of the sunshine of God's 
love; frequent watering with the showers of his grace; 
much cultivating through the applied knowledge of his 
character, as a foundation for faith and an inspiration to 
obedience. Then, when thus developed under these favorable 
conditions, it is ready for the pruning hand of discipline, 
and is also able to endure some hardness. And 
little by little, as strength of character is developed, the 
tests applied to it serve only to develop more strength, 
more beauty, more grace, until it is finally fixed, developed, 
established, perfected through suffering. Thus 
we learn to realize that "All things work together for 
good. ..to the called according to his purpose," to those 
who are to be members of his Body.— Rom. 8:28. 

DELIVERED OVER TO THE ADVERSARY FOR THE 
DESTRUCTION OF THE FLESH 

But some one may ask, "We see how these experiences 
of life are working out good for the New Creature; but 
is there no way in which experiences could work out evil 
things that would be bad for them?" 

We are to recognize that there are two classes of 
spirit-begotten ones, and that our text has reference to 
only one class of these. There is the Body of Christ, 
representing the priestly order, the antitypical Melchisedec 
—Jesus the Head and the Church his Body. They have 
kept nothing back of their love and devotion; things may 
happen disastrous to their fleshly interests; but they remember 
that they are "not in the flesh, but in the spirit," 
and realize that no outside influence can mar their real interest 
as New Creatures, nor hinder them, if faithful, 
from attaining to the glories of the Kingdom with their 
Lord and Head. They have entered into the holiest by 
the blood of Jesus, and do not withdraw; they "abide in 
the secret place of the Most High"; they will continue 
unto the very end. It is to this class, and to all the 
things that may befall them, that the assurance is given 



—"There shall no evil befall thee." 

As for the other of the two classes— the "Great Company" 
—some evils do befall them. They will be put 
into great tribulation. It was an evil on their part that 
they neglected the Lord's Word and the privileges of the 
"high calling." This coolness brought them into a condition 
which must be made right. They loved "father 
or mother or houses or lands," or something else, to such 

R4767 : page 59 

an extent that they failed to keep their covenant of 
sacrifice, and will be accounted unworthy of a share in 
the Kingdom, and will, instead, be subjected to the great 
time of trouble— "the day of wrath." It will be necessary 
that these evils come upon them to bring destruction of 
the flesh. 



R4767 : page 59 

A HOLY NATION PICTURED 

-MARCH 26.- 

"Happy the people that fare thus! Happy the 
people whose God is Jehovah."— Psalm 144:15. 

AT the time God accepted Israel to be his people 

he entered into a Covenant or agreement 

with them. He gave them the Law, represented 

in the Ten Commandments, as the 

basis of the Covenant which Moses mediated. 

Israel agreed to be faithful to God, 

and to keep those commandments perfectly. 

And God agreed that in that event he 

would bless them. They should be his 

people and by doing the things contained in 

the Law should live everlastingly— not die. Not only so, 

but he promised to bless them in all the temporal affairs 

R4768 : page 59 

of life; in their homes, in their families, in their flocks 
and herds and fields they should be prospered. 

Israel failed to get these blessings, for the same reason 
that any other people would have failed; namely, because 
God's Law is perfect, the measure of a perfect 
man's ability: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, mind, being and strength; and thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself." Hence, the Israelites continued 
to die, as their fathers had done, and as all mankind 
die— not being able to keep the Divine Law perfectly. 
For the same reason Israel experienced wars, 
famines, pestilences and drouths, in proportion as they 



were negligent of the terms of their Covenant- 
Lev. 26:14-33. 

HAPPY IS THAT PEOPLE 

In our lesson the Prophet David pictures the holy, 
happy, blessed nation of the Lord. It is a picture of the 
future and not of the past. It is an ideal picture. It 
will be realized when Messiah's Kingdom shall have 
been established amongst men— when Satan's power 
shall be restrained, when he shall be bound, when the 
blessings of Restitution shall have uplifted mankind from 
sin and degradation and shall have brought them back 
to the image and likeness of God lost in Eden, but re-acquired 
for our race through the sacrifice of our Lord on 
Calvary. 

But that happy nation will acquire, additionally, a 
happy home and world-wide Paradise. Even human perfection 
would not bring happiness if cyclones, tornadoes, 
blizzards, tidal waves, earthquakes, famines and pestilences 
continued. Thank God, the Bible's assurances 
are that the blessing of the Lord shall be, not only upon 
mankind, but upon all their earthly home. The earth 
shall yield her increase. The wilderness and the solitary 
place shall be glad and blossom as the rose. The 
Lord will make his footstool glorious.— Acts 3:19-21; 
Isa. 11:9; 65:25; Ezek. 37; Isa. 35:1; 60:13. 

PARTICULARS GIVEN BY THE PROPHET 

Incidental to the blessed condition of the holy nation 
of the future, the Prophet mentions a deliverance from 
strange children: "Rid me and deliver me from the 
hands of strange children, whose mouth speaketh vanity, 
and whose right hand is the right hand of falsehood."— 
Psa. 144:11. 

In the Church of the present Age there are some 
whom the Apostle styles "bastards," or strange children. 
All may make the same profession and confession, but 
"the Lord knoweth them that are his," and in his due 
time shall separate the false or strange children from 
the true and will glorify the saintly ones as members of 
the great Messiah, the Christ. Then will come the time 
for dealing with humanity in general— the time described 
in our text, when humanity in general, under the Messianic 
Kingdom, will be privileged to become the holy 
and happy people of God— when Satan and sin will be 
banished and righteousness and Truth will flourish and 
the knowledge of the glory of the Lord will fill the whole 
earth. 

The great Messiah undertakes to be the world's Life-Giver, 
Father, Regenerator. All mankind will be awakened 
from the tomb and have the opportunity for regeneration 
and full attainment of human perfection and 
God-likeness. However, for quite a time there will be 
strange children amongst men— those who will experience 



the blessings of that glorious time without giving 
proper heart responses. Not until the world shall have 
been rid of these, by their dying the Second Death, will 
the fullness of happiness prevail amongst the children of 
men. With the wrong spirit they utter vanity, foolishness, 
and their right hand, their best powers, prove disloyal 
to the King of kings, of whom King David was 
merely a type. 

"TIMES OF REFRESHING SHALL COME, AND HE SHALL 
SEND JESUS CHRIST" 

"Then your sons will be like plants, grown up in their 
youth; your daughters like corner-pillars sculptured in 
the model of a palace." The grace and beauty of the 
children of Messiah, partakers of human Restitution 
blessings (Acts 3:19-21), will be marvelous. They will 
attain to more than Adamic perfection, for they will 
have an increase of knowledge. 

Then the garners will be full, furnishing all manner 
of provisions. Then your sheep will bring forth thousands 
and tens of thousands in your open pastures. The 
earth shall yield her increase under the blessings of 
Messiah's Kingdom. 

Then the oxen will be strong to labor. Then there 
shall be no breach— no rupture of the happy relationships. 
Even death will be destroyed. 

Then there will be no migration— no further seeking 
for better or more happifying conditions. Then there 
will be no complaining in our streets. Discontent is now 
rapidly increasing with every added blessing of our 
wonderful day. The difficulty lies in the fact that sin 
and selfishness are reigning in the hearts and minds of 
men. Under the wonderfully changed conditions of Messiah's 
Kingdom, peace, happiness, contentment will take 
the place of selfishness and discontent. 

No wonder the Prophet declares that happy will be the 
people who fare thus— happy are the people whose God 
is Jehovah. We need to correct our ideas, our theologies. 
God does not acknowledge himself the God of the 
wicked and he declines to treat evil-doers except as 
rebels, aliens, foreigners, strangers, as respects his promises 
and favors. Our entire race was originally thus 
estranged. But Divine grace provided a "Savior and a 
great One." This Savior is already reconciling a saintly, 

R4768 : page 60 

faithful Church, who will be his associates in the Heavenly 
Kingdom. Shortly he will apply of the merit of his 
sacrifice on behalf of all mankind. 

The Scriptures assure us that this will be fully acceptable 
to the Heavenly Father, who will enter into a New 
Covenant with Israel, of which Messiah will be the 
great Mediator, the antitype of Moses. (Jer. 31:31.) 
Under that New Covenant all mankind will be privileged 



and assisted to come back to Divine favor under the 
processes of Restitution, in connection with the judgments 
and disciplines of that Messianic Kingdom. The 
result of the thousand years of that reign of righteousness 
will be the development of mankind as one holy 
nation or people, whose happiness will be complete and 
everlasting. There shall be no more sighing, no more 
crying, no more dying; for all the former things shall 
have passed away, and he upon the Throne shall have 
made all things new.— Rev. 21:1-5. 



R4768 : page 60 

GENERAL NAAMAN'S LEPROSY CURED 
THE PLAGUE TRANSFERRED TO A HEBREW GRAFTER, GEHAZI 

-2 KINGS 5:1-14.-APRIL 2.- 

"Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; 
for I am God, and there is none else."— Isaiah 45:22. 

GENERAL NAAMAN, of the army of Syria, 

on the northern border of the land of Israel, 

was a sick man. He had the loathsome infection 

and incurable disease called leprosy. 

Wealth, influence at Court, life's abundance 

and honors could not offset this terrible 

plague upon his life. The study of today 

tells of his miraculous healing by the 

Prophet Elisha. In Naaman's household 

was a young girl who had been captured 

from the Israelites and was a slave, although doubtless 

well treated. The maid remembered the Prophet Elisha 

and how wonderfully Divine power, through him, had 

healed diseases. Instead of rejoicing that her captor and 

master was suffering, she sympathetically inquired why 

he did not go to the Prophet, who, she felt sure, would be 

glad to pray for him and heal him. 

Although it seemed like catching at a straw Naaman 
followed up the suggestion; he got a letter from his King 
to the King of Israel and presented himself to the latter, 
requesting healing by Israel's great Prophet, of whom he 
had heard. The King was astonished. He knew leprosy 
to be incurable. Apparently he knew little about Elisha's 
powers. He surmised that the King of Syria was intent 
upon picking a quarrel as an excuse for sending an invading 
army to pillage his kingdom. Eventually, however, 
Naaman was directed to Elisha's place of residence, 
at a distance from the King's Court. 

Here again there was difficulty. Naaman expected 
great consideration for his rank— that the Prophet would 
make gestures over him and pray; perhaps offer sacrifice 
and incense, and, possibly, after a great ado, he might 



be healed. But instead of this, Elisha, without coming 
to see him at all, merely sent word by his servant that 
the General should go to the river Jordan and there wash 
seven times. 

Naaman was angry. He had come several days' journey 
with servants and costly presents hoping for healing, 
and he was turned away like a dog with a bone. He 
fumed as his chariot drove on: Have we not better rivers 
in Syria than this river Jordan, which is always muddy? 
It is not bathing that I need! 

However, a message of wisdom came to him from his 
servants, who suggested that he try the Prophet's prescription; 
that the fact that it was simple and easy of 
performance should not cause the General to reject the 
proposal. Although fearful that no good would come 
from the washing, and that he would be made the laughing-stock 

R4769 : page 60 

of his own servants, his own people and the 
Israelites, he concluded, nevertheless, to follow the 
Prophet's direction. He bathed seven times in Jordan 
and his leprosy was healed thoroughly. 

LEPROSY A FIGURE OF SIN 

In many respects leprosy corresponds to sin; first, it 
is incurable; secondly, it is loathsome; thirdly, it is contagious; 
fourthly, it is destructive; fifthly, it is painless. 

As only Divine power could heal the leper, only the 
same can heal the sinner. As the maid could call attention 
to the Prophet, and the Prophet prescribe the remedy, 
and the servants exhort compliance, so all those who know 
of a Divine power and arrangement for the healing of 
sinners may tell the good tidings, even to their enemies. 
The ministers or prophets of the Divine Word may direct 
as to the proper way to obtain Divine forgiveness and 
restoration, and others may help to impress the lesson; 
yet no recovery can be made except as the individual himself 
follows the Divine prescription, exercising both faith 
and obedience. 

The number seven in the Bible is used to represent 
completeness; hence the seven washings in Jordan would 
signify a complete cleansing, washing. The poet has 
beautifully referred to this and pictured the cleansing, 
healing Fountain into which by faith sinners may 
plunge:— 

"There is a Fountain filled with blood, 
Drawn from Immanuel's veins, 
And sinners plunged beneath that flood 
Lose all their guilty stains." 

It is by faith that we may now wash ourselves completely 
in the blood of Christ; by faith we may realize 
that the sacrifice of Christ was for the sins of the whole 
world, and may appropriate our share thereof. 



GEHAZI, THE GRAFTER, A LEPER 

Gratitude is one of the most worthy sentiments of 
the human mind. General Naaman's nobility was manifested 
in the fact that, after being healed, he retraced 
his journey nearly forty miles, in order to thank the 
Prophet for his recovery and to bestow upon him gifts 
which he had brought. We may assume that if he had 
not been noble-minded, God would not have provided 
for him this healing. "The generous soul shall be made 
fat." 

To the General's surprise the Prophet declined to take 
anything. The gifts of God's grace are not to be bartered 
for earthly good things. How fortunate it would be, 
and how much to the Lord's glory, if all of God's people 
would emulate Elisha in this respect! But Gehazi, Elisha's 
servant, had a different spirit. As he saw the wealth 
rolling away he thought the Prophet foolish and determined 
to get something by a process of "graft." 

When the chariot was out of sight he hastened and 
hailed it and told the General that although his master 
would take nothing of the things offered for himself, he 
would willingly accept some of the garments for the 
young men of the School of the Prophets. The General 

R4769 : page 61 

very promptly and gladly assented and gave more than 
was requested. But God through the Prophet punished 
the perfidy of Gehazi. He took Naaman's presents; he 
got, also, Naaman's leprosy. 

NAAMAN NOT SAVED--GEHAZI NOT LOST 

Many have erroneously assumed, in connection with 
this lesson, that Naaman was saved to heaven and Gehazi 
lost. Both conclusions are unscriptural. Naaman was 
saved to health and Gehazi lost his health. But the eternal 
interests of neither were settled. 

Not until Cornelius' day, three and a half years after 
the Cross, did any Gentile come into any kind of relationship 
with God. Previous to that, from the time of Moses, 
only the Jewish nation had recognition. "You only have 
I known of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) 
And God's favor to Israel was merely an earthly and 
preparatory one. No one gained eternal life prior to the 
Redeemer's sacrifice. Thus the Scriptures declare that 
Christ "brought life and immortality to light through the 
Gospel"; again, "So great salvation which began to be 
declared by our Lord." 

Since Jesus' day immortality has been brought to light 
—the offer of "glory, honor and immortality" to the 
saintly followers of Jesus' footsteps who, as the "very 
elect," will be the Royal Priesthood through whom earthly 
Restitution blessings will be opened up to natural Israel 
and, through Israel, to all nations during Messiah's reign 



of glory. 

R4769 : page 61 

SURROUNDED BY HEAVENLY HOSTS 

-2 KINGS 6:8-23.-APRIL 9.- 

"He shall give his angels charge over thee to 
keep thee in all thy ways."— Psalm 91:11. 

WHEN war was declared by Syria against 
Israel the invaders sought to gain an entrance 
into Israel's army in the mountain 
passes, but God through the Prophet Elisha 
forewarned the Israelites. When this had 
happened several times the Syrian king concluded 
that there were traitors amongst his 
counsellors, but was answered, No! the 
Prophet Elisha surely warns Israel's king 
of anything that you plan secretly. 

Learning that the Prophet was living at Dothan, near 
the Syrian border, the king sent a detachment of soldiers 
to capture him. They came by night. Elisha's servant, 
arising early, saw that the little city was surrounded. He 
ran to his master in fear, but the latter, unperturbed, answered, 
Fear not; for they that be with us are more 
than they that be with them. These words sounded 
strangely untrue to the servant, until the Prophet prayed 
for him an opening of eyes, which revealed a vision of 
angels, chariots and horses, with the appearance of fire. 

The lesson to us is that whoever are God's servants, 
and wherever they may be, Divine power, like a mighty 
army, surrounds them. Modern inventions and discoveries 
are more and more revealing to us secrets of nature and 
hinting at far more beyond. Whoever has knowledge of 
wireless telegraphy, X-rays, radium, etc., can readily believe 
that the Almighty God may have thousands of 
agencies and powers invisible to men whereby he can 
work all things according to the counsel of his own will. 

"THE ANGEL OF THE LORD ENCAMPETH ROUND ABOUT 
THEM THAT FEAR HIM AND DELIVERETH THEM" 

Angels are beings of a grade a little higher than man 
—beings with spirit bodies instead of flesh bodies. "Thou 
madest man a little lower than the angels." The Scriptures 
declare that the angels are sent forth to minister to 
or serve all those who are heirs of salvation. They encamp 
around about God's servants in the sense that Divine 
agency and power are everywhere and ready at any instant 
to be exercised as much as need be for the accomplishment 
of God's will. The same God who willed that 
Elijah should flee before Jezebel arranged that Elisha 



should be specially protected. But we are to remember 
that only those who are in covenant relationship with 
God are under this special watch-care and protection. 

We are to remember also that there are fallen angels, 
called "wicked spirits," and that these are on the alert 
to entrap and ensnare humanity through spirit mediums, 
spirit rappings, tippings, clairvoyants, ouija-boards, etc. 
God's people are warned against these, and they in turn 
should warn the world of the great danger resulting from 
any association with these fallen angels, who misrepresent 
themselves to be our dead friends. 

Many are being misled by these evil spirits. They 
have introduced various false doctrines and continually 
seek to entrap the human will and, if possible, to gain 
control over it— through obsession. Curiosity is one of 
the main baits to the hook of spiritism. 

Spiritists, including mediums, are being deceived. 
They think that they converse with the dead. They will 
indeed acknowledge that there are "wicked spirits," "lying 
spirits," as the Bible says; but they do not acknowledge 
that they are all wicked. The fact is that they have only 
partially realized the depth of Satan's power and deceit 
in this direction. The Bible indicates that shortly, in the 
ending of this Age, there will be a great time of trouble, 
which, to a considerable degree, will be brought about by 
these evil spirits. It is the duty of those who know to 
warn those who understand not the situation. 

FROM DOTHAN TO SAMARIA 

When the Syrian army corps drew near to Dothan, 
Elisha with his servant went out to meet them, praying 
that God would blind them. They were not blinded literally, 
but, as it were, hypnotized. Doubtless there is a 
hypnotic power, but as it interferes with the wills of 
others, none of God's people should have anything to do 
with it, unless, as in Elisha's case, specially commissioned 
of God. Elisha met the guard and told them that he knew 
the man they were seeking and that he would lead them 
to him in another city, if they would follow him. He did 
lead them several miles, right into the capital city of 
Samaria. There, surrounded by Israel's men of war, with 
the king at their head, Elisha again prayed and the hypnotic 

R4770 : page 61 

spell dissolved, and they beheld themselves prisoners 
and that the Prophet had fooled them. At Elisha's 
suggestion the King made them a feast and sent them on 
their way back to Syria. The effect of this treatment 
was that for a long time, at least, there were no further 
incursions into Palestine from Syria. 

The King's suggestion was that the King of Syria 
should be killed. But the Prophet in reply said, If you 
had captured them in war at the risk of your life, you 
would not kill them. Now, seeing that God's providence 



has placed them where they are, consider them as your 
guests and treat them kindly. How many enemies could 
be won by kind treatment, who would be made bitter by 
what might even be termed just treatment! After all, 

R4770 : page 62 

love is the great conquering power of the world— love is 
the greatest thing in the world. It is the "love Divine, 
all love excelling," which constrains or draws us to God. 

COMPARATIVELY FEW HAVE YET LEARNED OF GOD'S 
LOVE 

Only God's consecrated people have yet learned of his 
love, and they very imperfectly. The tactics of Satan 
and his demon hosts for centuries has been to blind the 
whole world and, as much as possible, God's people respecting 
his true character. By misrepresentations of the 
Scriptures and some interpolations and some mistranslations 
they have succeeded to a wonderful degree in putting 
light for darkness and darkness for light. This is 
shown in the creeds of all denominations— some in a 
greater and some in a less degree. 

A century or more ago, when the creeds were believed 
more fully than today, the effect was terribly demoralizing. 
Good men and women, under the delusions of those creeds, 
tortured one another, often to death, with thumb-screws, 
racks, burning-irons, the stake, etc. Their hearts were 
not so much worse, perhaps, than ours; but their heads 
were more deluded. Believing thoroughly in the doctrine 
of eternal torment, etc., they sought to copy this misconception 
of the Divine character and dealing. 

More and more let us see, realize, appreciate, the love 
of God which passeth all understanding. More and more 
let us appreciate the length and breadth and height and 
depth of this love of God. Let us get the proper focus 
upon the Divine Word. Let us obtain the reading of the 
most ancient manuscripts. Let us secure the best translations, 
that we may not be deceived, but understandingly 
appreciate the love of God in full co-operation with his 
Justice, Wisdom and Power— all co-operating now for 
the blessing of the saints with heavenly salvation, as it 
will by and by bless all the world of mankind, through 
this Seed of Abraham. -Gal. 3:29. 



R4771 : page 62 

DIVINE LOVE'S CONSUMMATION 

Beholding heaven's starry blue, 
I said, "Dear Lord, I will be true; 
Thy will shall be my chief delight, 
Clothe me in robe of spotless white." 



As I His glorious realm behold, 
He beckons me with crown of gold. 

"Lord, this is all my heart's desire- 
That I may join the heavenly choir 
And sing Thy praises evermore, 
Whom angels worship and adore. 
O guide me to my Father's home, 
To sit with Thee upon Thy throne." 

"My child wouldst thou this honor gain? 
The way is narrow, full of pain, 
For he, who shares the throne with me 
Must pass through dark Gethsemane; 
Must often suffer scorn and loss; 
With patience daily bear his cross." 

"Yea, gladly Lord, yet not alone, 
Since Thou wilt not forsake Thine own 
With open face beholding Thee 
As in a glass, O let me be 
Changed into glory like to Thine 
Until I in Thine imagine shine." 

Transcending joy! He speaks to bless 
In tones of loving tenderness ! 
"As sweet incense thy prayers arise, 
Thy God accepts thy sacrifice, 
Though thou art in the furnace proved, 
I'll ne'er forsake, nor cease to love. 

"Though hard the way and tempest riven, 
Meat in due season will be given; 
Thy faith and courage thus sustained 
Press forward till the goal is gained, 
As temple stones both true and tried, 
Thy Father loves and owns my Bride." 

love divine! Amazing grace! 

1 shall behold Him face to face. 
Lean on thy well beloved's arm, 

My heart, He'll keep thee from all harm, 

Bow down in adoration sweet; 

Be for the heavenly throng made meet. 

"Thy Kingdom come, the earth to bless 
With healing, truth, and righteousness, 
'Till quick and dead sin-cleansed shall be, 
Death swallowed up in victory; 
And joyful anthems rend the skies— 
The earth restored to paradise. 

ETTA C. SCHAFER. 



R4770 : page 62 



WHAT "CORRUPT COMMUNICATION" SIGNIFIES 

"Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth; 
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may 
minister grace unto the hearers."— Eph. 4:29. 

CORRUPT communication is the spreading of 

evil report or message instead of good. 

Our text might be understood to mean 

a corrupting communication according 

to the course of ordinary conversation. 

Our minds might get us into all kinds of 

difficulty with ourselves and with others, if 

we did not keep a rein upon them and hold 

them within certain bounds; but our 

tongues might do even more injury than 

our minds. What we may think injures only ourselves; 

but if our tongues come into the matter, not only are our 

own minds defiled, but there is contagion, there is rancor; 

for the tongue spreads the matter all around. And 

whether the matter be true or false, the influence is corrupting, 

degrading, tending, perhaps, at times even toward 

immorality. 

It would appear that not only amongst the worldly, but 
amongst the Lord's people there is a tendency to relate 
little incidents or make little remarks which, while not 
necessarily sinful, tend to cause sprouts of evil to develop. 
It is along this line that the Apostle says we 
should let no corrupt communication proceed out of our 
mouth. If, by any mischance, any corrupting information 
has come to our attention, we should see to it that it 
goes no further. We have sometimes wondered whether 
it is the quality of the natural mind to use the tongue 
to the disadvantage of others, or whether evil spirits 
have something to do with it. 

Let us, as the Apostle enjoins, drop evil communications; 
shun them, and hold fast only to that which is 
edifying— the word "edifying" having in it the thought 
of an edifice, a building, the up-building of each other. 

BROAD SCOPE FOR CONVERSATION ON RICHES OF GOD'S 
GRACE 

But some, even of those who profess to love the Lord 
and to be trying to walk in his footsteps, will say, "I 
never speak anything but the truth; and I mean no harm 
to anybody; but I must have something to talk about 

R4770 : page 63 

when my neighbors come in, and many of them would 
think me tiresome if I should try to interest them in religious 
matters." But it is evil speaking, slander all the 
same, and the scandal-monger, however refined his 
methods or words, well knows that so far from the 



scandal ministering grace to the hearer, it ministers 
evil; that the hearer, impelled by the forces of his fallen 
human nature, goes out to tell the scandal to others. The 
fallen nature feasts and revels in just such things, deluding 
many that they are thus moralizing, preaching 
against sin, and that in thus discussing and impliedly 
denouncing the transgressions of another, they are mentioning 
matters abhorrent to themselves. Alas! their 
reasoning is seriously defective when the Lord's counsels 
in righteousness are ignored. 

There is surely broad scope for conversation among 
Christian people on the subject of the riches of God's 
grace in Christ Jesus our Lord, expressed in the exceeding 
great and precious promises of the Divine Word. In 
these things we have indeed that which not only ministers 
grace to the hearer, but that which adds also to the grace 
of the speaker. It showers blessing on every hand so 
far as the New Creature is concerned, and assists in 
deadening the old nature with its evil desires, tastes and 
appetites. 

This, evidently, is what the Apostle had in mind when 
he said that the Lord's people should "show forth the 
praises of him who called us out of darkness, into his 
marvelous light." And a heart filled with the spirit of 
love, the spirit of God, the spirit of the Truth, and overflowing 
with the same will be sure to bestow it upon 
others; for, "Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth 
speaketh"; "Blessed are the pure in heart."— I Peter 2:9; 
Matt. 12:34; 5:8. 



R4770 : page 63 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have greatly enjoyed the past two weeks in the blessed 
service. None can know the blessedness of the Harvest 
work but those who are doing their little all in co-laboring 
with the Chief Reaper. 

None can understand your faithful course of self-sacrifice 
but those who, like yourself, are seeking the Lord's sweet 
approval day by day. Even as none but Abraham and Isaac 
could appreciate what the sufferings of Isaac meant, so only 
our Father and "we, brethren, as Isaac was," can appreciate 
what the "sufferings of Christ" are. 

Be assured of my Christian love and prayers for you and 
the work the Chief Reaper has entrusted to your willing 
hands. Many, many friends along the way desire to be 
remembered to you, and send words of confidence in your 
labor of love. 

Brother Rutherford suggested DAWN-STUDIES and Berean 
lessons to take the place of discourses. This surely is a wise 
procedure in many classes, even where they might have talent 
for speaking. 



I would like, however, if more could be done to awaken 
thought in the importance of testimony meetings. Many 
classes have not even talent for leading Berean studies (at 
least they think they have not the talent), and I think where 
only one meeting can be held, the testimony meeting, up-to-date, 
considering the past week's experiences, would be the 
best meeting possible. 

I have been hoping that at some time you would consider 
it profitable to advance this specially in the TOWER and suggest 
a subject for each week's meditation and for testimonies 
(each Wednesday night); or, possibly, that the MANNA 
verse and comment for Wednesday be read in advance at the 
previous testimony meeting and be considered as the subject 
for the following week.* 

The classes which I have visited and which have Wednesday 
evening testimony meetings seem to be more up-to-date in 
both knowledge and spirituality. 

God bless you, my dear Brother. Much love to you. 
BROTHER SAPHORE. 



*Some of the friends follow the plan of using Brother Russell's 
sermon text of the week, which the majority of them get through the 
newspapers. 

R4771 : page 63 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am still rejoicing in the "feast of fat things" which our 
gracious Lord is constantly spreading before us. 

Your recent relation of the various experiences had with 
our Jewish friends and how they are reaching out for more 
and more about the Messiah and his Kingdom, brought me 
back in mind to the days of John the Baptist, when he 
announced the Messiah, etc. 

In connection with this, in looking up what you had written 
about Enoch and Elijah, I read in TOWER No. 9, 1898, 
about Elijah's career, and then in Vol. 2, p. 254, to conclusion 
of chapter. You speak of the Elisha class not expecting to 
be glorified. Could this class be the Jews who are now 
becoming interested? 

A further thought, or rather, finding— 2 Kings 2:9: Elisha 
prays for a double portion. Marginal rendering is, "The 
portion of the first-born." 

My recent experiences and the reading of the above, and 
particularly the chapter on "Elijah shall first come," have 
energized me to renewed zeal and vigor to press on to the 
battle of the Lord. 

Our prayers go up in your behalf, dear Brother, that grace 
and strength and wisdom from on high be your portion sufficient 
for every time of need, until your work is finished and 
you have heard the Master's "Well done." 

Yours in him, E. W. V. KUEHN. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL: 

I feel that I must write you a word of thanks for the 
greatest blessing I have received in my life. I need not go 
into details, for the seventy-third Psalm exactly covers my 
experience; and I feel that in allowing me to read "The 
Divine Plan," God indeed took me into his sanctuary. 

Oh, wonderful patience! When I look back I can hardly 
believe it— he took such infinite pains just to show me his 
love! 

Last year, after many tribulations, stretching over a decade, 
I said to myself, Well, it may be all right; but if I'm not 
to grow utterly bad and bitter I must have a little prosperity. 
I can't bear this incessant going wrong any longer. (My 
principal temptation was that I wanted my children to have 
a good time.) 

Well, the prosperity didn't come— but your book did. It 
took some mental compulsion to read it, too. I couldn't 
really afford the set of STUDIES at the time I ordered them, 
and was cross, though much interested. So I put them on 
the shelf and never looked at them for months, till one day 
I had nothing to do and nothing to read, and took them down. 

I can only say they utterly changed the world for me and 
my family. We were sick of churches— we had been served 
so many mean tricks by "Pillars." 

I have sent out copies of the Plan (five-cent edition) to 
all of my friends and hope they will benefit, as I have done. 
I am longing for the other three STUDIES, and hope to send 
for them next month. We enjoy THE WATCH TOWER so 
much. Always wishing to be up-to-date in my reading I feel 
that I am so more than ever now. 

My husband has told many men about the book. He finds 
the poor love to hear about it, but the rich will have none 
of it. One old man said it was what he had been waiting 
for all his life. He knew his Bible nearly by heart and said 
the "Plan" was just what it seemed to say to him. 

Indeed, I can say your book has answered the "Why?" 
I have been asking ever since I was sixteen years old. When 
I had read it my little daughter (eight years old) asked me 
a question and I sat on the floor beside her and told her all 
about it. 

When I had finished she looked at me with tears in her 
eyes and said, "Oh, mamma, isn't God good! It makes me 
cry to think of it." And yesterday she said, "If there were 
any poor people here I would just take my two dollars and 
give it to them"— all she has— and she's been saving it to 
buy a doll. 

I believe she truly tries to "do as she'd be done by"; so 
isn't it possible that she might be of the Kingdom, notwithstanding 
her youth? She has told all her little friends about 
the Plan. 

With many, many thanks for the help you have given me 
and mine, 

Yours sincerely, ELEANOR I. CHILDE. 



page 66 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII MARCH 1 No. 5 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 67 

Money to Be Dictator 67 

Pope Pius X. Congratulated 68 



Federation in Fact 68 

The Immortality of the Soul 69 

Mr. Edison and the Bible 70 

Cardinal Gibbons' Words Agree to This 71 

The Kingdom of God in Sad Condition 72 

All a Great Mistake 73 

Murders Her Grandchildren 73 

1911 --Memorial Supper- 19 11 74 

Too Much Money 75 

Priests Poor Business Men 75 

The Duty of the Hour 76 

Some Calculations on the Jubilee Cycles 76 

The Wise Choice 78 

One Sacrifice Sufficient 78 

Interesting Questions 79 

Berean Questions in "Scripture Studies" 79 

page 66 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



1911-GENERAL CONVENTION-- 19 11 

The interests of the Far West this year will be served by 
the Convention trip already announced in these columns. 
Particulars of this will be repeated before the time. It is not 
possible to add any other points to the itinerary. 

Favorable dates for three-day Conventions will probably 
be fixed for Toronto, Canada, and some point in Nova Scotia 
—announcements later. 

Mountain Lake Park, Md., has been selected as the place 
for the principal Convention for the year. Its location in the 
top of the mountains is splendid. The dates there will be 
September 1 to 1 1— not the best, but the best that we can 
secure, as the association holding the Park property keeps the 
months of July and August for its own use. 

At this season we will not expect as large an attendance as 
we had last year at Celoron-Chautauqua at the height of the 
season. Additionally the widely scattered tour and the 
Toronto point will reduce the attendance. We hope later to 
announce very desirable excursion rates with full particulars. 
We announce the date thus early for the convenience of the 
friends who must arrange for leave of absence to attend. 

IMMERSION SERVICE IN BROOKLYN. 

Sunday afternoon, April 9th, opportunity will be given those 
desiring to symbolize their Baptism into Christ's Death by 
water immersion. Robes, etc., will be provided. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for April follow: (1) 60; (2) 
155; (3) 67; (4) 105; (5) 6; (6) 160; (7) 170; (8) 
110; (9) 41; (10) 281; (11) 325; (12) 112; (13) 25; 
(14) 176; (15) 130; (16) 145; (17) 293; (18) 113; 
(19) 115; (20) Vow; (21) 46; (22) 4; (23) 259; (24) 
145; (25) 264; (26) 88; (27) 233; (28) 47; (29) 179; 
(30) 230. 



R4771 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

MONEY TO BE DICTATOR 

THE trust system seems to be laying hold of 

everything— railroads, steamships, steel 

production, smelting, bridge works, oil refining 

and selling, meat, produce, groceries. 

Above all it has made a money combination 

or banking system, the most gigantic 

the world has ever known. Billions of dollars 

of the people are in the banks, and the 

banks are controlled by wealthy syndicates. 

This money trust has a power of control 

which is marvelous. As in Great Britain the titled aristocracy 

hold the land and collect immense revenues and 

bring great pressure to bear socially and financially, so 

now it is in this country, with evidently more to follow. 

AN ILLUSTRATION OF THIS POWER 

As an illustration of this power we note the facts recently 
set forth in the New York Press respecting the 
Magazine Trust. This Trust has recently bought up 
several magazines and put them under one management. 
And directly and indirectly it is able to dictate the policies 
of nearly all the others. The Editor of Hampton's 
Magazine sets forth that, having refused to enter the 

R4772 : page 67 

combine, his magazine is suffering boycott. Thus the 
capitalist syndicate, which is said to be headed by J. P. 
Morgan, the banker and trustifier, says: "Hampton's 
Magazine is warned to cease 'muck-raking,' to cease attacks 
upon Wall Street methods, to cease attacks upon 
the trusts in general." Mr. Hampton says:— 

"Constantly increasing pressure has been brought to 
bear on us to change our policy since Wall Street started 
its attempt to corner the magazine market and organize 
the biggest of all trusts. First this took the form of 
withdrawal of advertising. That failing to be effective 
we have been threatened in various ways. A few months 
ago we were notified that if we printed an article relative 
to a certain great corporation, the president of that 
corporation would make trouble for us with our stockholders. 
We printed the article. Within a month various 
magazines and newspapers and 'news bureaus' began 
to attack the stock of Hampton's Magazine. 

MONEY WIELDS CLUB 

"About this time we were advised that 'no bank with 
Wall Street connections' would have anything to do with 



this corporation as long as it remained under its present 
management. Also stockholders advised us that they 
had been approached, apparently by agents ofWall Street 
brokerage houses, who endeavored to secure their proxies 
to vote at the meeting. 

"The American people are in the grasp of the 'money 
trust' In the past the banker's only question has been 
the character of the business man, his experience and 
skill, the nature of his business, its conditions and the 
probable chances of success. Conditions have changed. 
'Thou shalt not run counter to Wall Street' is not the 
eleventh commandment— it is the first in the American 
business world. The money of the United States is 
cornered in Wall Street, just as wheat is cornered by a 
small group of men. No banking institution of whatever 
size dares to hazard a conflict with this influence. 

"As an illustration of what can be done, the current 
issue of Hampton's Magazine is being held up on the 
news stands. The Union News Company, because the 
magazine contains an article that offended Standard Oil, 
has ordered its agents not to sell it. The magazine lies 
on the stands, but the agents have their orders not to dispose 
of it, and when February 20 comes the copies will 
be returned unsold." 

This matter of coercion along financial lines is one 
of the most powerful methods of warfare ever known. 
Yet it keeps within the law. The effect will be to keep 
the surface of things quite smooth, whatever may be the 
turbulence beneath. The cry of "Peace, peace," where 
there is much discontent, will apparently be borne out by 
the facts, so far as the great newspapers and magazines 
represent them. The excuse will be that the public will 
get as much information as is good for them. What will 
happen to personal liberty under such conditions no one 
can foretell. God's people are to be peacemakers, to 
"seek peace and pursue it." Nevertheless the Scriptures 
forewarn us that all of these attempts to control the pressure 
and growing discontent of our time will prove unavailing, 
so, ultimately, there will be a great explosion, 
which will reach to the uttermost corner of the earth— 
the time when newspapers and banks, politicians and 
everybody will be lost, and when every man's hand will 
be against his neighbor. We see it coming. 

While we see the storm coming, let us remember the 
words of the Prophet, "We will not fear though the earth 
(society) be removed, and though the mountains (kingdoms) 
be carried into the midst of the sea (anarchy)." 
-Psa. 46:2. 

"BE AT PEACE AMONGST YOURSELVES" 
[1THESS. 5:13.] 

Because general discontent prevails in this our day, 
and because God's children, although not of the world, 
are in it, are influenced by it, therefore it becomes daily 
more necessary that each child of God shall be on the 



R4772 : page 68 

alert to keep his body under, to keep his tongue from 
murmuring, to keep his heart from discontent, to be filled 
with thankfulness and gratitude to God in appreciation 
of all his benefits towards us. 

Additionally the characters being called and drawn of 
the Lord during this Gospel Age must all be firm of texture 
—strong characters. God seeketh such to be of his 
Son's Bride and joint-heirs. Their firmness, positiveness, 
is in contrast with the supineness and indifference 
of others. Their weaknesses through heredity are as 
great as those of others. Hence when a number of these 
are brought together, as in a class for Bible study, there 
is a great need of patient forbearance one with the other. 
If differences and clashes come, the damage one to another 
is sure to be greater than with people of less character, 
of less positive convictions, of less determination. 
Consequently these find the Apostle's words true, "Ye 
have need of patience." 

With the Truth, therefore, to this class God proposes 
there shall also go the spirit of the Truth, the spirit of 
holiness, meekness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love; otherwise serious friction and damage 
would result. 

If in any class of Bible Students, STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES be neglected, weakness, worldliness, love of 
pleasures, lack of zeal in the Lord's service, etc., are sure 
to manifest themselves. And if STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
are prosecuted but not applied to the heart and life 
the fruits of the Spirit will be deficient— meekness, gentleness, 
etc. Every item of knowledge should be used as 
the foundation for soil in which further graces of the 
Spirit will be developed for the enrichment of the character 
of the New Creature. 

We have had occasion at times to call the attention 
of the classes to the fact that those chosen to be their 
servants, ministers, elders, are not to be recognized 
as their "lords," and are not to be upheld in any attempts 
to "lord it over God's heritage." (1 Pet. 5:3.) Now, 
on the other hand, we wish to call special attention to 
the fact that a hypercritical spirit might be engendered 
by the class, which might lead some of the members to 
take a wrong attitude. It would evidently be just as contrary 
to the Lord's Spirit if the class were to "lord" it 
over the elders. They are to be loved, to be upheld, to 
be appreciated; and if they have some imperfections, like 
other men, they are no less worthy of sympathy and forgiveness 
and exoneration. 

In proportion as the Elders or ministers are faithful, 
humble, diligent, in the service of the flock, they should 
have the hearty co-operation of every member of the 
class. "Honor to whom honor is due; praise to whom 
praise is due." 

Some of God's people, like some of the people of the 



world, take a hypercritical view of some trifling things, 
such, for instance, as parliamentary usages in connection 
with meetings. We are to remember that the Bible lays 
down no particular parliamentary usages, but gives to 
God's people the one broad, general law to govern each 
one of them in all the affairs of the Church. This Law 
the Master mentioned in few words, saying, "A New 
Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, 
as I have loved you."— John 13:34. 

Let this law of love measure all of our relationships 
as God's people; whether we be of those chosen to be 
Elders or not chosen, the law of love should be used to 
measure our every act, our every word— yea, our very 
thoughts. If we can all, dear brethren, have this rule 
continually in mind, it will save a great deal of friction, 
heart-burnings and heart-achings. It will make us more 
like our blessed Master, better representatives of him 
before each other and before the world. It will incline 
us to be as methodical and careful as possible ourselves 
in all that we do and then lovingly not to expect quite 
as much of others until after they shall have learned the 
beauty of the right way by observing our course. Let us 
be content whatever the method adopted by the majority, 
if it expresses the will of the majority, however the 
conclusion may be reached. If we think the majority less 
wise than we, let us learn patience and wait, as the Lord 
does, until they learn the error of their course and amend 
it. In a word, let us each more and more seek to be 
peacemakers: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they 
shall be called the children of God."-Matt. 5:9. 



POPE PIUS X. CONGRATULATED 

The present Pope is taking steps for the elimination 
of all Higher Critics and other unbelievers in the Bible 
from the Catholic priesthood. All the clergy and all the 
clerical students are required to swear their allegiance to 
the sacred traditions and to oppose what is styled "modernism," 
higher critical infidelity. The oath includes not 
merely the teachings of the Bible, but also the teachings 
of the Church. 

If loyalty to the Bible alone had been enjoined we 
could have wished that all the different Protestant denominations 
might have followed suit. That would have 
meant the cutting off of more than half of the ministers, 
trustees, etc., who freely confess that they have lost all 
faith in the Bible and are Bible teachers in name only- 
Bible opposers, in fact. 



FEDERATION IN FACT 
"Few people realize that most of the important Protestant 



denominations in America are united in a federation 
that is as real as the federation of States. Even the 
members of those denominations themselves who are 

R4773 : page 68 

aware of that fact are, for the most part, probably unaware 
of its significance. Nothing has so seriously hampered 
the Church as a moral force, as its sectarian divisions. 
If the Protestant branch of the Church is undertaking 
to remove from the field of moral power the hurtful 
influence of these sectarian differences, its power in 
shaping the lives of men will be incredibly enhanced. 
That is just what the Protestant churches of America 
are doing. 

"As our readers know, there assembled in Philadelphia 
two years ago last December, for the first time, the 
Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America. 
These churches found their common interest, not in a 
creed— though they agreed in the assertion of their attitude 
toward Christ— nor in a common ritual or form of 
government, but in a common work. On the 24th and 
25th of last month, in the city of Washington, the Executive 
Committee of that Council held their second annual 
meeting. It is noteworthy that all their discussions 
pertained to common activities of service. Whatever discussion 
there was concerning beliefs was the by-product 
of the consideration of a practical measure, and it was 
of no effect upon the final action. In all such organizations 
the crucial question is the financial one. People are 
ready to gather together for talk; but when they make 
appropriations, one may be sure that they are to be reckoned 
with. The denominations constituting the Federal 
Council are assessed, and most of them have paid their 
assessments already. Moreover, out of these assessments 
the Executive Committee have appropriated funds for defraying 
the cost of the common work. 

R4773 : page 69 

"Under authority of this Executive Committee there 
has been a careful investigation conducted in co-operation 
with the chief Home Missionary Societies; and the 
resulting recommendations have been adopted by nearly 
five-sixths of the home missionaries west of the Mississippi 
river. Under the authority of the Committee a branch 
of the Council, the Commission on the Church and Social 
Service, has made an important report on the relation 
of the Church to industrial conditions in a center of steel 
manufacture. The Executive Committee of the Council 
at its meeting appropriated $5,000 for the use of the Commission 
on the Church and Social Service. 

"Compared with the great mass of people composing 
the constituency of this Council— about fifteen millions— 
the sum appropriated seems minute. But the size of the 
sum is of much less significance than the fact that thirty 



denominations, including virtually all the larger ones, 

have formed a Federation that is exercising the power 

of the purse. By disregarding differences in creed, polity, 

and traditions, and by federating with the object of 

engaging in a common work that costs, these thirty denominations 

have, we believe, followed the course that 

will lead to real Church Union."— The Outlook. 



OPPOSITION TO JEWS IN TURKEY 

Turkey has long had the honor of being one of the 
few countries in which Jews enjoyed all the rights and 
privileges of preferred citizens. The Turkish Revolution 
was supposed to mark an era of special favor to the 
Jews residing in Turkey. It now seems that this is 
not the case. We quote from the Hebrew Standard:— 

"Dr. Israel Auerbach states that the era of good feeling 
produced by the successful outcome of the revolutionary 
movement among the young Turks has vanished. 
Turkish officials were disposed to exhibit an 
anti-Semitic tendency toward the Jews in the last year. 
In place of efforts to make the Jews of Turkey an important 
element of the body politic, an attempt to repress 
them is noticeable. Unlimited immigration of Jews into 
the Ottoman empire is likely to prove a chimera; an immigration 
statute, providing for restrictions more or less 
severe, is in process of enactment." 



R4773 : page 69 

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

MR. EDISON has taken time from his scientific 

investigations, which have centered 

chiefly in electricity, to take a look into 

things metaphysical and spiritual. In a 

magazine article recently he discussed the 

immortality of the soul. He brought to his 

subject the reasoning and philosophical 

powers of a gifted brain accustomed to look 

more carefully than usual at the relationship 

and bearing of one principle upon another, 

one theory upon another, one fact upon another. 

Mr. Edison denies the immortality of the soul; he declares 

that he can see no facts in nature leading to any 

such conclusion. As a sample of his close reasoning on 

the subject we quote one of his statements, which he considers 

too self-evident to need proof. Indeed we doubt 

not that Mr. Edison's position would be that human immortality 

is not to be assumed, in view of the fact that we 

are a dying race. We presume that his position is that 

the proofs must be sought in the opposite quarter— that 



man must be assumed to be mortal and that any disputing 
this position must give the proofs of his immortality. We 
quote Mr. Edison:— 

"A man's intelligence is the aggregate intelligence of 
the innumerable cells which form him— just as the intelligence 
of a community is the aggregate intelligence of 
the men and women who inhabit it. If you cut your hand, 
it bleeds. Then you lose cells, and that is quite as if a 
city lost inhabitants through some tremendous accident." 

PHILOSOPHERS OF THE PAST HANDICAPPED BY DREAD 
OF THUMB-SCREWS, ETC. 

It will not do for us to claim that Mr. Edison is not 
a philosopher because he disagrees with philosophers of 
the past. We must admit that his attainments in science 
have all been results of the exercise of a naturally philosophical 
mind, which now for years has been trained in 
philosophical study, and that for this reason he has his 
splendid rank as a scientific man. On the contrary, we 
must admit that many of the philosophers of the past 
in their reasoning on theological questions were handicapped 
by dread of thumb-screws, racks and other tortures 
of the "Dark Ages," as well as by certain ignorance 
and superstitions, which, thank God, are gradually passing 
from the minds of all intelligent people. Indeed, we must 
remember that nearly all the philosophies as respects 
cosmogony and chemistry have proven themselves fallacious, 
and the latest researches of science astound us 
by threatening a revolution of the philosophies respecting 
astronomy. Perhaps philosophy has made progress in 
every other direction than along religious lines. And 
in this particular we note that the great majority of the 
learned have entirely abandoned the philosophies of their 
fathers and are known as "Higher Critics," "Evolutionists," 
etc. Only in the Catholic Church are the theological 
philosophies of a century ago given the slightest weight 
amongst the learned, although these theories, embodied 
in Protestant creeds, still hold a powerful sway in the 
minds of many Protestants who still like to think that what 
their fathers believed was infallible on every subject. 

Meeting Mr. Edison's statement, above quoted, with 
such candor as the gentleman's intellectual prowess seems 
to justify, we must admit that there is a great deal of 
force and logic in his deduction. Mr. Edison has Apostolic 
authority for considering man as made up of various 
members, each intimately related to the welfare and intelligence 
of the whole. St. Paul uses this argument in 
illustrating the true Church, "the Body of Christ." He 
likens one member to the hand; another to the foot; another 
to the eye, etc., and declares that each is necessary 
to the completeness and harmony of the whole and adds, 
So, also, is the Church. 

We will not here follow the Apostle's argument to the 
Church to note particularly how Jesus is the Head of the 
Church, how every member is united to each other member 



and interested in each other member. We will take 
the same example of the human figure. It seems to justify 
the statement that a man's intelligence is represented in 
the intelligence of all his members. Human skill is related 
to human intelligence. Consequently the man who 
has lost his hands has less intelligence, less opportunity 
and less skill than previously. If he lose also his feet, his 
intelligence decreases proportionately. If he lose his sight, 
his hearing and his sense of smell, each loss diminishes 
his intelligence. A whole village of people devoid of sight, 
hearing, taste, the sense of smell and of touch, would be 
a very unintelligent community. This we understand to 
be Mr. Edison's argument, expressed in different terms. 
Mr. Edison's terms seem appropriate if we take a sufficiently 
broad view of his language. To illustrate: If one 

R4774 : page 70 

lose a few drops of blood, the loss may make no perceptible 

impression upon his intelligence. But if he lose a 

quart of blood, his intelligence will be considerably diminished; 

faintness, stupor, may be expected. This 

would seem to prove Mr. Edison's statement correct, and 

that the loss of a few drops of blood is really a loss, to 

some extent, of vital power, and hence a loss of intelligence, 

but in so small a degree as not to be appreciable 

to one in health. 

PUZZLED OVER BELIEF THAT BLOW THAT WOULD KILL 
WOULD ENABLE MAN TO KNOW EVERYTHING 

In olden times we were told, and tried to believe it, 
that a dead man knew more than a living one. We were 
puzzled by the fact that a blow on the head might stun 
one to insensibility, in view of the fact that we were told 
that a heavier blow, that would kill the man, would enable 
him to know everything in an instant. The philosophy 
(?) of this was handed to us thus: The soul is the intelligent 
being, of which nobody knows very much. It is 
imprisoned in our mortal bodies and can operate in them 
only unsatisfactorily. The moment of death is the moment 
of release to the soul, which then can think and reason 
more soundly than when obliged to use the brain. 

Many of us tried in childhood years to believe such 
unphilosophical philosophy. We asked for proofs and 
were told that it was the voice of the Church's philosophers, 
and if we would doubt it we would be damned to 
eternal misery. Believing this, and not willing to be 
doomed to eternal misery, many of us restrained ourselves 
and that portion of our brain became well-nigh 
atrophied. 

Even the religious found it difficult to believe in so immaterial 
a soul and inquired, Why, then, a resurrection 
of the dead? Will the resurrection signify another real 
imprisonment of the soul and a decrease of intelligence, 
as this philosophy (?) would seem to imply? Some gave 



up the quest for knowledge in despair and sought for 
something more intelligent outside of all the creeds and 
philosophies of "science falsely so-called." Others of us 
have held to the Word of God and sought to see its 
philosophy, its teachings, and to harmonize them. 

We are glad to belong to this growing class of Bible 
students who declare, Let God and his Word be true, 
though it disprove many of the theories we once believed 
and almost worshipped. (Rom. 3:4.) We want the 
Truth! 

MR. EDISON AND THE BIBLE 

We are not personally acquainted with Mr. Edison, 
nor with his religious views, but we believe that his 
philosophical mind is turning quite into line with the 
teachings of the Bible respecting man and his future. We 
do not say that he has attained the Bible viewpoint, but 
merely that he has taken a good step in that direction. 
Without discounting good features contained in our own 
creeds, we must admit that many of them are thoroughly 
illogical and unscriptural. For instance, the theory that 
a human soul is an invisible entity specially created by 
God and full of Divine intelligence and that this intelligent 
soul is introduced into the new-born child and is the 
real child— this is no longer reasonable nor logical to us. 

We wonder that our forefathers of the darker period, 
in their wonderful philosophies, did not see the absurdity 
of such a position. If it were true, would it not make the 
Almighty Creator a co-laborer with fornicators and adulterers 
in the bringing into the world of illegitimate children? 
Still worse, does not this theory charge to the 
Almighty God of Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power the 
creation of idiots and mental imbeciles and moral degenerates? 
If the human parents merely bring human 
bodies into existence as receptacles for souls which God 
individually and specifically creates in each instance, then 
not the parents, but the Almighty is responsible for all 
the degeneracy we see in the world, for it is the soul that 
is responsible, as all must admit. 

THE FIRST MAN, OF THE EARTH 

The center of the mistake on this subject, handed to 
us from the philosophers of the "Dark Ages," is the assumption 
that the real man is the spirit being, the soul. 
St. Paul assures us to the contrary of this, saying, "The 
first man was of the earth, earthy." The Lord through 
the Prophet David declares the same truth, saying, "What 
is man that thou art mindful of him?. ..Thou hast 
made him a little lower than the angels." (Psa. 8:4,5.) 
The angels are the lowest in rank on the spirit plane, and 
man, although in God's image when perfect, was still 
lower than the angels, in that he was not a spirit being, 
but a human, an earthly being— "of the earth, earthy." 

The Scriptural proposition is not that God made a body 



for man out of the dust of the earth and put a spirit man 
into that body, but that God made man of the dust of the 
earth, breathed into his nostrils the breath of life (an 
animal life) and "man became a living soul"— an animal 
or earthly soul. In other words, the entire Adam became 
a living soul— a living being. That one man was subsequently 
made twain for the very purpose of propagating 
living souls in his own likeness. And thus for six thousand 
years the Divine command has been in process of 
fulfillment— "Multiply and fill the earth." God created 
but the one soul originally, divided it, and then, by 
natural processes, generation after generation of human 
souls have been born. Man is an earthly soul or earthly 
animal, as are all the earthly creatures, only that his is a 
higher nature— an earthly image of his Creator, who is a 
Spirit Being. 

From this standpoint how clearly we can discern the 
mistakes of the philosophies of the past and the true 
philosophy revealed to us only in the Bible, although discerning 
penetrating, philosophical minds like that of Mr. 
Edison may reach the same truth from the study of the 
great Book of Nature. 

From this standpoint we see that the entire man is a 
living soul— that is to say, a sentient being. The formation 
of Adam was very important, just as today, under 
the same Divine regulations, the shape of the brain has 
to do with the character of the man— gentle or vicious, 
criminal or conscientious, benevolent or stingy, reverential 
or otherwise. As the Bible declares: "As a man 
thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) And a 
man's thoughts shape themselves according to the structure 
of his brain. Thus phrenology is a widely-recognized 
science. Not only so, but physiology tells us that 
the various portions of the human body are so intimately 
related to the brain that the quality of the mind can be 
discerned in the general features, not only in the shape 
of the nose, the curl of the lip, the glance of the eye, but 
also in the grasp of the hand and its general shape, even 
to the particularity of a finger print. 

All these outward signs indicate the character of the 
soul, being— all are identified with it. In a word, a soul 
is a person. The various districts of the brain representing 
the various sentiments and passions of the individual, 
are like so many members, each having its own personality. 
Amongst these various members of the human 
mind some are stronger, some weaker, and the stronger 
ones dominate. There are exceptions, of course, to this 
rule in what we sometimes term conversion. Conversion 

R4774 : page 71 

means the establishing of a new rule or order in the individual 
life. Note the method of its accomplishment:— 

(1) Certain matters are brought to the attention of 
the person or soul which seem to indicate a wiser course 
than the one pursued in the past. The various districts 



of the brain, like so many members of a council, consider 
the proposition, weigh its pros and cons, advantages and 
disadvantages, and then reach a decision. That decision 
we call will. Sometimes there is desperate struggle in the 
brain, the various members of the council of thought 
battling and struggling against each other. The will may 
be strong or may be weak, just as a party in Congress 
may be strong or weak while in power. But the will rules 
with more or less vacillation or strength, according to the 
number and power of the members supporting it. 
Thus we have found some possessed of strong characters; 
others who are weak, vacillating— "double-minded." 

THE WILL REPRESENTS THE SOUL, THE PERSON, 
THE EGO 

Some of the qualities of the mind may be styled the 
"flesh"— this term represents the lower and more animal 
qualities of the person, the soul. To the contrary of these 
are the higher organs of the mind— reverence, spirituality, 
conscientiousness, sublimity, ideality, etc., and these are 
called the heart, because they include the affections and 
qualities of the mind to which God appeals, saying, "My 
son, give me thine heart." 

Thus seen, we are daily making soul-character, influenced 
by our environment and the lessons and experiences 
which come to us through our senses. The character develops 
either upward or downward— toward God or toward 
sin. But there is no such thing as total depravity, 
except in idiocy, for, by Divine providence, some features 
of the original Divine likeness in which father Adam was 
created still persist in all of his children who have reason. 
The effort of all reformers is to appeal to the mind, 
either through fear or love or selfishness, to effect an organization 
of the mental qualities favoring the things of 
righteousness and opposed to sin. The permanent conversion 
which produces the saintly character is the appeal 
of love— "The love of Christ constraineth us." The love 
of the Father is potent in the hearts of all who receive 
it. It can effect changes in conduct, in language and in 
thought, which can be accomplished by nothing else. 

A METHODIST BISHOP'S DEFINITION OF SOUL 

A Methodist Bishop is credited with the following 
definition of a soul: "It is without interior or exterior, 
without body, shape or parts, and you could put a million 
of them into a nut-shell." Mr. Edison does not believe 
in such a soul. In repudiating such a view he places 

R4775 : page 71 

himself in accord with the Divine teachings. 

The word immortality is rarely used in its strict, academic 
sense, as signifying deathlessness or that which is 
proof against death— inherency of life, requiring no sustenance. 



Immortality in this sense of the word is, of 
course, a quality which belongs to God alone. As the 
Scriptures declare of him, "He alone hath immortality, 
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, 
whom no man hath seen nor can see." Immortality in 
this sense of the word, possessed by the Heavenly Father 
and his only begotten Son, the world's Redeemer, is 
promised as a special reward (not possessed by angels or 
any other creature) to the elect, saintly few, called, chosen 
and faithful during this Gospel Age. These are styled 
the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and the promise to them is 
that they shall receive this great reward of glory, honor 
and immortality when the Redeemer shall appear in his 
glory in the end of this Age to grant to them a share in 
the First or Chief Resurrection from the dead. With 
this attainment of immortality they are promised also new 
bodies, no longer flesh, but spirit, no longer in the likeness 
of the first man— "As they bore the image of the 
earthly, they shall also bear the image of the heavenly." 
-I Cor. 15:49. 

ARE ALL MEN IMMORTAL? 

Mr. Edison is in full agreement with the Bible in his 
conclusion that human soul or personality is always 
identified with an organism or body. We must also agree 
with the Bible and with Mr. Edison that all souls die. 
The Bible declares, "The wages of sin is death," and 
again, "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." The Bible 
explains that Adam, as a living soul, might have continued 
his existence perpetually had he not transgressed 
the Divine Law and that the transgression brought to him 
the penalty of death. Mr. Edison agrees with this conclusion 
without, perhaps, admitting original sin or anything 
else connected with the Scriptures. 

Where, then, is human immortality? We answer 
that there is no human immortality, in the same sense 
that there is a Divine immortality— in the sense that God 
is death-proof. He alone has immortality in that sense. 
When we speak of immortality in respect to mankind, 
we use the word, not in an academic sense, but in a relative 
way. We mean that death does not end all for 
Adam and his children— that a future life is arranged for 
them in Divine providence— when, where and how the 
Bible clearly tells. 

We wish that Mr. Edison and many thinkers who 
have no confidence in the Bible might see the beauties 
and harmonies of its presentations. The Bible declares 
that the eternal life lost by father Adam has been redeemed 
for him by the death of Jesus Christ, "the Just for 
the unjust." It tells us further that as all of Adam's race 
share by heredity in his death penalty, so they all shall 
be permitted to share in his recovery from the power 
of the tomb, from sin and death. Thus the Scriptures declare, 
As by a man comes death, by a man also comes 
the resurrection of the dead; for as all in Adam die, even 



so shall all in Christ be made alive, every man in his own 
order or company.— I Cor. 15:21-23. 

The great Apostle Paul declares that there shall be a 
"resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust." 
The Hebrew Prophet declares, "Many that sleep 
in the dust of the earth shall awake." The awakening 
time will be the morning, as the present is the night-time 
of sin and darkness. The glorious morning nears, as the 
night of sorrow and tears passes. There will be a glorious 
dawn to that great day of a thousand years, whose light 
is already fore-gleamed in the wonderful inventions of 
our time, in which Mr. Edison has been used of the Almighty 
to assist. Shortly the Sun of Righteousness shall 
shine forth, scattering the darkness, ignorance, superstition, 
sin, death. Shortly the reign of the Divine righteousness 
and love, co-ordinated, will bring blessings to our 
race, now resting under the sentence or curse of death. 
Shortly all will have the opportunity of recovery from 
the fallen condition of weakness and degradation, being 
uplifted or resurrected gradually to the full perfection of 
human nature, earthly nature, in the image and likeness 
of the Creator, in the midst of a world-wide Paradise. 

CARDINAL GIBBONS' WORDS AGREE TO THIS 

Cardinal Gibbons gave an interview to a reporter of 
the Columbian Magazine in answer to Philosopher Edison. 
Noting with interest the Cardinal's defense of the 

R4775 : page 72 

doctrine of immortality, we have clipped and below produce 
the essence, the kernel, of his argument on the subject 
as based upon the Scriptures. We are pleased to 
see that, like ourself, the Cardinal finds the Scriptural 
proof of a future life, not in the philosophies of a darker 
past, but in the resurrection promise of the holy Scriptures, 
as follows:— 

"Christ brings to humanity the certainty of eternal 
life. He proved it by his own resurrection; and if anyone 
thinks the evidence for Christ's resurrection is weak, 
I ask him to study and think deeply over the 

fifteenth chapter of First Corinthians. No sane scholar, remember, 
denies that we have the testimony of St. Paul himself; 
nor that St. Paul is honestly setting down the testimony 
of those who claim to have seen our Lord after death. If 
so many sane men, Apostles and disciples of Christ, are 
mistaken, if they cannot believe the testimony of their 
own eyes, if such a delusion can keep so firm a hold on 
so many different characters for so many years and become 
the basis of all their beliefs and the transforming 
power of their lives, then no human testimony is of any 
value; then let us close our courts of justice, for no case is 
proven by so many trustworthy witnesses. No!" the Cardinal 
said, in the tone of deepest conviction, "Christ is 
risen; and his resurrection is the plainest evidence of 



man's immortality." 



R4775 : page 72 

THE KINGDOM OF GOD IN SAD CONDITION 

BISHOP HUGHES (Methodist), of California, 

recently spoke in Boston. He complimented 

the Catholic Church and berated 

his own denomination and, incidentally, 

called attention to the sad state of God's 

Kingdom. In its report of the address 

the Boston Transcript says: "Praise for the 

Roman Catholic Church and what it does 

for its children, was given by Bishop Edwin 

H. Hughes, of California, before a 

large congregation at the Bromfield Street Methodist 

Church last evening at the final session of the Sunday 

School Institute. Bishop Hughes said:— 

'"You talk about the wonderful hold the Roman Catholic 
Church has upon its people. You ask, how does it 
do it? I will tell you how it does it. They instruct their 
children. It is borne in upon the consciousness of every 
child in every good Roman Catholic home, as soon as it 
comes to any sort of understanding, that the Church is 
the instrument of his salvation, and he is held right to 
that idea. They establish their catechetical classes, they 
run their parochial schools with a religious purpose, and 
they lay an enormous emphasis upon taking care of their 
children. 

'"I say to you, if the Roman Catholic Church is willing 
to pay that price for holding its own, and the Methodist 
Episcopal Church is not willing to pay that price 
for holding its own— then I say the Roman Catholic 
Church deserves to be the coming Church. 

"The Protestant Church that does not see that its 
future is inevitably bound up with the religious instruction 
is just as certainly doomed to failure as I am standing 
here tonight. If the members of the Roman Catholic 
Church are more willing, under the instructions of their 
priests, to obey the laws of God with reference to the 
children of the Church than our people are, under our instruction, 
then I say that the Roman Catholic Church is 
entitled to the credit of the whole business. 
'"When God Almighty puts into the arms of any 
earthly parents a new life, then I say that God Almighty 
pays those parents the biggest compliment that he can 
possibly pay. That child is God's child ere he is our child, 
and he is to be held as a member of the Kingdom of God. 
We of the Methodist Church hold that all children, by 
virtue of the unconditional benefits of the atonement, are 
members of the Kingdom of God. If this is so, then the 
biggest task we have is to keep them members of that 
Kingdom. I believe the greatest church on earth is the 



Christian home; the finest sanctuary to be found anywhere 
is the Christian home.'" 

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL EFFECT 

The Bishop used the above words in connection with 
an address on Sunday School Work. His words endorse 
our presentations of the subject. In STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. VI., we call attention to the fact that 
Sunday Schools are an innovation little more than one 
century old. We point out that they are the expression 
of human wisdom merely— that neither to the Jews nor 
to Christians did God give directions respecting Sunday 
School organizations. The Divine arrangement is that 
each family should complete a unit and that the parents 
should be the instructors of the children in religious 
things. In disregarding this Divine arrangement two 
evils have ensued:— 

(1) The parents have felt relieved of the responsibility 
of teaching their children and thus have lost a 

great blessing and source of personal instruction. 

R4776 : page 72 

(2) The children have been taught to look elsewhere 
for the highest information, and correspondingly 

to disrespect their parents as unqualified to be their instructors. 
As a result, disrespect and disobedience to 
parents have increased and parental interest in and control 
over their children have diminished. 

We urge upon all parents everywhere within the range 
of our influence to weigh the responsibility resting upon 
them in respect to their children. Whoever brings into 
the world a child, should feel the responsibility toward 
it for food and raiment and reasonable comfort, and particularly 
for moral and religious instruction. Regardless 
of what others do or do not, all of the Lord's consecrated 
people should be faithful to this great trust. No service 
to the Lord could possibly be acceptable as a sacrifice if it 
meant the neglect of duty to one's children. 

ATONEMENT AND THE KINGDOM 

We are glad to note that Bishop Hughes recognizes 
the unconditional benefits of the Atonement in respect to 
all children. His reference to the Kingdom of God, however, 
clearly shows that his understanding respecting it 
is quite vague. There are at this moment at least eight 
hundred millions of children under ten years of age. If 
these all be members of the Kingdom of God, our Savior 
was quite in error when he declared: "Fear not, little 
flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." Eight hundred millions could hardly be called 
a little flock. And besides, Jesus said the Kingdom had 
not yet been given. On the contrary, did he not teach us 
to pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth 



as it is done in Heaven"? 

We ask the Bishop, and as many as this article shall 
reach, to consider the improbability of the Bishop's view 
of matters being true— the incorrectness of the Methodist 
view. If earthly parents have a responsibility for 
their children, how about the heavenly Creator or Parent, 
"In whom all live and move and have their being?" 
Has God no responsibility for all the children born into 
the world? Would he neglect his duty, if earthly parents 

R4776 : page 73 

did neglect theirs? Are the thousands of millions of 
heathendom and Christendom going to a burning hell because 
of neglect of their education by the great Life-Giver 
or Father? 

Let us reason a little on the Bishop's statement of 
Methodist views. If Christ made an atonement for the 
sins of all mankind, of what purpose or value has it been 
as yet to any but the handful, the "little flock," whom our 
Lord declares will receive the Kingdom of God by and 
by— the Kingdom prayed for? 

We look all about us for God's Kingdom quite in vain. 
The heathen three-fourths of humanity are surely not 
God's Kingdom, nor any credit to any Kingdom or government. 
The one-fourth of humanity known as Christendom 
(Christ's Kingdom) does not appear to be the 
genuine article. It is full of jarring creeds, selfish antagonisms, 
bitterness, envy, hatred, strife, "works of the 
flesh and of the Devil." Its most civilized nations are 
spending thousands of millions of dollars on war preparations 
—and this after more than eighteen hundred 
years of the reign of Messiah, as Bishop Hughes and the 
Methodist friends think. 

ALL A GREAT MISTAKE 

Our Methodist friends and many others have, according 
to the Bible, made a great mistake in their theology 
on this point. God's Kingdom is not here. It has not 
yet come. We are still, in the language of the Apostle, 
"waiting for the Kingdom of God's dear Son." The 
promise is still more sure that the faithful, saintly overcomers 
of this Gospel Age will sit with Messiah in his 
Throne of spirit control during his Messianic Kingdom. 
We are still waiting for it. Neither the heathen children 
nor the heathen parents, nor the Christian children, nor 
the Christian parents are yet in the Kingdom which has 
not yet come. 

We are glad that the Bishop sees that the Atonement 
of Christ is universal— for all mankind. We ask him to 
look again at the subject and to note that in the present 
Age, during the past eighteen centuries, God has been 
merely selecting the saintly followers of Jesus to constitute 
with him the Kingdom or ruling class. These are 
the little children, or humble children of God. "Beloved, 



now are we the sons (children) of God, and it doth not 
yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he 
appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him as 
he is." 

God has not only arranged that the Atonement work 
of the Savior shall be for the sins of the whole world, but 
he has also provided that there shall be a time and an 
opportunity in which the Redeemer will make his atonement 
work available to all mankind— heathen and Christian, 
old and young. To them he will give the opportunity 
of Restitution to all that was lost in Adam and 
provided for at Calvary. This will be at the Second 
Coming of Christ, as St. Peter explains in Acts 3:19-23. 

Then Messiah will set up, establish, his Kingdom— a 
thousand years' reign of righteousness. Satan will then 
be bound and the darkness which belongs to his reign of 
sin and death will give place to the glorious light of the 
knowledge of God. Under those favorable conditions humanity 
will not have an opportunity of becoming kings 
and priests unto God, members of the "little flock"; but 
they will all have the opportunity of becoming identified 
with the Kingdom, not as kings, but as subjects. They 
will all have the opportunity of attaining everlasting life 
as human beings in this world, which will then gradually 
be transformed— Paradise regained. Meantime the unwilling, 
rebellious, disobedient, as St. Peter says, will be 
"destroyed from amongst the people"— Second Death. 

RESPONSIBILITY OF CHRISTIAN PARENTS 

The fact that God has not neglected his responsibilities, 
but is working out his glorious purposes to fulfil 
them, must not make Christian parents negligent. On 
the contrary, the example should make them all the 
more careful by showing them a parent's obligations. 
Some of the children may so respond as to become eligible 
to a share in the Kingdom proper, as members of 
the Royal Priesthood, who shall sit upon the Throne; but 
to the others, parents also have a duty. Such should be 
taught, not that all transgressions will be punished alike, 
in eternal torment, but that every transgression, great 
and small, will receive eventually a just recompense of 
reward. They should be taught that whatsoever 
is sown will be reaped, and that advancements under the 
blessings of the Kingdom may be promoted or retarded 
by their present conduct, by obedience or disobedience 
to the Divine law. Such rational teaching will appeal 
much more quickly to the children than will any amount 
of falsification and misrepresentation concerning eternal 
torment, fire, etc., in which no reasonable person longer 
believes, and which came not from the Bible, but from 
the "Dark Ages." 



R4776 : page 73 



MURDERS HER GRANDCHILDREN 

EASTER SUNDAY'S LESSON 

--APRIL 16.-2 KINGS 11:1-20.— 

"Blessed are they that keep his testimony, and 
that seek him with the whole heart."— Psalm 119:2. 

JEZEBEL'S daughter, Athaliah, on the death 

of her husband, became Queen Dowager of 

the Kingdom of Judah, her son Ahaziah 

becoming King. In Oriental lands the 

King's mother is still the highest authority 

in the Kingdom, as, for instance, in China. 

This was the custom with the Jews. As 

Queen Dowager Athaliah had exercised a 

powerful and baneful influence against the 

true God and his worship and in favor of 

Baal worship. Here is not the only instance in which 

the intermarriage of the kings of Israel with the daughters 

of foreign kingdoms brought great injury. Her 

mother Jezebel was another notable illustration. And we 

remember that it was Solomon's foreign wives who ensnared 

him. 

In line with all this we remember that the Divine 
command to all Jews was that they should not intermarry 
with other nationalities. Every deviation from the Divine 
Law seems to have brought with it serious penalties. 
This is strictly in harmony with God's arrangement with 
that one nation alone, that they should be his people in 
a peculiar sense, that other nations were not his people 
and that obedience to his laws would bring them blessings 
and disobedience bring them adversities. That Law 
is still upon the Jews, but it is not upon others. 

A proper recognition of the antitype, or spiritual significance 
of that item of Jewish Law, should be observed 
by all; it is applicable to Christians, who constitute, from 
the Divine standpoint, "a holy nation, a peculiar people." 
Christians are not to be unequally yoked with unbelievers. 
Christians are to come out from the world and be 

R4777 : page 74 

separate. This, however, does not apply to nominal 
Christians, but only to the spirit-begotten class, who have 
made a full consecration of themselves to the Lord. 
These are counselled to marry "only in the Lord"— only 
the consecrated. Those who disregard this Divine injunction 
endanger their own spiritual development, as 
well as their own happiness and the happiness of the 
worldly person with whom they become yoked. 

MURDERING FOR POWER 



When King Ahaziah was slain by Jehu, his mother, 
the Queen Dowager, realized instantly that this meant 
her loss of rank and power— the power and honor and 
riches which her selfish, proud heart so loved. She realized 
that the moment her grandson ascended the throne 
she must vacate her position in favor of her daughter-in-law. 
Her selfish, proud heart resolved that on no 
account should this be. Rather, she would be a murderess. 
Forthwith she caused her grandchildren to be 
slain, except one, an infant, who was hidden by his aunt 
in a room used for the storage of sleeping mats, and, in 
our lesson, styled a bed-chamber. Subsequently, he was 
nursed until his seventh year, in one of the rooms connected 
with the old temple, which was in disuse during 
Queen Athaliah's reign, as she favored and upheld the 
worship of Baal. 

One lesson for us here is the power of pride. We 
may well hope that many could not be influenced to become 
murderers, even with such inducements. But not 
many of us will ever have such a temptation either to 
grasp a throne or to retain hold on one already possessed. 
Other illustrations of the power of pride leading to 
murder, in the interest of a throne, are mentioned in 
history. For instance, King Herod's murder of all the 
infants of Bethlehem of two years and under was to 
preserve to himself and his heirs the throne of Israel. 
History tells us of how Laodice poisoned her six sons, 
one by one, that she might be Empress of Constantinople. 
Another mother named Irene, which name signifies peace, 
gouged out the eyes of her own son that he might be 
incapable of ruling the Empire over which she sought to 
reign alone. 

No wonder the Bible declares that the heart of man 
in his fallen condition is deceitful above all things and 
desperately wicked! No wonder the Bible tells us that 
the blessing of the New Covenant which God will establish 
with the world through Israel, during Messiah's 
reign, will operate to the taking away of the stoniness of 
the heart and to the return to mankind of a heart of flesh 
—a proper human sympathy such as the perfect man had 
when he was created in the image and likeness of God! 
How glad we are that Messiah's Kingdom will not merely 
restrain sin and sinners, but, by restitution processes, 
take away the stoniness of heart and bring as many as 
are willing of mankind back to tender-heartedness and 
into harmony with the Divine Law of Love for God and 
for the neighbor! 

Since we are not kings and queens and have not their 
temptations, let us note that the same principle of hard-heartedness 
operates in the business world, in the social 
world and in the family. In the business world, it 
operates to the destruction of a rival concern. In the 
social world, it cuts rivals, prompts to misrepresentation, 
slander, etc. In the home, as between parents and children, 
brothers and sisters, it frequently means injustice. 
The correction for all this is a love of righteousness 



which will lead each to love and to obey the Golden 
Rule and, as nearly as possible, to comply with the Divine 
will, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart and all thy mind and all thy being and all thy 
strength, and thy neighbor as thyself." 

CROWNING THE BOY KING 

The young King was named Joash. He was kept in 
hiding six years and, in his seventh year, was crowned. 
Jehoiada, the High Priest, whose daughter had rescued 
Joash, superintended the inauguration ceremonies. With 
great wisdom he called together the chiefs of the nation 
at a festival time, when their coming would not be 
thought strange. Likewise the guards were so disposed 
as to give every protection to the young King and leave 
the palace without protection. The ceremony passed off 
successfully. The Queen Dowager, hearing the shouts, 
"Long live the King!" came forth from the palace to the 
temple to investigate and, realizing the situation, cried, 
"Treason, treason!" 

So it is that injustice sometimes becomes intrenched 
and fortified in human minds so that an attempt to establish 
righteousness is considered treason, rebellion, outrage. 
The lesson to all the Lord's consecrated children 
is, "Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the 
issues of life."— Pro v. 4:23. 

When the crown was put upon the young King's head, 
on top of it was laid the Testimony, the parchment scroll 
of the ten commandments. Thus was indicated that the 
Divine Law was superior to the crown. Such should be 
the estimation of the matter in every well-balanced mind. 
Divine Law comes first; human laws second. And human 
laws are usually up to as high standards as the people 
who make them are worthy. 

Judah must have been considerably sunken in the 
qualities of patriotism and manhood to allow the Dowager 
Queen to usurp the throne by murder for six years. 
Similarly states and cities, permitting and recognizing the 
domination of frauds and combines against the public interests, 
are usually getting as good treatment as they deserve. 
It is the heart, the intellect, the mind that is 
to be educated up to the higher standards— then those 
high standards will be attained by the body politic. 



R4778 : page 74 

1911 -MEMORIAL SUPPER- 1911 

THE JEWISH PASSOVER, which lasts for 
a week, begins this year on Thursday, 
April 13, which, in Jewish reckoning, is 
the 15th of the first month. In Jewish 
reckoning a day begins to count in the 



evening at 6 o'clock, consequently the 15th 

begins Wednesday night at 6 o'clock. 

Wednesday, April 12, would be the 14th 

day of the first month, and it, in turn, begins 

at 6 p.m. Tuesday, April 11, which is 

thus the anniversary of the first celebration of the Lord's 

Supper. 

It is the custom of WATCH TOWER readers all over the 
world to celebrate our Redeemer's death on its anniversary. 
We trust that the celebration this year will be 
a very general one. The significance of the Memorial is 
described in our issue of February 1 and also in SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, Series VI. 

On the evening of April 1 1 at 7:30 the New York 
City Church will assemble in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
17 Hicks street, for the celebration of the Memorial. All 
Christians in fellowship of heart with the Lord are cordially 
invited to be present. We do not, however, specially 
invite or urge brethren from other congregations meeting 

R4778 : page 75 

similarly for this celebration on the same evening. We 
believe the instructions of the Lord's Word on the subject 
imply that each congregation or family of the 
Lord's children should meet together for this celebration. 

There will be a baptism service on the Sunday preceding 
the Memorial— April 9— in the Brooklyn Tabernacle 
at 3 p.m. The subject of baptism is also discussed in 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume VI. All thinking of participation 
in this symbol are requested to make a very 
thorough study of the subject, that they may act with 
proper intelligence. 

We recommend that all gatherings of Bible students, 
if possible, provide an opportunity for immersion preceding 
the Memorial. The Memorial celebration should be 
esteemed a great privilege. If any one is out of heart 
fellowship with the Lord, his first work should be to get 
right with him. And the Lord directs that any coming 
to his altar, should, as far as possible, before coming, get 
into heart harmony with all of the "household of faith." 
This should, therefore, be a time of heart searching and 
purifying. This, in the Jewish Passover type, was prefigured 
by the search made for leaven of every description 
—leaven being a symbol of corruption, sin, contrariness 
to purity, righteousness and love. 

Whoever finds himself out of harmony with the Lord 
at this season and avails himself of the privileges above 
suggested and seeks a return to Divine favor will surely 
experience a great blessing. And whoever passes by the 
opportunity will lose a blessing which none can afford 
to lose. A realization of our own imperfections at such 
time must not discourage us or make us faint. Rather we 
should remember God's provision for our reconciliation 
through our great Advocate, whose death the Memorial 
celebrates. Let us also remember our Covenant of sacrifice, 



by which we become members of the Body of Christ. 
It may not be amiss that we remind our readers that 
for some reason which we cannot explain it has for years 
appeared to us that Satan is granted special power to 
tempt the Lord's consecrated people at this Passover 
season, as he had special power at this season when our 
Lord was crucified. Then Judas entirely succumbed. St. 
Peter stumbled badly, and all of the Apostles temporarily 
forsook the Master and fled and were in deep perplexity 
until Pentecost. The Master's advice then is good still, 
"Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation." 



R4777 : page 75 

TOO MUCH MONEY-FURTHER OFFERINGS REFUSED 

FREE-WILL OFFERINGS ONLY 

A LESSON FROM THE FAR PAST ON GIVING FOR RELIGIOUS 
PURPOSES -TREASURERS WITHOUT BONDSMEN 

-APRIL 23.-2 KINGS 12:1-16.- 

"Then the people rejoiced for they 
offered willingly."— 1 Chron. 29:9. 

SIXTEEN years passed after the incidents of 

our previous study and found King Joash 

in his twenty-third year. Already he had 

made suggestions to the priests respecting 

the repairs of the temple, which was considerably 

dilapidated, because the people 

were still half-hearted in the worship of 

Jehovah. The influence of the idolatry of 

surrounding nations was still upon them. 

Some of them still burned incense upon the 

altars of Baal. 

PRIESTS POOR BUSINESS MEN 

King Joash found that allowing the priests to collect 
the money wherewith to repair the temple showed no 
results. Not every good-hearted man has executive ability. 
The record does not tell that the priests were dishonest 
in the use of the money collected for their affairs. 
Nor does it say that they spent the money unwisely. 
Possibly the people did not have confidence in the priests 
and did not give so freely on that account. However, the 
King noted the fact that the temple continued to be 
dilapidated and called for the priests and said to them, 
Why repair ye not the breaches of the temple? The 
answer of the priests is not given, but the King's mandate 
was, "Now, therefore, take no more money from your 
acquaintances." The King passed over the matter as 



lightly and courteously as possible, without charging the 
priests with embezzlement or neglect. 

A new procedure was to have a specially prepared 
money-chest inside the temple court, convenient to the 
worshipers who passed in and out, and under the care 
of the priest, who served as doorkeeper. This method 
proved successful. The money speedily accumulated. 
Ere long there was a sufficiency to make the repairs and 
more. Further donations for this purpose were refused. 
The temple was put into good order and a general blessing 
followed the experience. 

There is a lesson in this matter for us. The people 
like to see results. (1) They want to know that monies 
that are donated for benevolent purposes are not all absorbed 
for office expenses. (2) Voluntary offerings have 
the approval of both God and men, rather than offerings 
that are importuned, coaxed, begged, wheedled from 
saints and sinners. Everybody who gives to the Lord's 
cause is advantaged thereby; he not only forwards a 
benevolent cause, but cultivates generosity in his own 
heart. Our Lord said, "It is more blessed to give than to 
receive"— where the giving is willing and voluntary. 

Church begging is undoubtedly doing great harm. 
The remark has been made that the chief item of religion 
in some churches is begging for money— private solicitation, 
and also public solicitation, by the passing around of 
the collection box. Church fairs, church suppers, grab-bags, 
etc., are still more reprehensible than the collection 
box and private solicitation. Some one has called such 
efforts the "milking of the goats." The Lord's people 
are supposed to be sheep; the world's people, goats. 

The proper thought seems to be what the Scriptures 
inculcate, namely, that each Christian should give according 
to his ability and interest in the work and that non-worshipers 
should not be expected to give nor requested 
so to do. But who does not know that a large proportion 
of the money collected for church purposes is unwillingly 
given by people who not only are not directly interested 

R4778 : page 75 

in the projects, but sometimes even opposed thereto! 
Thus Protestant business men often give to Catholic 
charities, rather than offend good customers. Likewise 
Catholic business men donate to Protestant enterprises 
with which they have no sympathy. 

It is a good time to return to the Gospel admonition, 
Let each one of you lay by in reserve on the first day 
of the week according as God has prospered you— for 
religious and charitable objects. Only such voluntary 
giving has any merit whatever in the sight of God or in 
the sight of good men. Only such will receive the Divine 
blessing upon it, whether it be the widow's mite or the 
rich man's munificence. 

R4778 : page 76 



BREAKS IN THE TEMPLE WALL 

Viewing the spiritual temple we perceive that, outwardly, 
as represented by the magnificent churches of 
metropolitan cities, nothing more could be desired than 
what is now enjoyed. Describing the church conditions 
of our day, the Scriptures portray our condition under 
the figure of the Laodicean Church, thus: "I know thy 
works, that thou art neither cold nor hot; I would thou 
wert hot or cold. So, then, because thou art lukewarm, 
and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my 
mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich and increased 
with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not 
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and 
blind, and naked, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried 
in the fire, that thou mayest be rich, and white raiment, 
that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy 
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with 
eyesalve, that thou mayest see."— Rev. 3:15-18. 

It is from the spiritual standpoint, therefore, that the 
temple of today needs to have repairs. Outwardly, the 
church is rich; spiritually, she is poor. The majority of 
her educated, including ministers, have abandoned all 
faith in the Bible as the Word of God. Yet they are not 
known as infidels, but by the less harsh term, "Higher 
Critics," "Evolutionists." With many the faith in a personal 
God even, is shaking and they incline to wonder if, 
somehow or other, we have not an unintelligent God- 
nature— and mankind and all other intelligencies merely 
evolutionary products. The cause and foundation of this 
disastrous condition is not far off. 

The absurdities of the creeds formulated during the 
"Dark Ages" are so great that intelligent people can no 
longer accept them. We have made the mistake of supposing 
that these absurdities are based upon the Scriptures 
and well supported thereby. The Truth is that our 
creeds of the past not only contradict each other, but also 
contradict the Bible. To learn this, to believe it, signifies 
a return to Bible study with the colored spectacles 
of our fathers removed and with our hearts uplifted to 
God that he may give us the light promised to his faithful 
people in the end of this Age, of which we read that 
we should "give heed to the sure word of prophecy as 
to a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn and 
the day star arise."— 2 Pet. 1:19. 

THE DUTY OF THE HOUR 

Noting the spiritual impairment of the House of God, 
the Church, all who love the Lord and who worship him 
should do their part, make their contribution, toward the 
improvement of these spiritual conditions. It is not to be 
left wholly in the hands of the clerical or priestly class. 
The people in general are to appreciate the situation and 
each delight to do his part in the rebuilding of the 



spiritual walls of Zion. Those spiritual walls consist of 
"the faith once delivered to the saints." 

Each Christian should ask himself, What am I doing 
toward these repairs? How am I manifesting to the Lord 
my zeal for Truth and righteousness and my hatred of sin 
and untruth? And as an answer to this question each 
should redouble his efforts to understand the Truth and 
to help others to an understanding of it, whatever may 
be the cost to the creeds and systems of the "Dark Ages." 



R4778 : page 76 
SOME CALCULATIONS ON THE JUBILEE CYCLES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Your calculation of the Jubilee Cycles (as published 
in September issue of Overland Monthly, 1910) beginning 
the count from the time Israel entered the land of 
Canaan, is so remarkably simple that I am surprised it 
did not come to my attention sooner; as it is with this 
added new viewpoint that certain questions which have 
somewhat puzzled me before have now been thoroughly 
cleared up in my mind, I am noting them for your consideration. 
They are as follows: 

1 . Why did not Israel celebrate 20 instead of only 
19 Jubilees in the land before the great Cycle of 50 
Jubilees began their count, so that the entire 70 Jubilees 
would be complete? 

2. Why did the Jews remain in their land 19 years 
after the celebration of their last typical Jubilee? Why 
did they not immediately go into captivity? 

3. Did the 70 years of desolation typify anything? 
If so, what? 

As a result of your article in the Overland Monthly 
I have been helped to a solving of these questions, and I 
am sending you herewith my calculations and conclusions 
for any comments or added thoughts you may have or 
can suggest. 

FIRST CALCULATION 

This is my understanding of your reckoning as presented 
in Overland Monthly: 

"To fulfil the word of the Lord by the mouth of 
Jeremiah until the land had enjoyed her Sabbaths: for 

R4779 : page 76 

as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfill 
three score and ten years."— 2 Chron. 36:17-21. 

In the above quotation we find the entire number of 
Jubilee years the Lord purposed for Israel to be 70, 
which mark 70 cycles or periods of time. Each cycle was 
49 years and its Jubilee the 50th year. 



70 times this number (50 years) would be 3,500 yrs. 

And this period, measured from the time Israel 

entered Canaan, which occurred before the date 

known as A.D. 1 1,575 " 

Hence the years since A.D. 1, to complete above 
period of 3,500 years, are 1,925 " 

Or 1925 A.D. marks the date when the full number 
of Israel's Jubilees would have been accomplished as indicated 
by the Lord through Jeremiah the prophet. 

THE SECOND CALCULATION 

This calculation is based on the Jubilees from the 
standpoint of the Law which was given to Israel as a 
nation and to which they bound themselves, and which 
has been and is now being fulfilled with regard to the 
Jews.— Lev. 26. 

This calculation in no way antagonizes the view as 
expressed in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. 2, chapter 6, paragraph 
2, page 180; also page 181; but is considering it 
only with regard to the Jewish nation and their land and 
not with regard to the restitution or antitypical Jubilee 
as set forth in S.S., Vol. 2. 

The multiplying of the Sabbath or 7th day by 
7 (7 x 7 = 49) pointed out Pentecost, the 50th day, or Jubilee 
day, which followed. 

The multiplying of the Sabbath or 7th year by 7 
(7x7 = 49) made the cycle which pointed out and led to 
the 50th year or Jubilee year. 

The multiplying of the Sabbath or 50th year by 50 
(50 x 50 = 2,500) made the cycle which pointed out and 
led to the 51st cycle or Jubilee cycle. 

As the Jubilee day was not celebrated on the last or 49th 
day, but on the following or 50th day, and the Jubilee year 
was not celebrated on the last or 49th year, but on the following 
or 50th year, so the Jubilee cycle (of 50 years) was not 
celebrated on the last or 50th cycle, but on the following or 
51st cycle. 

The Law required that where the typical system 
ended, the antitypical counting should begin. 

R4779 : page 77 

Total number of years in Great Cycle 2,500 yrs. 

From the celebration of the last Jubilee by Israel to 
the year A.D. 1 625 " 

The number of years since A.D. 1 necessary to 
complete the cycle of 2,500 years 1,875 " 

If the year 1875 A.D. marks the end of the Great 
Cycle of 50 x 50 years, then the following 50 years, or 
from 1875 A.D. to 1925 A.D., will be the Jubilee Cycle 



or period of time during which the Jews will be returned 
to their possessions. (This date, 1925 A.D., as we have 
seen, is the date originally intended by Jehovah as marking 
Israel's full number of Jubilees.) And how harmoniously 
does this agree with the ending of the Times of 
the Gentiles, which terminate during this Jubilee period; 
their lease of power departing from them allows the Law 
to be fulfilled toward the Jew, who can now come into 
his possessions. 

Here we get the key to the matter regarding the 
celebration of only 19 and not 20 cycles before the Great 
Cycle (of 50 x 50 years = 2,500 years) began to count. 
The last or 20th Cycle of 50 years was reserved for the 
Jubilee Cycle to follow the Great Cycle. 

Jubilees celebrated in the land by Jews 19 

Jubilees represented in Great Cycle 50 

Jubilee period representing the time in which the Jew, 
according to Jubilee celebration, should return to his 
possessions 1 

70 

THIRD CALCULATION 

"And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim 
liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants 
thereof; it shall be a Jubilee unto you; and ye shall 
return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return 
every man unto his family. 

"A Jubilee shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall 
not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, 
nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed."— 
Lev. 25:10,11. 

Here we have two statements made respecting the 
Jubilee year: 

1. The RETURN of every person to his possession; and 

2. The REST of the land. 

"Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it 
lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even 
then shall the land REST and enjoy her sabbaths. As long 
as it lieth desolate it shall REST; because it did not REST 
in your sabbaths when ye dwelt upon it."— Lev. 26:34,35. 

Here again we find that while Israel celebrated the 
Jubilee when they dwelt in the land, and each man may 
have returned to his possession and family at the Jubilee 
period, nevertheless the Lord declares that the land "did 
not REST" in its Sabbaths when they dwelt upon it. 

So the Lord provided the REST feature of the Jubilee 
for the land when Israel went into captivity for 70 years, 
and here the 70 Jubilees of REST were accomplished for the 
land, but during that time the other feature of the 
Jubilee was neglected (the RETURN of each man to his 
possession and family), for we find the very reverse of 
this condition to be true. The Jews, instead of returning 
to their possessions during that time, were in captivity 



to and serving the King of Babylon. 

How, then, and when will this returning feature of 
the Jubilees be accomplished? 

As shown in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. II., chap. 6, Israel 
celebrated 19 Jubilees before going into captivity, and 
we have no reason to doubt that at each of these celebrations 
the RETURNING of the people to their possessions 
was accomplished to the best of their ability. 

Now, as 70 was the number of Jubilee Sabbaths or 
years of REST celebrated for the land (during the captivity), 
but only 19 Jubilees or years with the RETURNING 
feature were celebrated, when will the other 5 1 Jubilees 
or years with the RETURNING feature be fulfilled? We 
answer:— 

70— Full number of Jubilee Cycles ordained of God. 
19— Cycles (with Jubilees) celebrated (50 years 
each) 950 yrs. 

51— Cycles remaining (without Jubilees) celebrated 
(49 years each) 2,499 " 

Total years 3,449 

Number of years Israel entered Canaan before the 
date known as A. D. 1 1,575 " 

Total number of years since date known as A.D. 1 
to complete above period of 3,449 1,874 " 

Or the year 1874 A.D. completes the above period 
as was actually fulfilled. This date, 1874, is just 5 1 
years prior to the year 1925 A.D., which, in the first 
calculation, was found to be the date originally intended 
by Jehovah as completing the Jubilees for Israel. 

Here we have the 5 1 Jubilees or years to be celebrated 
all at one time and not individually as were the first 19. 
What wisdom on the part of our Heavenly Father! The 
land has already enjoyed the REST feature of the Jubilees 
(while the Jews were serving in captivity to Babylon) 
and now Israel, being deprived of the privileges of the 
RETURNING feature of the Jubilees for 51 Cycles (of 49 
years each), can celebrate the 51 Jubilees with RETURNING 
feature from 1874 A.D. to 1925 A.D. And this 
we find fully corroborated, for in 1874 the first Jewish 
colony was founded in Palestine. (Overland Monthly, 
September, 1910, page 324, 7th line from top of page.) 
And we see every year the increase of Jews RETURNING 
to their land and fulfilling the purpose of these 5 1 
Jubilees. 

The further question as to why Israel remained in 
the land 19 years after the celebration of the last Jubilee, 
is answered, to my mind, as follows:— 

IS THIS TOO FAR-FETCHED? 

If a day symbolically represents a year in Scripture, 



and 7 days mark to Israel the Sabbath which was carried 
out in the larger or 7-year system, would not the year 
symbolically represent the next greater time measure, or 
the Cycle period? If so, then, after the typical feature 
had ceased and the Great Antitypical Cycle began to 
count, Israel's 19 years in the land and 70 years captivity 
would fitly represent, or typify, the 19 Jubilee Cycles 
which Israel celebrated in their promised land, and 70 
Cycles or (70 x 50 years = 3,500 years) 3,500 years of 
captivity before they would be permitted to FULLY 
POSSESS again their land. 

R4780 : page 77 

Number of years in 70 cycles 3,500 yrs. 

Number of years Israel celebrated their last Jubilee 
before the date known as A. D. 1 625 " 

Number of years after date known as A.D. 1. when 
the 70 cycles end 2,875 " 

The year 2,875 A.D. is just 1,000 years from 1875, the 
time the Jews began to return to their possessions. At 
that time, we trust, according to the sure promises of the 
Lord, the Jews, as well as all mankind, will not only be 
established in their land but be capable of POSSESSING it 
and WILL POSSESS it; and it shall be for Abraham and his 
seed for an everlasting POSSESSION. 

Your Brother, sincerely for truth, in love, 
HAL KAUP. 



R4780 : page 78 

THE WISE CHOICE 

"Choose ye this day whom ye will serve; as for me and 
my house, we will serve the Lord."— Joshua 24:15. 

THE Children of Israel had crossed Jordan. 

Moses was dead and Joshua was their 

Leader. They were having no difficulty at 

that time; but Joshua thought that it was 

proper just then for them to make their 

decision— proper for them to decide whether 

or not they would be faithful to the Lord, 

or would allow themselves to be led away 

by the idolatry of the people who lived in 

Canaan. Joshua had called them together 

and had recounted to them the Lord's blessings and favor 

which they had thus far enjoyed, and then expressed himself 

in the grand and noble sentiments of our text. 

So, dear friends, we who realize that the Lord has 
been blessing, guiding and sustaining us in the past, 
should come to a full, positive decision as respects our 



course of life. The very fact of coming to a positive 
decision is a great blessing and a great help in the formation 
of character. Every time we come to a wise decision 
on any question, it strengthens mind and character, 
and makes us much more ready for another test— along 
some other line, perhaps. 

We well recognize the fact that the entire consecration 
which the Christian makes, leaves nothing out; but 
we need to have some touchstone, something which will 
enable the mind to reach a decision quickly, and this 
touchstone should be God's will, so that to perceive the 
Lord's will on any subject would be to settle it without 
any temporizing. Again, it is highly proper that we 
should reiterate our consecration, and thus make it 
prominent before others. 

For instance, if this were New Year's Day, and we 
were at a testimony meeting, there would be nothing 
wrong in saying, "Whatever any one else may do, I 
acknowledge God and will serve him!"— not as a new 
vow, but as a fresh acknowledgment of the consecration 
Vow we have already taken. 

We are to recognize the difference between making a 
new covenant every day, and the daily renewing of our 
covenant; the one would be an impropriety; the other 
would be proper. If we have made a binding covenant 
for life, we should no more think of breaking it than 
would a man who had leased a house or sold it. 

Every day we should renew our covenant with the 
Lord— renew it and make it fresh in our minds, thus 
showing that there has been no change on our part; that 
we are still in the same attitude. This is the same 
thought as was in the making of our consecration; we 
are dead with Christ— "Ye are not your own, ye are 
bought with a price." We are exhorted to make this 
review of our lives and renewal of our consecration 
daily; to continue to keep this before our minds and 
hearts; to render our sacrifice to the Lord. Thus we are 
baptized by baptism into his death; and this baptism continues 
just as it was with our Lord. He had made his 
consecration and so it had to be completed; so it is with 
us; our vow, our covenant is unto death. 

If the Lord's consecrated people could be brought to 
the point where the chief aim in life, the burden of all 
their prayers, would be that they might have a larger 
measure of the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of holiness, 
the spirit of the Truth, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of 
a sound mind, what a blessing it would mean! If then 
they should wrestle with him until the breaking of day, 
their hold upon him would be sure to bring the desired 
blessing. The Lord reveals himself for the purpose of 
giving this blessing; but he withholds it until we learn to 
appreciate and desire it. 



R4780 : page 78 



ONE SACRIFICE SUFFICIENT 

"Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, 
first for his own sins and then for the people's; for this 
he did once, when he offered up himself."— Heb. 7:27. 

IT HAS been asked how the Church could in 
any way be identified with the offering of 
this sacrifice. 

To get the Apostle's thought we are 
compelled to take one of two views; either 
that the High Priest in this case meant our 
Lord Jesus alone, separate and distinct 
from his Body, or else that it did not mean 
our Lord Jesus alone, separate and apart 
from his Body. 

In another place the Apostle tells us that God foreknew 
the Church; therefore, in the Divine Plan it was 
a foreknowledge that there would be a Church selected 
from among sinners, even as it was predestinated of 
Jesus himself that he should be the Head: "He [the 
Father] hath chosen us in him [Christ] before the 
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and 
without blame before him in love; having predestinated 
us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto 
himself." (Eph. 1:4,5.) Consequently, to take any 
other view would indicate blindness respecting the Scriptures. 
For this reason, we think that Paul referred, in 
the text under discussion, to the High Priest as a whole 
—Head and Body. 

Although this feature of the Plan was not revealed 
until the end of the Gospel Age, we see, nevertheless, 
that the Apostle was discussing the change of dispensation, 
and that everything pertaining to the Tabernacle 
and the "Most Holy" passed away to give place to the 
"better sacrifices" of the Gospel Age— all these things 
coming in instead of those things. And this is what the 
Apostle is reasoning out. When, therefore, he speaks of 
the High Priest, saying, "And this he did once," he is 
referring to the one sacrifice of two parts. He does not 
mean to say that the Priest offered merely one sacrifice 
of one part, but that the Priest made first the offering 
of the antitypical bullock, and afterwards the offering of 
the antitypical goat. 

In the type these things were done year by year; but 
in the antitype, which must be greater than the type, and 
which must really put away sin— "this he did once." 
Instead of doing this year after year, as represented in 
the typical atonement day sacrifices, the Great High 
Priest first offered the sacrifice of the antitypical bullock 
on behalf of those who are accepted as members of his 
Body, and afterwards the sacrifice of the antitypical goat 
on behalf of all the world of mankind. 

We also see that this second part has not yet been 
accomplished; after it shall have been finished, then will 



begin to follow the long-promised glory— "The sufferings 
of Christ and the glory that shall follow." (I Pet. 1:11.) 
And again, "the sufferings of this present time are not 
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed 
in us."— Rom. 8:18. 



R4780 : page 79 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

Question.— Kindly explain the following text, especially 
the forepart of it: "The Man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a ransom for all."— I Tim. 2:5,6. 

Answer.— Our Lord gave himself a corresponding 
price for all— a ransom. The application of this price 
will be made in due time. It has been, at the present 
time, appropriated to the Church, imputatively, on account 
of their turning from sin and walking in the footsteps 
of Jesus. The next step in its application will be, not 
the imputation, but the actual giving of this to the world, 
bringing them up out of their imperfection, during the 
thousand years of the Mediatorial reign; bringing them 
back into that condition in which they shall be in harmony 
with God, even as Adam was in harmony with him 
before the fall. 

Regarding the expression, "The Man Christ Jesus," 
we would say that the Man who gave himself seems to 
be the particular point. That Man who gave himself, 
the anointed Jesus, who finished the giving of himself at 
Calvary, is the "Mediator between God and men," between 

R4781 : page 79 

God and the world of mankind. In harmony with 
the Divine Plan, during this Age, before his work of 
uplifting mankind is due to begin, he is doing another 
work that the Father has ordained; namely, the selection 
of brethren over whom he is placed as the "Captain of 
their salvation." These are counted in as members of 
the Body of the Messiah, he being Head over them— 
"the Church which is his Body." 

So, then, the Man Christ Jesus is the Redeemer of 
the world. But in the interim— as noted above— before 
the application of his merit shall be made for the world, 
the testimony is given to a few— as many as have ears 
to hear and are join t-sacrificers with him. These will 
be associated with him as Prophet, Priest, Mediator, King 
and Judge between God and men during the Millennial 
Kingdom. 



Question.— After Adam sinned, could God have made 
with him such a Law Covenant as he made with the Jews 



—a Covenant offering him life upon condition of fulfilment 
of the Law? 

Answer.— We think it would not be reasonable to 
suppose that it would be consistent with the Divine 
principles, after Adam had had a full and complete trial, 
and after he had failed in that trial, and after he had 
been sentenced to death, that God should belittle his 
Government and his decision by making another proposition 
to him, after he had gotten into a more or less fallen 
condition. It would seem that even the suggestion of a 
trial would have been inconsistent with Divine principles, 
unless full satisfaction had first been made for the transgression 
already committed. We see quite a difference 
between Adam and the children of Adam, who were born 
in imperfection and who have never willingly and wilfully 
and intelligently sinned against God and who have 
never been given an offer or opportunity to see whether 
they would be able to keep that Divine Law. 

God gave Israel certain surroundings of typical justification 
and typical sanctification, etc., for the purpose of 
imparting general instruction foreshadowing the great 
blessing which he ultimately will bestow upon all mankind 
—giving them the opportunity of coming back into 
Divine favor and eternal life. 



page 79 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study V.— The Organization of the New Creation. 
APRIL 2 

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE NEW CREATION 

(1) When will the organization of the New Creation be 
complete, and how is it illustrated in the Scriptures? P. 195. 

(2) In view of the foregoing, what shall we say about a 
temporary organization of the New Creation? P. 196, par. 1, 
first part. 

(3) What is the character of the Divine arrangement with 
respect to this preparatory work, and why is the granting of 
liberty the best plan? P. 196, par. 1, last part, and par. 2, first part. 

(4) Why has the simplicity of the organization of the 
Church by the Lord and the Apostles been regarded by many 
good persons as unsatisfactory and inadequate? P. 197, top. 

(5) Taking Natural Israel as a type, should we expect to 
find a nominal as well as a real New Creation? P. 197, par. 1, 
first sentence. 

APRIL 9 

(6) What judgment is permitted the New Creation as 

to the "wheat" and "tares," and has any "branch" in "the True 



Vine" the right to criticise, rebuke or otherwise prune any 
other "branch"? P. 197, par. 1; P. 198. 

(7) How differently are such matters dealt with in 
human organizations? P. 198, par. 1. 

(8) Explain what is signified by the "Mystery of God." 
P. 199, par. 1, first part. 

(9) Describe its counterfeit, the "Mystery of Iniquity." 
P. 199, par. 1, last part; P. 200, par. 1. 

(10) What course toward these "tares," or imitation 
New Creatures, has the Lord pursued and instructed his 
people to follow? P. 200, par. 2. 

APRIL 16 

(11) When did the Mystery of Iniquity begin to work, 

and why did it not make much headway in the Early Church? 
P. 201, par. 1. 

(12) What spirit led gradually to the organization of 
the great Anti-Christ? P. 201, par. 2. 

(13) How has our great Adversary thwarted every fresh 
effort to reach the Truth since the Reformation period? 
P. 202, par. 1. 

(14) Cite certain facts which prove conclusively that the 
Scriptures have been preserved in comparative purity, and 
that the systems claiming to have been organized by the 
Lord and his Apostles are totally different from the Church 
which they did organize. P. 202, par. 2, to P. 204, par. 2. 

(15) Why has God permitted the world of mankind in 
general to exercise their mental and moral qualities according 
to their own inclinations? P. 204, par. 3. 

(16) How has the Lord been dealing with "Christendom?" 
and how and when will he bring order out of confusion? 

P. 205, par. 1. 

APRIL 23 

(17) What special feature of the Divine Plan characterizes 
"the ends of the Ages?" (1 Cor. 10:11.) P. 205, par. 2. 

(18) As originally instituted, who was the Head of the 
true Church? P. 206, par. 1, first part. 

(19) What is meant by the "True Vine" and the "Vine 
of the Earth," and what are their respective fruits? P. 207, 
top. 

(20) Did the Lord and the Apostles recognize any division 
in the Church, or were the various names applied to the 
Church as a whole, and even the smallest gatherings, intended 
as proper names? P. 207, par. 1. 

(21) What spirit led to the use of various unscriptural 
names during the Dark Ages? P. 207, par. 2. 

APRIL 30 

(22) How many Apostles were chosen, and what were 
their names? P. 208, par. 1. 

(23) Who was chosen by the Lord to succeed Judas, 
and what are the Scriptural proofs? P. 208, par. 2. 



(24) What Scriptural evidence have we against "Apostolic 
Succession?" P. 209, par. 1. 

(25) Why has the Church no reasonable need for more 
Apostles? P. 209, par. 2. 

(26) How were the twelve Apostles selected by our 
Lord? P. 210, par. 1. 

(27) What were doubtless some characteristics of the 
Apostles, and why were they chosen so early in our Lord's 
ministry? P. 210, par. 2. 



page 82 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 81 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII MARCH 15 No. 6 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

A Snare-A Trap-A Stumbling-Block 83 

The Great Gulf Between the Earthly and 

the Heavenly Israel to be Destroyed 84 

Pride Led to Oversight of Certain 

Scriptures Foretelling "the Sufferings 

of Christ" 84 

"I Am My Beloved's, and My Beloved is 

Mine" 85 

Other Sheep Not of This Fold 87 

God's Pity for the Heathen 88 

"Pride Goeth Before Destruction" 89 

In Thee I Trust (Poem) 90 

The Call to Divine Service 91 

The Fig Tree is Withered Away 92 

Bro. Russell's Western Tour 92 

Proper and Improper Jealousy 93 

A City Without Walls 94 

"The Bible in Stone" 95 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 95 

page 82 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., MAY 7 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3 
p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Avenue 
and St. Felix Street. Topic, "The Resurrection Hope." 

LYNCHBURG, VA., MAY 14 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock. Discourse for the interested 
at 1 1 o'clock and Lecture for the Public at 3 p.m. 
All services to be in the Auditorium, Main Street, between 
11th and 12th Streets. 

BALTIMORE, MD., MAY 21 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock. Discourse for the interested 
at 1 1 o'clock in Lehman's Hall, 856 North Howard 
Street. Afternoon service for the Public at 3 o'clock in the 
Lyric Theatre, Mount Royal and Maryland Avenues. 

BOSTON, MASS., MAY 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 4 



"EVERYBODY'S PAPER" 

This title will take the place of PEOPLES PULPIT for use in 
announcing Pilgrim Meetings and for the "Bible Extension 
Course," of which we have advised all INT. BIBLE STUDENTS 
CLASSES. The PEOPLES PULPIT will continue. Reply to Cardinal 
Gibbons will appear in it. 



PEOPLES PULPIT (1911) VOLUNTEER MATTER 

This year's Volunteer Matter, we believe, will be equal to, 
if it does not excel, that of any previous year in its effectiveness 
for the dissemination of Present Truth. We are placing 
printing orders in various parts of the country for the quicker 
and less expensive filling of your orders. 

We trust that the different classes and individuals desirous 
of promoting this service will send us in promptly memorandum 
of the total amount they promise to use prudently, 
wisely, free. 

Give address very explicitly. We will divide the total order 
when large into two or more shipments, and advise you 
fully. 



R4781 : page 83 

A SNARE--A TRAP--A STUMBLING-BLOCK 

"And David saith, Let their table become a snare and a trap, 
and a stumbling-block, and a recompense unto them; let 
their eyes be darkened, that 
they may not see."— Rom. 11:9,10. 

AT ONE TIME these words seemed irreconcilable 

with either justice or love. Supposing 

that the poor Jews who were blinded, 

stumbled into eternal torment, God's conduct 

seemed inscrutable— no matter if, 

through the Apostle, he did promise (vss. 25,26) 

that, generations after, the blindness 

should be turned away— after the fullness 

of the elect Church, the Gentiles, had 

been brought into Divine favor. 

We reasoned that the recovery of a man's great-great-great-grand-children 
could never compensate for 

his own loss, if he went to eternal misery. And although 
trained in Presbyterian thought it seemed terrible to 
read the calm, cold assertion, "What then? Israel hath 
not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the elect hath 
obtained it, and THE REST WERE BLINDED"-"STUMBLED," 
"SNARED," "TRAPPED." 

KNOWLEDGE OF THE DIVINE PLAN ENABLES US TO 
UNDERSTAND THE SCRIPTURES PROPERLY 

But, thank God, our own blindness was removed and 
the breaking of the Millennial dawn, revealing the Divine 
Plan, set our ideas right, enabled us to rightly 
divide and apply the Scriptures and brought the grandest 
order out of our confusion. We found that the hell to 



which Israel went was the grave— hades; that there is no 

consciousness in hell (Heb., sheol; Greek, hades— Ezek. 37:12; 

Psa. 6:5); that blinded, stumbled Israel is still 

there, and that not merely their grand-children, centuries 

after, will have their blindness removed and their sins 

forgiven, but all of them will individually enjoy these 

favors. 

They all were included in the unbelief and blindness 
and stumbling, that God might have mercy upon all and 
recover every one of them from that blindness and bring 
every one of them to that full, clear knowledge which will 
render every man without excuse and fully responsible 
for his choice of life through obedience to Christ, or of 
the "second death" through disobedience. See verses 27-32; 
John 5:28; Ezek. 37:12,13; John 1:9. 

To see the matter thus clearly was a great relief; 
but still our heart cried out to God for an explanation 
and a just reason for the blinding, stumbling and entrapping 
of all but an elect few of a nation to which, as 
a whole, he had made many gracious promises and for 
whom he had already done so much, for eighteen centuries 
—a nation which alone of all the nations of earth 
recognized him as its Ruler and were under covenant 
relations to him and his Law. 

ISRAEL'S PROMISES EARTHLY -NOT HEAVENLY 

The answer of God's Word is that, while he had 
called Israel by his promises to a great and noble part 
in his Plan of Salvation, he did not call them to the place 
of chief favor and honor. His promises to them were 
earthly, not heavenly. And although all of the sons of 
Jacob were called or invited, it was a conditional call 
which the nation as a whole never complied with. Only 
the few ever kept his Laws (or were reckoned to have 
kept them by proper intention) and hence, all along, it 
was true that some children of Jacob, professedly children 
of God, were really of their father the Devil (John 8:44), 
because they were not all Israelites that were of 
the nation of Israel.— Rom. 9:6. 

When God's due time came for the great Atonement 
for sin to be made by our Redeemer's sacrifice of himself 
(Heb. 7:27), that also was his due time for beginning 
the selection of his spiritual Israel, to whom he 
extends heavenly promises and for whom he has reserved 
the very highest place in his great Plan— next to himself. 

EARTHLY ISRAEL SET ASIDE UNTIL THE COMPLETION OF 
THE SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

Christ himself became the Head and Chief of this 
spiritual or heavenly Israel, of which fleshly Israel with 
its precious but earthly promises had so long been a 
type or shadow. And as soon as Christ's sacrifice was 
completed the work of selecting the spiritual Israel as 
his "Bride" or "Body" or "brethren" and "joint-heirs" 



was due to begin. 

It was not God's purpose that the two Israels should 
continue side by side; hence, as soon as the spiritual was 
begun the earthly was set aside; not set aside forever, 
but merely until the spiritual Israel had been selected. 
But although the fleshly House of Israel was set aside at 
the time of Christ's crucifixion (Matt. 23:38), yet the 
first opportunity for membership in spiritual Israel was 
given to that people. 

It is not surprising that only a handful, a "remnant," 
of fleshly Israel was able to stand the tests of faith and 
sacrifice exacted of the spiritual Israelites. Those 
"hypocrites" to whom it was said, "Ye are of your father 
the Devil," would surely not be in condition to be attracted 
by the Truth and its spirit into fellowship in the 

R4781 : page 84 

new spiritual Israel. And even of those who were 
Israelites indeed, who trusted in the promises of God, 
we cannot suppose that many would be without guile, 
pure in heart, and just ready for faith and obedience 
under the Gospel Age call. By the Divine arrangement, 
therefore, the preaching of the Gospel of the Cross 
skimmed off, as it were, into the Gospel Church the cream 
class of that people— "and the rest were blinded"; and 
God was agreeable to their being blinded. 

THE GREAT GULF BETWEEN THE EARTHLY AND THE 
HEAVENLY ISRAEL TO BE DESTROYED 

God would allow "a great gulf" to be fixed by their 
prejudices between them and the spiritual Israel; he 
would make of them a spectacle before the world, and 
although outcasts from his favor for a time they should, 
as a dead nation, be witnesses to his Word throughout 
the world; and, finally, when he shall have selected and 
polished and glorified his spiritual Israel, he will destroy 
the "great gulf," turn away their blindness as a people, 
and receive back to favor all of them who then will come 
—showing mercy upon them through the glorified spiritual 
Israel— vss. 31,32. 

"O, the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God" ! How grandly systematic and reasonable 

R4782 : page 84 

and just is the Divine Plan of the Ages! — 
Romans 11:33. 

HOW THEIR TABLE BECAME A SNARE, A TRAP AND A 
CAUSE OF STUMBLING 

But now another point deserves consideration: In 
what way was their table their snare and trap and cause 
of stumbling? 



Their "table" signifies their food; and the table or 
food spread before fleshly Israel, God's fleshly children, 
consisted of those special favors and promises of God to 
them as his Chosen People. (Matt. 15:26,27.) Thus 
seen, it was God's goodness and favor toward them that 
stumbled and entrapped them and prejudiced their unconsecrated 
hearts. They presumed upon God's favor. 
They said within themselves, "We have Abraham to our 
father." (Matt. 3:9.) They concluded that God must 
keep his promises to Abraham and that they, being his 
children, the Kingdom to bless the world must sooner or 
later be themselves. They trusted in themselves and 
despised others; they became arrogant, haughty and self-confident, 
and hence that much the less the humble-spirited, 
that the Lord sought, for his spiritual Israel. 

PRIDE LED TO OVERSIGHT OF CERTAIN SCRIPTURES 
FORETELLING "THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST" 

Their pride led them to look only at the promises of 
glory and honor and power to accompany the exaltation 
of Israel, and led them to ignore the passages which tell 
that Messiah must first be rejected and "led as a lamb 
to the slaughter" and "pour out his soul unto death," 
being smitten for our sins, "the chastisement of our 
peace being laid upon him." 

For the same reason they overlooked the statements 
of God's prophets that they should first be scattered 
amongst all nations, where God would show them no 
favor; and that their later blessing would be in connection 
with their regathering out of all nations (Jer. 16:13-17; 
Deut. 4:26-28; 28:36,37,63-65), and that when 
the Lord shall deliver them "they shall look upon him 
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him 
as for an only son."— Zech. 12:10. 

Thus their "table" became their "trap," which still 
holds them tightly— their pride of heart, built upon those 
promises, still blinds them. But we should notice carefully 
that their stumbling was not because of any wrong 
done them by God. No; "his way is perfect." "Every 
good and perfect gift cometh down from our Father." 
"He is not a God of confusion" and "he is the same 
yesterday, today and forever." The "table" which he 
provided was good. The entire difficulty was that Israel's 
consecration was incomplete; hence the majority of them 
were not of the class whom the Lord intended should 
know the Truth before the Messianic Age, when the eyes 
of all shall be opened and all shall come to an accurate 
knowledge of the Truth. 

THE THINGS WRITTEN WERE SPECIALLY FOR OUR 
LEARNING 

But now we come to the most important feature of 
this subject. These things were written for our learning, 
upon whom the ends of the Ages are come. (I Cor. 10:11.) 



As fleshly Israel was a shadow or type of 
spiritual Israel, so the stumbling, trapping, snaring in 
the Harvest of their Age foreshadowed a similar sifting 
out of all except a faithful "remnant" here. 

Here, as there, many in nominal spiritual Israel are 
not Israelites, but "hypocrites," and of their father the 
Devil. Here, as there, all who are really of Israel and 
before whom the "table" of God's bounties has been 
spread with Providential care— "exceeding great and 
precious promises"— all of these do not digest and appropriate 
God's promises to the upbuilding of characters 
pleasing to God and fit for the Kingdom; and hence, 
even while feeding at his "table," such receive the grace 
of God in vain. To these, as well as to their prototypes, 
the "table" of Truth which they delight in is sure to 
become a snare, a trap, a stumbling-block. And it is 
specially for the sake of such that we now write to put 
them on guard as to how they use the "food" now so 
abundantly supplied to us.— Luke 12:37. 

Only those who have at least some hunger and thirst 
after righteousness [Truth] are at all welcomed at this 
"table"; it is the children's table and others than God's 
true children may gather and eat only the crumbs that 
fall from it. 

UNLAWFUL FOR ANY EXCEPT THE PRIESTS TO EAT THE 
SHEW-BREAD 

It is the table of the consecrated believers at which 
others "have no right to eat." (Heb. 13:10.) The truly 
consecrated are the antitypical or Royal Priesthood, 
whose "table" was typified in the Tabernacle and in the 
Temple by the table of shew-bread, of which it was not 
lawful for any except the priests to eat. If, therefore, 
you have "tasted that the Lord is gracious"; if you have 
"tasted of the good Word of God"; if you have had 
"meat [food] to eat that the world knoweth not of"; if 
you have tasted the "present truth"— "meat in due season" 
—it implies either that you are one of the consecrated 
ones, one of the Royal Priests, or else that you are in 
contact with them and receiving crumbs from their 
"table." 

The giving of all Truth, and especially "present 
truth," implies an object. That object is the sanctifying 
or setting apart to God and to his holy service. The 
crumbs of Truth are to awaken a desire for and to lead 
to the act of consecration or sanctification. The full table 
of bounties is for those who have taken the step of fully 
consecrating themselves, their wills and their all to the 
Lord— and the bountiful supply of exceeding great and 
precious promises then granted to them is that by these 
they might be strengthened and enabled to carry out fully, 

R4782 : page 85 

step by step, the full consecration they have made— even 



unto death. 

The object of our consecration and subsequent disciplining 
under the guidance and power of the Truth is 
for the formation of character, for "perfecting holiness 
in the fear of the Lord." The Apostle clearly shows the 
object of our precious promises, our spiritual food, saying, 
"Having, therefore, these promises, dearly beloved, 
let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh 
and spirit; perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord." 
(2 Cor. 7:1.) He assures us that knowledge may be 
received and used for a different purpose and produce a 
bad, instead of good effect and puff up or make proud 
and self-willed. 

WHAT EFFECT HAS THE TRUTH UPON OUR HEARTS? 

It becomes each of us to ask himself the questions, 
Have not I received considerable knowledge of the 
Truth— of God's Character and Plan? Has it had the 
bad effect of puffing me up and making me feel that I 
am somebody? Has it caused a self-satisfied feeling, 
which ignores my own weaknesses and failings and 
merely relies on God's mercy and seeks to exaggerate 
that mercy and to ignore Scripture texts which clearly 
show that "God is angry with the wicked every day"; 
that "the wrath of God is revealed against all unrighteousness," 
for "all unrighteousness is sin"; that 
whosoever committeth sin [wilfully] is [a child] of the 
Devil," and that "all the [intelligently and wilfully] 
wicked will God destroy"? Or has it caused me to feel 
more humble and dependent on the giver of all good? 
And has it, properly, caused me to feel Divine approval 
and rest and security, only under the merit of the precious 
blood when I am using my best endeavors for righteousness, 
godliness, purity and Truth? 

The latter is the only legitimate and proper use of the 
Truth. If the true view of God's character, seen in his 
Plan and the exceeding great and precious promises held 
out to the overcomers, reaching our ears and our hearts, 
fails to awaken there a responsive adoration of things that 
are true, things that are honest, things that are just, 
things that are pure and things that are lovely, and a 
desire to be more and more transformed to that God-likeness 
and accordingly to cleanse ourselves from all filthiness 
of the flesh and spirit and to become more and more 
perfected in holiness— if these are not the effects of the 
Truth upon our flesh and our spirits (minds, dispositions) 
we are receiving the grace of God in VAIN; for it was 
given for no other purpose. And if we receive God's 
grace and Truth in vain, we may be sure it will be but 
a little while until it will slip from us and be replaced 
by misconceptions. 

Let us, therefore, take heed to the illustration given 
us in God's typical people, lest our table, so bountifully 
spread and served by the Master himself, become to us a 
snare, a trap and a stumbling-block into blindness— the 



"outer darkness" of the world, because of a failure to 
properly use its blessings already received. 

"Let us fear lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest [by full consecration and perfecting holiness 

R4783 : page 85 

in our hearts and conduct and thus developing our 
characters and being changed from glory to glory into 
the likeness of God's dear Son] any of us should seem 
to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 



R4783 : page 85 

I AM MY BELOVED'S, AND MY BELOVED IS MINE 

[SOLOMON'S SONG 6:3.] 

RIGHTLY understood we find the Bible to be 

a love story of surpassing interest. No 

earthly love story will compare with it. 

First, we have the Father's love for our 

race, which, originally created in his likeness, 

fell by disobedience under just condemnation. 

What a wonderful story of 

parental Love blended with Divine Justice 

is conveyed to us in the narrative of how 

God so loved the world while we were yet 

sinners, that he gave his Only Begotten Son to be our 

Redeemer, that he might restore again to Divine favor 

and blessing whosoever wills to return after learning of 

his loving provision. 

How different this view of the Divine character and 
Plan from the one which once terrorized us— when we 
thought of God as almighty in power and knowledge, but 
destitute of love and sympathy; when we thought of him 
according to the universally accepted false teachings as 
having, with cold indifference, sat in the councils 
of eternity, before the creation of the earth or our race, 
and there planned our creation and everlasting destiny; 
that he there deliberately arranged ("according to the 
council of his own will," as the catechism expresses it) 
that he would place us as a race under such unfavorable 
conditions that only a mere handful, comparatively, would 
ever attain to a life of bliss, either in the present world 
or in that which is to come. Deciding also that the vast 
majority, ignorant (whom the God of this world hath 
blinded), steeped in inherited sin and degradation, born 
in sin and shapen in iniquity, should, nevertheless, be so 
constituted and preserved that they could never end 
their miserable existences; and, withal, providing, we 
were told, a great place for their eternal torture, from 
which would ascend for ever and ever, alike futile and 
unheeded, their prayers, their curses and their groans. 



RELIEF TO KNOW THAT GOD IS REALLY A GOD OF LOVE 

What a relief do we experience as finally we awake 
to a better knowledge of God and of his precious Word, 
to find that all these teachings of the Dark Ages were 
but a horrible nightmare, as unreal as they were cruel 
and unjust— as unscriptural as they are contrary to every 
reasonable conception of every reasonable mind, of the 
proper exercise of Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power— 
the Divine attributes. We are reminded of the nursery 
tales of childhood, told to children by parents and nurses 
who, with grossly mistaken ideas of wisdom and propriety, 
used them as a lash of terror with which to 
secure a frightened obedience. As the bugaboos of infancy 
faded from memory, or at least ceased to inspire 
terror, as we grew older and began to take note of the 
deceptions which had been practiced; so as children of a 
larger growth we have learned that many of the "terrors 
of the Lord"— which, however severe, are reasonable 
and just— have been distorted by theologians and others 
who would fain exercise a terrorizing influence upon 
the world, to restrain from evil. We have learned, in 
the language of Scripture, that "their fear toward me is 
taught by the precepts of men," and not by any of the 
Divine precepts.— Isa. 29:13. 

Oh, what a relief it has brought to our hearts to 
know God as really and truly a God of love, who is not 
only willing to save unto the uttermost, but able to save 
unto the uttermost all who put their trust in him! and 
who is so willing thus to save that he has made abundant 

R4783 : page 86 

provision that every member of Adam's race must come 
to a clear knowledge of his grace and to a full opportunity 
—by obedience to the extent of his ability— to attain 
eternal life through Christ Jesus. 

It does us good at times to look back and view, not 
only the horrible pit and miry clay of sin out of which 
Jehovah lifted us when he placed our feet upon the 
Rock, Christ Jesus, but also to remember his mercy toward 
us in the anointing of our eyes, now in the end 
of the Age, that we may see wonderful things in his 
Word; that we may realize how he has graciously 
brought us "out of darkness into his marvelous light," 
in permitting us to brush away the veil of superstition, 
misunderstanding and mistranslation which has befogged 
his Word, beclouded our understanding and bedimmed 
our view and appreciation of the great Father 
of lights, from whom cometh every good and every 
perfect gift.— James 1:17. 

NOT ONE, BUT MANY INDIVIDUALS CHOSEN TO BE BRIDE 
OF CHRIST 



But our text deals specially with another part of this 
great love story of the Scriptures. Our loving Father, 
having provided a redemption for all our race through 
Christ Jesus, did more: he highly honored and glorified 
our dear Redeemer as a reward for those things he 
endured faithfully through obedience to the Father (Phil. 2:8-11), 
and in addition to this arranged to select a 
Bride and joint-heir in glory for his Son, our Lord 
Jesus. It was not an individual that was chosen to be 
the Bride, but many individuals, and yet in all, compared 
with the world, a "little flock," the "elect Church," called 
and in process of selection and perfection, to be "the 
Bride, the Lamb's Wife." 

Of all the plots and peculiarities of love stories which 
have been conjured up by human brains, none will compare 
with this story of how Christ loved the Church and 
gave himself for her— redeeming her with his own life; 
and how, being rewarded with excellent glory by the 
Father, these who would be his companions, are invited 
to share his cross, his suffering, his death, and to be 
received up into glory with him, to share his love and his 
throne and the Father's favor. We will not go into 
details here; we have done this before and our readers 
are familiar with every feature— so, instead, we pass on 
to consider some of the conditions of acceptance with the 
Bridegroom, and how we may make our calling and our 
election sure to this position of honor and blessing to 
which he has invited us. 

ONLY A FEW CAN SAY FROM THE HEART, "I AM MY 
BELOVED'S" 

Our text briefly, yet very pointedly, states the entire 
matter. (1) "I am my Beloved's." 

There is no possibility for any one to get into this 
special elect class, "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife," without 
knowing it. There is therefore no possibility that 
heathen philosophers or others who lived and who died 
without a personal knowledge of Christ as their personal 
Savior, can ever be members of the elect Church, the 
Bride; all who are of it will be able to say, "I am my 
Beloved's." Very manifestly also, for the same reason, 
many who are Church members "in good and regular 
standing," have neither part nor lot in this matter; for 
only a few can say, from the heart, truly, "I am my 
Beloved's." This union with the Beloved (Christ) implies 
that the step of justification through repentance and 
faith in the precious blood has first taken place; because 
only the justified are "called." (2) It is implied that the 
one who can say, "I am my Beloved's," has not only heard 
of Christ but has made a definite, positive compact or 
contract with him. And this contract— to be his in every 
thought and word and deed, to the extent of our ability, 
if he will accept us and be our Bridegroom, is our marriage 
vow or covenant. 

The Scriptures assure us that in the present time, 



while evil prevails and the God of this world blinds the 
minds of the vast majority, none can come to the Lord 
Jesus, except as the Father draws them. (John 6:44.) 
The Father is not drawing all mankind now, but only 
believers. He is leaving the general work of drawing 
the worldly for the next Age, the Messianic Age, when 
Christ and the Church glorified shall, as God's agents, 
cause the whole earth to be filled with the knowledge of 
the Truth. Whenever the Truth reaches the heart and 
understanding its influence is to draw, although the drawing 
may be resisted not only in the present Age, but also 
in the Age to come. (Acts. 3:23.) But, it is only the 
few who are being drawn to Christ by a knowledge of 
the Truth now, because only a few have a knowledge of 
the Truth. And while many resist the truth and refuse 
the opportunity of union with the great Bridegroom, 
some have gladly accepted and given themselves wholly 
to the Lord, thus sealing the covenant binding themselves 
to him and by his grace binding him to them. 

IF FAITHFUL IT IS THE PRIVILEGE OF EACH TO SAY, "MY 
BELOVED IS MINE" 

It is proper that each one should decide for himself 
positively, whether or not he has ever accepted the 
Divine invitation to give himself (Prov. 23:26; Rom. 12:1) 

R4784 : page 86 

to the Lord, to be ultimately accepted as a member 
of his Bride if he continue faithful to his engagement 
to the end. If we are faithful, and so long as we continue 
to be faithful, it is our privilege to look up with confidence 
and be assured of the second part of our text, 
"My Beloved is mine." And if we will, it is possible for 
us to continue in this attitude, "faithful unto death"; and 
so doing we may know that in the resurrection we shall 
be with our Lord, and be like him, and share his glory 
and his throne.— Rev. 3:21. 

How much is implied in this statement, "My Beloved 
is mine" ! We are reminded of the Scripture which 
declares, "He that hath the Son hath life"— eternal life. 
More than this, the Apostle assures us that those who 
have Christ, who can truly, Scripturally say, "My Beloved 
is mine," are really possessors of "all things." 
For since Christ is the heir of all things, if we have become 
associates with him, then, indeed, "all things are 
yours (things present and things to come) for ye are 
Christ's, and Christ is God's." (I Cor. 3:22,23.) If it 
lifted from us a great load to know that our sins were 
graciously forgiven through the merit of the precious 
blood, how much more of a load of care does it lift from 
us to know that we are vitally united with the illustrious 
Son of the great King of the Universe— the Son in whom 
the Father is well pleased and whom he has made his 
sole associate in the glory and dominion of the Universe. 



Nor does this promise of blessings in Christ apply 
merely to the future. The glories and honors truly are 
not now, but by and by to be revealed; but the Bridegroom's 
care, protection, provision and comfort belong to 
his betrothed even now, while we are in this tabernacle; 
so that while we are passing through the "valley of the 
shadow of death," we need fear no evil, for he is with 
us, and his rod and staff comfort us. 

All who abide faithful to him, all who truthfully can 
say, "I am my Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine," have 
not only the promise of the life that is to come, but also 

R4784 : page 87 

the promise of this present life. They hear the Master's 
voice saying, "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the 
end of the Age," and in the end of the Age he is to be 
specially near, specially precious, and is to reveal himself 
to his faithful in an especial manner, even before she is 
so changed as to behold him in his glory. 

ALL THE "EXCEEDING GREAT AND PRECIOUS PROMISES" 
BELONG TO THIS CLASS 

It is the privilege of these to apply to themselves, and 
to realize as properly theirs, all the "exceeding, great 
and precious promises" of the Divine Word. These may 
hear the voice of the Lord, saying, I will be with thee 
in six troubles and in the seventh I will not forsake thee. 
"My grace is sufficient for thee." "Call upon me in the 
day of trouble and I will deliver thee." Indeed, we are 
assured and "know that all things shall work together for 
good to them that love God, to the called ones according 
to his purpose [to be the Bride, the Lamb's Wife]."— 
Job 5:19; 2 Cor. 12:9; Psa. 50:15; Rom. 8:28. 

These promises of the Lord have been well summed 
up in the expression of the poet:— 

"In every condition, in sickness, in health, 

In poverty's vale, or abounding in wealth, 

At home and abroad, on the land or the sea, 

As thy days may demand, shall thy strength ever be. 

"When through the deep waters I call thee to go, 
The rivers of woe shall not thee overflow; 
For I will be with thee thy troubles to bless, 
And sanctify to thee thy deepest distress. 

"When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, 
My grace all-sufficient shall be thy supply; 
The flames shall not hurt thee— I only design 
Thy dross to consume, and thy gold to refine." 

What a blessing of peace, quietness of spirit, ability 
to endure hardness as a good soldier of Christ, and sustenance 
and strength in time of trial, lies behind these 



precious assurances of the Bridegroom to those who can 
see and realize unquestionably, "I am my Beloved's, and 
my Beloved is mine," no tongue can express. It has in 
the past permitted his faithful ones to pass through many 
dark and trying experiences with a fortitude that has 
surprised the world, which has seen them in the fiery 
furnace, but has not seen that there is with them the 
form of the Son of God. (Dan. 3:25.) They have endured 
as seeing him who is invisible. (Heb. 11:27.) 
The poor world who know not this invisible Friend 
above all others, and are unacquainted with this Heavenly 
Bridegroom, and know not his sustaining grace in every 
hour of trial are, indeed, to be greatly pitied. They must 
largely bear alone those burdens which the Lord's people, 
his betrothed, are privileged to lay at the feet of the 
great Burden Bearer, whose invitation is, "Come unto 
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give 
you rest." 

But, if the case of the world is a sad one, because it 
knows not our Bridegroom, how much worse is the case 
of those who having once known him, and having once 
experienced his tender care and helpfulness in all of 
life's affairs as a Counselor and Guide, have wandered 
off, having lost their first love; having forgotten that 
they were purged from their old sins, and become deaf 
to the "exceeding great and precious promises" pertaining 
to the present as well as to the future life; and are 
now striving merely for the things which perish, and 
which at most are but for a moment. (2 Cor. 4:17,18.) 
These are in a much worse condition than the world. 

As the Apostle declares, "It had been better for them 
not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after 
they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment." 
-2 Pet. 2:21. 

Let us who have named the name of Christ, who have 
assumed his name, abide in him— by continuing in faith, 
in love and in zeal, to walk in his footsteps and thus 
make our calling and our election sure. 



R4784 : page 87 

OTHER SHEEP NOT OF THIS FOLD 

"Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I 
must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold and one Shepherd."— John 10:16. 

DURING the Gospel Age the Lord has but 
one Church, one flock who follow him. 
"My sheep hear my voice, and I know 
them, and they follow me." (John 10:27.) 
From the very first there has been no 
change in the Lord's flock, either in the 
terms of discipleship or in the reward 



promised; as we read, "Ye are called in 
one hope of your calling."— Eph. 4:4. 
The "other sheep" evidently refer to 
others who will become the Lord's followers under different 
conditions and under a different call from that 
which has gone forth during the Gospel Age. The 
present flock are called upon to sacrifice the earthly 
nature and become partakers, with the Master and 
Shepherd, of the divine nature. (Rom. 12:1,2; 2 Tim. 2:11,12; 
2 Pet. 1:3,4.) The Lord's flock of the future 
will not be invited to sacrifice and to a change of nature, 
but will, on the contrary, be privileged to maintain and 
retain the human nature; and by obedience will gradually, 
step by step, experience Restitution to perfection of mind 
and body and morals, lost through sin in Eden and redeemed 
by the great Sacrifice at Calvary. These are not 
now of the "flock," for they are not invited to the 
divine nature and a heavenly mansion, but will be invited 
to earthly nature and Paradise restored during the reign 
of Messiah. 

"WHEN HE WHO IS OUR LIFE APPEARS WE SHALL 
APPEAR WITH HIM" 

These other sheep are particularly mentioned by our 
Master in Matt. 25:31-46. This parable of "the sheep 
and the goats" belongs, not to this Age— the Gospel Age 
—but to the coming Age— during the Messianic reign. 
The introduction of the parable (vs. 31) shows this, 
saying, "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, 
and all the holy messengers with him, then shall he sit 
upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be 
gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from 
another as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats." 

The Savior has not yet appeared in his glory, and the 
promise is that "When Christ, who is our life, shall 
appear, then shall ye [the Church, the sheep of the 
present Age] also appear with him in glory." (Col. 3:4.) 
In a word, the overcoming "sheep" of the Gospel Age 
will be associated with the Great Shepherd in his work 
of dealing with the world of mankind during his reign. 

R4785 : page 87 

Then all mankind will be on judgment or trial, to be 

tested with a view to proving who will develop the sheep-like 

disposition, and who will develop the goat-like disposition. 

THE DIVIDING OF THE SHEEP WILL BE IN PROGRESS 
DURING THE MESSIANIC REIGN 

During that thousand years all who develop the spirit 
of obedience will be accepted as members of the 

R4785 : page 88 



Shepherd's flock, on the right hand of favor, as worthy of 
eternal life; and at the close of that Dispensation will 
hear his words, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit 
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of 
the world."-Vs. 34. 

Those of the contrary spirit who, under the favorable 
conditions of that glorious time, will fail to develop the 
characteristics of the Lord's sheep— gentleness, meekness, 
love— will be accounted unworthy of eternal life, unworthy 
of being considered among the Lord's sheep. By 
that time these will have taken their places on his left 
hand of disfavor. Then will they be rejected. The 
sheep class will abide in the Lord's favor and be granted 
an abundant entrance into everlasting life; while the goat 
class will be rejected as unworthy of eternal life and 
will be sent away to experience his disfavor of everlasting 
punishment. 

That punishment, however, will not be everlasting 
torture, but everlasting death— a death which will last 
through all eternity; for the Lord will not again become 
a sacrifice, nor will he offer further opportunity 
to those rejecting the Divine arrangement during 
that glorious reign. As in the parable a goat is used to 
symbolize those who are contrary to the Lord, so fire 
is used as a symbol of the destruction which will come 
upon the goat class. Fire is the most destructive agency 
known and is fitly used to symbolize destruction. Verse 46 
of this parable might very properly be read, "These 
shall go away into everlasting cutting off (Greek, 
kolasin), [from life], but the righteous into life eternal," 



R4785 : page 88 

GOD'S PITY FOR THE HEATHEN 

-APRIL 30. -JONAH 3:5 TO 4:11.— 

"Go, ye, therefore, and teach 
all nations. "-Matt. 28:19. 

SKEPTICS have long been inclined to treat 

the story of Jonah's experiences in the 

belly of the great fish as a seaman's yarn. 

Many pulpiteers even laugh at the account 

of Jonah's experiences as suitable only for 

the credulous and not for wise, "Higher 

Critics." Nevertheless, the Great Teacher 

refers to Jonah and his experiences in the 

belly of the great fish, and those who believe 

the Scriptures will seek no better 

ground for their faith in the story than this. Nor is 

Jonah's account without a considerable parallel. One of 

the New York journals recently gave a detailed account, 

profusely illustrated, showing how a sailor, overboard, 



was swallowed by "a great sulphur whale," but after 
several hours escaped, his skin made purplish from the 
action of the digestive fluids of the whale's stomach. 

So far as we know, Jonah's case was the only one in 
which anyone spent parts of three days and nights in the 
belly of a fish. True, the throats of the majority of 
whales seem too small to admit a man. We remember, 
however, that they are quite elastic. The great sulphur 
variety is of enormous size and is said to have a throat 
capable of swallowing a skiff (much larger than a man) 
and less flexible. Besides, the Bible description of the 
matter tells us specifically that God prepared a great fish. 
No one who has a proper appreciation of the powers of 
the Almighty would question for an instant the ability 
of God to prepare a special fish, either at the moment or, 
foreknowing Jonah's course, long in advance. The exceptional 
character of Jonah's experience constituted him 
a type of Jesus, who, in death, was swallowed up of the 
earth, as was Jonah by the fish; and as our Lord was 
liberated from his prison-house, so was Jonah. 

PREACHING TO THE NINEVITES 

Our special lesson, however, is connected with Jonah's 
preaching to the Ninevites. Nineveh was a great city 
outside the pale of Judaism and therefore at that time 
outside the lines of Divine favor; for from the giving of 
the Law until three and a half years after the Cross, God's 
favors were exclusively confined to the Jewish nation 
under the terms of the Law Covenant— Cornelius, the 
centurion, being the first Gentile to receive evidence of 
Divine favor at the close of the period of Israel's exclusive 
favor. 

In the cases of the Sodomites, Ninevites and Amalekites, 
Divine Justice decreed that their iniquity had come 
to the full, and that for them to live longer would be 
unwise, and for them to be cut off in death would not 
only hinder them from further degradation, but also furnish 
to mankind a general lesson, to the effect that there 
is a limit to the Divine permission of evil. The fact that 
these people were thus condemned and overthrown did 
not signify that they had ever enjoyed salvation, or even 
an offer of salvation. Like all of Adam's children, these 
people were under the sentence of death, "Dying thou 
shalt die"; "As all in Adam die." They were merely 
cut off from further life under present conditions. Their 
opportunity for future life by resurrection from the dead 
was not interfered with. Neither they nor others had yet 
been redeemed. 

Hence the future life, secured by the redemptive work 
of Jesus, was in no sense interfered with by the sentence 
of death issued against them en masse. Indeed, the Jews 
were not saved either. The offer of salvation made to 
them under the Law Covenant did not give them eternal 
life; as St. Paul declares, "By the deeds of the Law shall 
no flesh be justified in God's sight." If the Jews were 



justified by the Law, then Christ died in vain. 

The offer of life given to the Jew was merely to prove 
to him, and ultimately to all, the impossibility of any obtaining 
life under the Divine Law without Divine assistance 
—without the Savior and his work at Calvary and 
additionally his work for the world as the Mediator of 
the New Covenant, during his Messianic reign of a 
thousand years. In harmony with this the Apostle declares, 
"Christ brought life and immortality to light 
through the Gospel." And again, "There is none other 
name given under heaven whereby we must be saved." 
And again, "This great salvation began to be preached by 
our Lord."— Hebrews 2:3. 

THE NINEVITES REPENTED 

Jonah's preaching was that within forty days God 
would destroy Nineveh. But the people, impressed by his 
message, repented of their sinful course and sought 
Divine forgiveness. The King's proclamation was that 
"neither man nor beast, herd nor flock taste anything; 
let them not feed nor drink water, but let them be covered 
with sackcloth, both man and beast, and let them 
cry mightily to God; yea, let them turn every man from 
his evil way and from the violence that is in their hands." 
The Lord hearkened to the Ninevites, accepted their 
repentance, and permitted their national life to continue 
for a time. 

We are, of course, to understand that God knew the 
end from the beginning— that he knew that the Ninevites 

R4785 : page 89 

would repent and that he would not blot them out within 
forty days, in accordance with Jonah's preaching. 
Nineveh did pass away utterly, great city as it was, but 
not within forty literal days. Possibly the time meant 
by the Almighty was what is sometimes termed prophetic 
or symbolical time, a day for a year— forty days, forty 
years. 

The lesson shows us how much greater is the compassion 
of the Almighty than that of his imperfect servants 
of human kind. God was pleased to have the 
Ninevites turn from their sins to hearty repentance. He 
was pleased to grant them an extension of earthly life. 
But Jonah was displeased. His argument was, There, 
God did make a fool of me. He told me that this great 
city would be destroyed within forty days and I preached 
it. But all the while he must have known that it 
would not be destroyed within forty days. God has 
brought discredit upon me and I am now to be regarded 
as a false prophet. 

Jonah was more interested in himself and his own 
reputation than in the Ninevites and their interests. The 
Lord's servants must not be so! Self should be lost 
sight of; as the great Apostle Paul advises, "Love seeketh 



not her own"; and again, "Christ pleased not himself." 
-I Cor. 13:5; Rom. 15:3. 

GOD REPENTED OF THE EVIL 

The query arises in some minds, How can God repent 
and change his mind if he knows the end from the beginning? 
The answer is that the word repent has a wider 
meaning than is generally appreciated. Humanity uses it 
only in respect to a change of purpose. But, as modern 
dictionaries show, the word may mean either a change of 
action or a change of purpose, or both. God's purposes 
do not change. He never repents of them. But he does 
change his conduct. 

R4786 : page 89 

Thus Israel, his favored people for centuries, were 
cut off and God's dealing towards them changed. But 
God's purposes never changed toward Israel. He foreknew 
and foretold their rejection of Jesus and his rejection 
of them, and how later on they would be re-gathered 
to their own land and be forgiven and be blessed by 
Messiah when he assumed his Messianic Office as King 
of kings and Lord of lords— "the Prince of the kings of 
the earth." 

The Lord taught Jonah a lesson respecting his sympathy 
for a gourd, an inanimate thing, and his lack of 
sympathy for the Ninevites. So it is with many preachers 
and others. They have sympathy for the flowers, for the 
birds, for the lower animals, for children and, to some 
extent, for all mankind under the distresses of the present 
time. Nevertheless such people sometimes become 
angry at the bare suggestion that God does not intend to 
roast the Ninevites, Sodomites, Amalekites, or anybody 
else, to all eternity and that his gracious purposes for the 
world in general will be manifested in giving all an opportunity 
to attain to human perfection, a world-wide 
Eden and everlasting life, if they will hear and obey the 
Great Messiah— whose Head is Jesus and whose members, 
the elect Church, have been in process of selection 
and preparation throughout this Gospel Age. 

Our Lord declared that the Gospel was to be preached 
no longer to the Jews only, but to all nations. The 
preaching was not intended to convert all nations, and 
has not done so. It was intended to gather a saintly few 
from all nations, and this it will soon have accomplished. 



R4786 : page 89 

"PRIDE GOETH BEFORE DESTRUCTION" 
-MAY 7.-2 CHRONICLES 26:8-21.- 



"Pride goeth before destruction and a haughty 
spirit before a fall."— Proverbs 16:18. 

A GREAT and prosperous king in Jerusalem 
was Uzziah. He made a good beginning, 
was reverential toward God, and put his 
capital and the remainder of his kingdom 
into a good condition for defense against 
enemies. When thinking of the wars of 
Israel we are to remember that this nation 
for a time represented God's rule in the 
earth in a sense that no other nation ever 
did, either before or after them. 

Israel's kings were anointed by Divine commission 
and authority, as were no other kings, and they were 
said to "sit upon the Throne of the Kingdom of the 
Lord," as no other kings before or since have held 
dominion. Theirs was not, however, the Kingdom of 
God for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will 
be done on earth," but merely a preparatory arrangement 
with the typical Israelites. God's Kingdom will really 
come to earth after Messiah shall establish it. For a 
thousand years he shall reign to uplift the humble and to 
bless all who seek righteousness and to punish and correct 
all others and finally to destroy the incorrigible in 
the Second Death. It was, therefore, quite in line with the 
arrangements of that time that the kings of Israel and 
Judah should fortify and strengthen themselves and 
defend the land which the Almighty had specially given 
to their nation. 

The truthfulness of our text was illustrated in King 
Uzziah when his fame had spread abroad and he began 
to feel his greatness. Pride came in; he forgot that he 
was merely the Lord's representative in the kingdom, 
and that his first duty as a loyal subject of the Almighty 
was to hearken to and obey the Divine commands. 

Having accomplished great things from a political 
and military standpoint, Uzziah essayed to a religious 
distinction. He evidently felt that God was proud of him 
and of his success and would be very pleased to have 
him enter the temple after the manner of the priests and 
offer incense at the Golden Altar. He knew of the rules 
and regulations governing the temple and its service, but 
considered himself above them. He would go direct to 
God and not recognize the priest. 

Many successful people fall into the same error of 
supposing that their success in business or in politics, 
their brilliancy of mind, or their polish of education are 
the only requisites in the sight of Jehovah. They 
feel that if they should go to Church and acknowledge 
God, God should be very proud to have them and, of 
course, should give them the first place in everything. 
This is a mistake. The great King Eternal, "the Lofty 
One that inhabiteth Eternity," has rules and regulations 
governing all attempts to approach him. There is just 
the one way of approach and no other. 



THE MELCHISEDEK PRIEST 

"Oh!" says one— "I see. You wish us to understand 
that the laity have no access to God, that they must come 
through the clergy, even as King Uzziah should have 
approached God through Israel's High Priest! But I 
deny that the clergy are any more than other mortals. 
I claim that many of them are less brilliant of mind than 
myself; that many of them are less educated, and others 

R4786 : page 90 

totally devoid of business sense. I admit that it may be 
well enough for the common people to approach God 
through the clergy, but whenever I approach I do so on 
the strength of my own personal intelligence and with the 
realization that the Almighty is glad to have me come to 
him. When I pray I often say, 'Oh, Lord, I thank thee 
that I am not as other men, nor even as this publican.'" 
-Luke 18:11. 

No, friend, that is not our thought— not the Bible 
thought, not the lesson we should draw from the Scriptures 
under consideration. We must admit that there is 
no Scriptural authority for a clerical class in the Church 
of Christ— unless it be the twelve Apostles, St. Paul 
taking the place of Judas. Those twelve Scripturally 
rank as a hierarchy— the special mouthpieces of the Great 
Teacher. We are not intimating that the soul desirous 
of approaching God must come through the clergy of 
any denomination; we do emphasize, nevertheless, 
that there is but the one way of approaching God and 
that is by and through the Great Advocate whom he has 
appointed for us— "Jesus Christ the Righteous"— "a 
Priest for the Age, after the order of Melchisedek" 
(Heb. 5:6); "No man cometh unto the Father but by 
me," was his message; "There is none other name given 
under heaven or amongst men whereby we must be 
saved" (Acts 4:12), is the Apostle's message. 

INCENSE AT THE GOLDEN ALTAR 

Those whose eyes of understanding have never 
been opened to a realization that Jesus is the Divine 
Appointee for the reconciliation of the world to God 
may be excused if they approach God in prayer aside 
from him. Their prayers may be answered to a limited 
extent, if offered in sincerity, from the heart, and because, 
as the Apostle intimates, God "winked at" their 
ignorance of his arrangements. 

But as King Uzziah knew of the Divine arrangement, 
that his prayers as incense could be offered to the 
Almighty on the "Golden Altar" only by the priest, so 
those who now have come to a realization of the fact 
that Jesus is the great antitypical Priest through whom 
communication with the Father has been opened up 



would come under condemnation should they intrude into 
the Divine presence in prayer, otherwise than as provided 
in the Divine arrangement, as King Uzziah was smitten 
with leprosy for his presumption and pride. 

Leprosy, Scripturally considered, is a type of sin. 
Uzziah's experiences, therefore, signify, typically, that 
whoever would approach God aside from his ordained 
Priest, having a knowledge of the impropriety, would 
come under Divine sentence as a wilful sinner. The 
penalty would be in proportion to the degree of enlightenment 
previously enjoyed. 

FOURSCORE VALIANT PRIESTS 

When the king entered the holy of the temple to offer 
incense at the golden altar the High Priest and eighty 
of the under-priests followed him, protesting against his 
sacrifice. Although this was only their duty, it nevertheless 
marked them as valiant, courageous men, for in 
ancient times a king had great power. And King Uzziah 
was feeling his own greatness, and proud of it, and was 
likely to resent any interference with his kingly prerogatives. 

Their words of protest voiced what the king already 
knew respecting the restrictions attaching to the services 
of the temple, but they added, "Go out, for thou hast 
trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honor from 
Jehovah God." True honor, true blessing, true prosperity, 
cannot be found in opposition to the Divine arrangements. 
The king's course, therefore, must bring 
him dishonor. Had he hastened to glorify God, he would 
have received a blessing, no doubt. But, instead, violation 
of the Divine Law brought him the curse. 

The lesson is a plain one, exemplified by our text and 
by St. Paul's words, "He that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted; he that exalteth himself shall be abased." (Luke 14:11.) 
It was not enough, even if the king had good 
intentions, instead of pride, backing him up. Good intentions 
should have guided him to a study of the Divine 
arrangements and promises. Ignorance of the Law is 
not an excuse. Hence the Apostle's exhortation, "Study 
to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of 
Truth. "--2 Tim. 2:15. 

The lesson seems to be one of humility, both for the 
Church and the world. Some are born humble-minded 
and others self-conceited. The latter, therefore, are 

R4787 : page 90 

handicapped as respects this grace, though Scripturally 

advantaged in respect to courage to battle against present 

adversities. On the whole our handicaps through imperfections 

of the flesh are not so unequal as to make it 

easier for one than for another to enter into the Kingdom 

under the call of this Gospel Age, for where much 

is given much is required; and the judgment of the Lord 



will be according to the heart, the will, the intention, 
the endeavor, and not according to the flesh and its 
weaknesses and failures. 

Humility is important, not only on its own account, 
but also because the other graces of the holy Spirit 
cannot be cultivated without it. The Apostle begins the 
list of these spiritual graces with meekness. How could 
one be gentle or make good progress in the cultivation 
of these graces if he were not meek? How could one be 
patient and submissive in the trials and difficulties of 
life if not meek? How could one be kind toward opponents 
and in all things if he were not meek? How 
could one be patient toward all if he were not meek? 
How could one have brotherly kindness except through 
meekness? How could one be Godlike except he possessed 
meekness? How could one be loving in the Scriptural 
sense without meekness? Along these lines all who will 
be of the Church will be tested. And meekness and 
humility must be cultivated and must abound in the heart, 
in order to enable the cultivation of the other fruits of 
the Spirit. 



IN THEE I TRUST 

Only for thee, Lord, would I live, while here below; 
It is my great delight, thy love to show; 
Use me, then, first as thou seest best- 
Not mine to choose, but mine to trust and rest. 

Only to thee would I resign my will, 'tis all 
I have to give, and Lord, it seems so small 
A thing to offer unto thee, 
Who didst lay down thy life for me. 

Only to thee, my Lord, I'd come when trials press, 
Assured that thou alone canst comfort best; 
My deepest griefs, I need not to thee tell, 
Thou understandest all, dear Lord, so well! 

'Tis only thou canst send the peace which soothes my pain, 
That bids my weeping cease, and sunshine follow rain, 
My every fear remove and doubt dispel,— 
I rest on thee, and know that all is well. 

JENNIE G. SHARP. 



R4787 : page 91 

THE CALL TO DIVINE SERVICE 
-MAY 14.-ISAIAH 6.- 
"Then said I, here am I; send me." 



LET US study today Isaiah's vision. The 

temple at Jerusalem, otherwise called the 

House of Jehovah, was the scene of the 

vision. But instead of the holy and most 

holy, the mercy-seat, the altar, the table of 

shew-bread and the golden candlestick, 

everything was changed— a glorious Throne 

was there, and upon the Throne the Lord. 

On either side of him, as representing the 

Divine attributes, stood the four seraphim, 

while the entire temple was filled with his train of followers. 

The temple was full of glory-light and two of 

the seraphim cried, "Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of 

Hosts." The two on the other side replied, "Let the 

whole earth be full of his glory." Following this 

response the door-posts were shaken and an obscuring 

haze filled the temple, dimming the glory. 

LET THE WHOLE EARTH BE FULL OF THE LORD'S 
GLORY 

The signification of this vision we draw from the 
words of Jesus. He refers us directly to this vision. 
(John 12:41.) In fulfilment of the Divine promise Jesus 
appeared at his first advent and tentatively offered himself 
to Israel as their great King of Glory, the great 
Mediator of the New Covenant, promised them by 
Jehovah. (Jer. 31:31.) God knew that Jesus would be 
rejected; nevertheless the offer was made. Had he been 
received and had he then taken to himself his Messianic 
glory and power it would have meant that a sufficient 
number of the Jewish nation had received him with their 
whole heart, so as to constitute the complete number of 
the Bride class, to be associates in the spiritual Kingdom. 
In that event there would have been no offer made to 
the Gentiles of joint-heirship with Messiah in his glorious 
Kingdom— Israel would have gotten the entire blessing. 
The Kingdom would have been established forthwith and 
the nation of Israel, accepting Messiah, would at once 
have become the channel of Divine blessing to all nations. 

But when the voice declared, Let the whole earth be 
full of the Lord's glory, the unreadiness of the world to 
receive the message was indicated by the shaking of 
the door-posts and the darkness beclouding the glorious 
scene. The fulfilment of this we see in the fact that the 
Jewish nation, which is the doorway to this glory, was 
not in proper condition. A new doorway must be provided 
through which the glories of the King of kings 
will issue forth to the world. St. Paul declares that the 
shaking of anything, in a typical sense, represents its instability, 
its removal— that something superior may be 
established in its stead. The Jewish nation was removed 
from its favored position and a new nation, a new doorway, 
a new channel of access between God and men has 
since been in process of establishment. 



"YE ARE A HOLY NATION" 

No other nation in the world was found more worthy 
than Israel of the honored position. Consequently, God 
proceeded to make a new nation composed exclusively of 
saints. As St. Peter explains, "Ye are a royal priesthood, 
a holy nation." (I Pet. 2:9.) First of all, the 
saintly Jews were taken, to be the nucleus of the new 
Nation, spirit-begotten, heavenly. Subsequently, the 
selective processes having continued throughout this Gospel 
Age, with its close the Holy Nation will be completed 
by the power of the First Resurrection. Then 
everything will be in proper readiness, and the command, 
Let the whole earth be filled with the glory of Jehovah 
God, will go forth and the world will be blessed— natural 
Israel being promised a prominent share in connection 
with this grand work. 

In the vision Isaiah recognized that the shaking of 
the door-posts and the obscuring mist signified an unpreparedness 
somewhere for the glory of the Lord and 
he cried out, recognizing his own imperfection and the 
imperfection of those with whom he dwelt. A glimpse 
of the Lord's glory showed his own defects and those of 
his neighbors. 

This was the effect of Jesus' teaching upon all those 
who received his message. The Law shone out more 
resplendently than ever and they found that they violated 
it more than they had supposed— not only in deeds, but 
also in words and thoughts. The holy ones, as represented 
in Isaiah, took the matter to heart and humbled 
themselves before the Lord and acknowledged that they 
were not fit to be the teachers of men, but that the whole 
Jewish nation and all others were imperfect, and that any 
message which their lips could carry would be imperfect. 

As Isaiah's lips were touched with a live coal from 
the altar, it illustrated how the saintly ones of Israel 
and from all nations during this Gospel Age have had 
the required blessing upon their lips and have proclaimed 
the Divine invitation, "Present your bodies living sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable to God." (Rom. 12:1.) This 
message, enkindled by the live coal from God's altar of 
sacrifice, has gone hither and thither throughout the 
world for eighteen centuries. It has not only taught a 
cleansing from sin, but a service to God. 

"HERE AM I; SEND ME" 

Isaiah continued to be the type of the holy people. 
God has desired to send his message of grace and the 
invitation to sacrifice to all who would have the ear to 
hear. And the sanctified, whom Isaiah typified, have 
throughout this Age said, "Lord, here am I; send me." 

Our lesson further shows that the message of this 
Isaiah class would be unpopular. Few would hear; few 
would see; few would receive the blessing of forgiveness 



and begetting of the holy Spirit. The Master and his 
Apostles began this proclamation. It has continued the 
same to this day. 

But we are not in this to be discouraged. Only the 
"little flock," the pure in heart, the followers in the footsteps 
of Jesus, will get this blessing and be prepared to 
constitute the Kingdom class, the new doorway or threshold 
connecting the Divine Holy with the world of mankind. 

Israel's experiences are used as the measuring line to 
show when the completion of the Church will be accomplished 
and the glory of the Lord shine forth upon 
Israel, and through Israel to all nations, peoples, kindreds 
and tongues, for a thousand years. That measuring line 

R4788 : page 91 

tells of the desolation of Israel's land, of its becoming 
utterly waste and of their removal from the land. The 
last verse of the lesson tells of how in the end there will 
come a sprout out of the roots— a holy Seed, a holy 
people, under Divine providence, will be raised up. These 
holy ones of Israel, on this side the veil, will be the 
Ancient Worthies, who will be resurrected and enter into 
their reward as the earthly representatives of Messiah's 
Kingdom. (Heb. 11:38-40; Psa. 148:11.) To these 
Princes will be gathered the faithful, loyal, holy of the 
Jews, the nucleus, the beginning of the earthly phase of 
the Messianic Kingdom. 



R4788 : page 92 

THE FIG TREE IS WITHERED AWAY 

"And Peter, calling to remembrance, saith 
unto him, Master, behold the fig tree which 
thou cursedst is withered away."— Mark 1 1:21. 

OUR thought is that this particular incident in 

our Lord's earthly ministry may be very 

significant. We see that nearly all his 

acts were good, not only for the time being, 

but, as it were, pictures of larger things 

to come after. In the casting out of 

devils, etc., he was showing forth the glory 

of his coming Kingdom. When his Kingdom 

shall come, all the sick will be healed, 

all the blind will have their eyes opened, all 

the lame will walk; there will be literal healing and 

blessing of the world. All devils will be cast out. 

The Lord did not attempt to heal all the sick he saw 
when on earth. We recall the case where the impotent 
man was lying on the porch at the pool of Bethesda. 
Jesus went to that one man and said, "How is it that you 
are here?" He said, "When the time comes for the 



moving of the water, others step down before me." Then 
Jesus merely said to him, "Arise, take up thy bed." He 
said nothing to the others. He did not pretend to heal 
all the sick. He was merely demonstrating his mighty 
power, which will be fully expanded when the glorious 
Kingdom is established. 

Therefore, we think we are taking the proper view of 
matters when we suppose that even the little things, every 
little act of the Lord Jesus, was in some degree prophetic, 
significant of the great things to come. Take, for instance, 
his coming into the boat at night. There was a 
great storm; but as soon as Jesus came into the boat, 
they were at the shore where they were going. 

Now in the instance under consideration, we read that 
Jesus came unto a certain place and there was a fig tree 
and he declared something about gathering of figs; "for 
the time of figs was not yet," our common version reads; 
more properly it would read, "for the time of figs was 
not over," was not past. It would be strange for Jesus 
to come before the proper time to look for figs. 

And he cursed the fig tree and said, "Let no more 
figs grow on thee to the age." Then later St. Peter 
called attention to the fact that the fig tree was beginning 
to wither, and Jesus said, "Have faith in God." 
What is the reason? 

WHEN YE SEE THE FIG TREE PUTTETH FORTH LEAVES 
YE KNOW THAT SUMMER IS NIGH 

It is our understanding that the fig tree was a type 
or picture of the Jewish nation, to whom Jesus came 
when it was proper to expect fruitage. But coming to 
the Jews, he did not find the nation bearing fruit. The 
great ones of the nation were cast off; and only the 
publicans and sinners were ready to accept his message 
—the very ones the others would not recognize at all. 

It is remembered that the nation had a blight upon it. 
At the end of his ministry, Jesus, riding to the brow of 
the hill overlooking Jerusalem, said, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
which killest the prophets, and stonest them that 
are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy 
children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under 
her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left 
unto you desolate." (Luke 13:34,35.) A very short time 
afterwards it began to lose its power; and the Jewish 
nation lost its identity completely as a nation in the year 
70—37 years after. 

While the Jewish nation has thus been in hades, in 
the tomb, so to speak, it is as a nation that they 
are referred to thus. Of course, they go into the 
tomb as individuals, as every one else; but as a nation 
also they have gone into the tomb. But according to the 
Scriptures there will be a resurrection of the Jewish 
nation, and a picture of that raising up is given where it 
says, "the bones came together, bone to his bone," etc. 
(Ezek. 37:7.) Those bones represent the whole house 



of Israel, which is referred to as saying, "Our hope is 
dead" (Vs. 11); our ambitions are all gone or are asleep! 

So God is telling them that all the Kingdom hopes 
of that nation are to be revived. As Jesus said to his 
disciples in one of his discourses— When ye see the fig 
tree beginning to put forth its tender leaves, ye know 
that summer is nigh. We see the fig tree putting forth 
its leaves today (see Matt. 24:32; Mark 13:28); we see 
the Jews looking back to Jerusalem, and we thus see the 
fig tree putting forth its leaves, or giving signs of life, 
looking forward to the re-establishment of the Jewish 
nation. God says there will be such a Jewish nation 
again. 



R4788 : page 92 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S WESTERN TOUR 

IN ACCORDANCE with the brief announcement 
in the January 15th TOWER arrangements 
are being completed as fast as possible 
for this long Trans-Continental Tour of 
over 7,000 miles. 

ROUTE.— Stops will be made and Brother 
Russell will speak at Conventions of the International 
Bible Students Association at 
Indianapolis, St. Louis, Kansas City, 
Wichita, Pueblo, Colorado Springs, Denver, 
Salt Lake City, Los Angeles, Pasadena, Santa Cruz, San 
Francisco, Oakland, Sacramento, Portland, Tacoma, 
Seattle, Victoria, Vancouver, Calgary, Winnipeg and 
Duluth. 

ITINERARY. -All the details for the movement of the 
party are in the hands of Brother L. W. Jones, M.D., 
3003 Walnut street, Chicago, 111. We are just in receipt 
from him of a beautiful Itinerary, giving full particulars 
regarding the various features and arrangements of 
the trip, route, Convention stops, rates, etc. 

SPECIAL TRAIN.-It is proposed to use an entire SPECIAL 
TRAIN, consisting of several cars, in which the 
party will travel as one large family, eating and sleeping 
on the train for practically the entire journey of over a 
month, beginning June 9th, the date Brother Russell leaves 
Brooklyn. The train will consist of Compartment, Standard 
Pullman and Tourist Cars, providing for seven different 
grades of accommodations, according to the needs, 
desires and pocket-books of those participating. 

MEALS.— Each price includes 64 meals for each. A 
refund will be made if less than 64 meals are eaten on the 
train. Other meals may be had at the various places where 
Conventions are held. The several grades follow:— 

One entire compartment for one person, with 64 
meals, $237. 

One entire compartment for two people, 64 meals each, 



rate each, $141. 

One entire compartment for three people, 64 meals 
each, rate each, $109. 

One section in Pullman for one, 64 meals, rate, $157. 

One section in Pullman for two people, 64 meals each, 
rate each, $93. 

Half section in Pullman for one person, 64 meals, 
rate, $93. 

R4788 : page 93 

One section in Tourist for one person, 64 meals, 
rate, $109. 

One section in Tourist for two people, 64 meals each, 
rate each, $69. 

Half section in Tourist for one person, 64 meals, 
rate, $69. 

RAILROAD FARE. --The railroad fare is additional to 
the above prices. The round-trip rate from Chicago and 
return to Chicago is $77.50. 

DEPOSIT.— As large contracts must be made in advance 
for the cars, supplies, etc., a deposit of $50 will be required 
from each. 

EARLY ACTION.— The magnitude of such a movement 
is little appreciated by those unaccustomed to arrange for 
such things, and in order to know what contracts to make 
and how to provide the best possible service at a minimum 
of cost for each and every one, it is essential that 
it be known as soon as possible how many will take advantage 
of this special service. Another reason why early 
reservations should be made on this Special Train is 
that quite a number are desirous of joining en route for 

R4789 : page 93 

a portion of the journey, but it is difficult to give them 
very definite information until there is some idea as to 
the size of the main party who will take the entire trip. 
It will, therefore, be rendering a favor and service to 
those dear brethren who can go only a portion of the 
way, if those who can go all the way will make reservations 
IMMEDIATELY. 

Brother Jones URGENTLY REQUESTS those who contemplate 
going that they get into communication WITH 
HIM AT ONCE. He will be pleased to take up the matter 
with such in detail. 

We publish above the information in full so that all 
who may not only desire to be of the party, in spirit, 
but who also find themselves so circumstanced that they 
can participate personally in the trip, may fully know of 
its financial cost to them and be better able to determine 
whether it will be pleasing to the Lord for them to 
join the party. We urge that all who take this trip 
should do so filled with the spirit of Truth— meekness, 
gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, 
love. 



R4789 : page 93 

PROPER AND IMPROPER JEALOUSY 

"Jealousy is cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are coals 

of fire, which hath a most vehement flame."— Song of Sol. 8:6. 

JEALOUSY of another is always an evil quality; 

as the text states, it is "cruel as sheol," 

which engulfs all mankind; it is unreasoning 

and insatiable. One has said of it, 

"Jealousy is really— whether so recognized 

or not— a thirst for blood, life; at any moment, 

when reason is a little weaker than 

usual, jealousy is ready to kill the thing it 

hates or the thing it loves." It signifies 

either apprehension of being displaced in 

the affections of another, or of being outdone by a rival 

in matters of favor or popularity with others. 

The jealousy mentioned in our text is the most vicious 
kind of cruelty, committed in the name of love, or through 
envy; it is one of the great foes which confront every 
Christian and is closely allied to hatred, malice, envy, 
strife, and should be slain on sight as an enemy of God 
and man, and of every good principle; and to the extent 
that its presence has defiled the heart even for a moment, 
a cleansing by the spirit of holiness and love should be 
invoked. It is not only a cruel monster of itself, but its 
poisonous fangs are almost certain to inflict pain and 
trouble upon others. The mind which is once poisoned 
with jealousy so rapidly brings everything within its environment 
to its own color and character that it is with 
great difficulty that it can be entirely cleansed from it. 

"I, THE LORD THY GOD, AM A JEALOUS GOD" 

Nevertheless, love, wisdom, hatred, jealousy, are attributed 
to God and should all be in us. We read, "I, the 
Lord thy God, am a jealous God." If man could have 
his hatred and his jealousies along the same lines as God, 
it would be all right. We, as God does, should hate sin, 
but not the sinner. God's jealousy is just and is sure to 
bring to the sinner a just punishment. He tells us that 
when we have other gods, we must consider him jealous; 
but the impropriety of jealousy is when it leads to bitterness 
and other like qualities to which the fallen human 
mind is subject and liable. When the Lord announces 
himself as a jealous God, he means us to understand that 
he wants all of our affections, all of our confidence, our 
entire trust. He wants that we should be so fully in 
accord with him that his will shall be supreme in all the 
affairs of life. 

This is not to be considered selfishness on the part of 



the Almighty; because this, under his overruling providences, 
means to his creatures the largest amount of happiness, 
the largest amount of success in the duties and 
affairs of the present life, and the fullest preparation for 
the blessings which God has prepared for, and promised 
to, those who love him. 

"I AM JEALOUS OVER YOU WITH A GODLY JEALOUSY" 

When St. Paul wrote, "I am jealous over you with a 
godly jealousy" (2 Cor. 11:2), we cannot understand 
that he was actuated by a mean jealousy, but that he was 
jealous for, or in the interest of, the Corinthians; he was 
jealous also for the things that were right and that they 
should be in accord with them. His jealousy, therefore, 
was an earnest, anxious solicitude and vigilant watchfulness, 
a godly jealousy for the best interests of the Lord's 
precious Truth. This, of course, is a jealousy such 
as we all should feel in the Church. If we see a condition 
such as that to which the Apostle refers, a departure 
from the simplicity and purity which is in Christ, we 
should feel, "This is all wrong," and should do all in our 
power and in reason to correct this difficulty. So, if we 
see anything in one member of the Church that would 
be likely to cast a reflection upon the Lord's cause, we 
should feel it proper to put forth efforts to correct that 
one, lest harm be done. 

When we have that jealousy in the Lord's cause, it is 
different from a jealousy in our own interest. Very few 
get too jealous in the Lord's cause; however, it would 
be well, even in his cause, to scrutinize our words, deeds, 
etc., properly; and while we should be very zealous, very 
jealous in the Lord's cause, yet we must be very sure 
that it is not a private matter; and should consider 
whether or not we are "busybodies." Then, too, we 
should consider whether it may be a proper thing for the 
elders to deal with, and whether or not it would be our 
duty to go to the elders. We should all have a great deal 
of jealousy for the Lord's cause and the Lord's work, but 
be very careful that it is not the bitter kind mentioned 
in the text; in other words, we should be very sure that 
it is not jealousy of another, but jealousy for another, 
for his interests and best welfare. 



R4789 : page 94 

A CITY WITHOUT WALLS 

"He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city 
that is broken down, and without walls."— Prov. 25:28. 

FORCEFUL, indeed, is the simile found in our 
text. A city, especially in olden times, was a 
place where people were congregated for 



mutual advantage and protection. Marauders 
were abroad ready to plunder and the 
wall of the city was very much in the 
nature of a preservation from harm, that 
the inhabitants might be able to protect 
their valuables, their rights, their interests. 
For a like purpose God, in creating man, 
gave him a will. It is one of the strong elements of 
man's likeness to his Creator. We may have a will, however 
weak our bodies, or, however strong our passions. 
That will may be strong whether we are brought into outward 
subjection to others or not. Our bodies may be enslaved, 
but our wills cannot be enslaved without our permission. 
Our will is something which cannot be taken 
from us; but it needs to be defended; it needs to be repaired; 
it needs to be made strong in weak places. 

THE NECESSITY FOR STRENGTHENING THE WILL 

Those who do not attend to this and do not strengthen 
the will where they find special liability to assaults, are 
sure to have it much broken down so that, by and by, 
they reach a place where they have no will, no self-control. 
Just as in a devastated city the protecting walls 
have been destroyed and the enemy finds easy access, so 
the human being who yields to sin and various weaknesses 
and assaults of the Adversary has lost his real 
manhood and is in danger of losing everything. 

It is a part of our duty as Christians and as New 
Creatures to withstand all assaults of the Adversary; 
and these assaults come, not from visible forces alone, but 
from evil spirits; from those who seek to obtain possession 
of us— as is the case with those who come under 
the control of these evil spirits. Their wills are subdued, 
broken down, and they are in the hands of their enemies, 
exactly as pictured in our text. Let such strive to cast 
out the enemy, to resist him, to strengthen the walls of 
their minds and to make an alliance at once with the 
Lord Jesus. Let them give their hearts fully and completely 
to him and accept his will, his Word, his guidance, 
in every matter. 

True, when thus released from the bondage of sin and 
of Satan, they become bond-slaves of righteousness and 
of Christ; but when it is realized that to be the bond-servants 
of Christ means to serve that which is good and 
true and right, and to be in harmony with the Father, 
all should rejoice to place themselves fully and unreservedly 
under the control of him who hath so loved the 
entire race of mankind as to purchase them with his own 
precious blood. Surely all are safe in his hands! 

R4790 : page 94 

But it is not sufficient that any of us merely place ourselves 
in the hands of the Lord. The Psalmist counsels 
us, "Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and 



he shall bring to pass; and he shall bring forth thy 
righteousness as the light." (Psa. 37:5.) The Apostle 
Paul tells us that "It is God who worketh in you both 
to will and to do of his good pleasure." (Phil. 2:13.) He 
works by means of the promises in his Word; by means 
of the various experiences of life, its disciplines and 
humbling processes, and it is well that we take heed to 
each lesson as it comes if we desire to have a character 
developed in the likeness of our Head. 

"HE THAT RULETH HIS OWN SPIRIT IS GREATER THAN 
HE THAT TAKETH A CITY" 

We are not to lose sight of the fact that we are to be 
"workers together with God" in the accomplishment of 
the great transforming work to be wrought in us by the 
renewing of our minds. Our battle with self is our 
greatest battle, and we have the Lord's Word for it that 
he that "ruleth his own spirit [his own mind, will] is better 
than he that taketh a city," because he has to that 
extent learned to exercise the combativeness of a true 
character in the right direction— that of self-control. 

But, lest we become discouraged with the slowness of 
our progress, we should ever remember that the attainment 
of the control of our own spirits, our own minds, 
the bringing of these into full accord, full harmony, with 
the Lord and, so far as possible, into accord with all of 
the Lord's people who are in accord with him, is attained 
"finally," as the Apostle informs us; it is gradually 
reached by "patient continuance in well doing," relying 
upon the Divine assurance of grace to help in every time 
of need. 

Let us all strain every energy toward this final and 
grand development. We are to have it continually before 
us as the standard, the ideal, the aim, and although we 
may fail time after time, if we are rightly exercised in 
the matter we shall be stronger as the result of each failure; 
for each failure will show us, more clearly than we 
previously discerned, the weak points of our characters, 
naturally resulting from the fall. And if each weak 
point be carefully noted and guarded against as respects 
the future, we shall come, by and by, by the grace of God 
and under the direction of our great Teacher, by his Word 
and example and providential leadings, to that subdued 
condition, that harmonized condition, which will fully 
accord with the will of God. 

To such, looking back, even the failures which, subsequently 
recognized, led to greater fortification against 
the wiles of the Adversary and the weaknesses of the 
flesh, may be seen to have been overruled by the Lord for 
our blessing, according to his promise that "all things 
shall work together for good to them that love God."— 
Rom. 8:28. 



WHY SHOULD I FEAR? 

"Whene'er the storms come down on thee, 
And days of peace all seem to flee; 
This thought thy peace again shall bring, 
Why should I fear?— the Lord is King. 

"E'en when the tempest rages high, 
And darkest clouds are drawing nigh, 
With hands of faith to this, O! cling- 
Why should I fear?— the Lord is King. 

"Amid the stormy waves of life, 
Above the tumult and the strife, 
The chimes of hope still sweetly ring- 
Be not afraid— the Lord is King. 

"Thy ship is toss'd by wind and wave, 
But there is one whose power can save; 
Across the sea he hastes to bring 
Both rest and peace— the Lord is King. 

"Yes, Jesus walks upon the sea, 
And in the storm he comes to thee; 
Then trust in him, rejoice and sing; 
He calms the waves— the Lord is King. 

"He stretches out his hand to thee, 
And from thy fears he sets thee free; 
Beneath the shadow of his wing 
He keeps thee safe— the Lord is King." 



R4790 : page 95 

"THE BIBLE IN STONE" 

"In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst 
of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to 
the Lord; and it shall be for a sign and a witness unto 
the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt."— Isaiah 19:19,20. 

IT IS a mistake to think of ourselves as more 

brainy than our forefathers. The fact that 

we are living in the day of steam-power 

and electric light, the telegraph, telephone, 

phonograph, etc., does not prove, as some 

assume, that we are more brainy than our 

forefathers. As a matter of fact, very few 

of us are inventors of anything useful; 

only here and there have great inventors 

sprung up, and they tell us that they achieve 

their greatest success by something akin to sudden inspiration. 

They stumble upon their inventions, rather than 

work them out. 



Furthermore, our inventions are usually the product 
of several minds, the suggestions from one proving 
seed-thoughts for another. The printing press and mail 
service have been great factors in the distribution of the 
knowledge of truth throughout the world, enabling one 
to profit by the thoughts of another. The Bible explains 
the progress of these days and informs us that it is because 
we are in the day of God's Preparation— preparation 
for the Messianic Kingdom and the world-wide 
blessings which will then prevail. 

STATISTICS SHOW THAT OUR RACE IS STEADILY 
DETERIORATING 

As a matter of fact, statistics show that our race in 
most civilized lands is steadily deteriorating. Announcement 
has recently been made that the hat manufacturers 
of Great Britain notice that the demand for smaller hats 
has been increasing and the demand for larger hats decreasing, 
as shown by their records for years back. The 
Evolution theory, which is directly opposed to the Bible 
teaching of man's creation, has helped to give the impression 
that the wonderful inventions of our day are the 
result of evolution— that a little way back our forefathers 
were in a class akin to the monkey. 

What are the facts? If we look for poets, where shall 
we find them? Have we today, in this so-called "Brain 
Age," any one to match with the poet Shakespeare? or 
the Psalmist? or Job? According to the Evolution theory, 
one who lived 3,500 years ago should have been merely 
an intelligent ape; yet who can read the Law of Moses 
and not be struck with his intelligence, justice, wisdom 
and generosity? Well would it be if we, in our civilized 
times, should copy some of Moses' regulations; that, for 
instance, of the Jubilee year, in which all property rights 
reverted to the original owner. 

THE GREAT PYRAMID ONE OF THE EVIDENCES OF 
THE SKILL OF THE ANCIENTS 

The Great Pyramid of Egypt is one of the evidences 
of the skill of the ancients, which those of Evolution 
fame would have us think were mere uneducated monkeys. 
Today, with our latest machinery, we might possibly 
duplicate everything in the Great Pyramid, even 
down to the fine joints between the immense stones. But 
every thoughtful person examining the Great Pyramid, 
or reading accounts thereof, must be impressed with the 
wonderful precision exercised by its builders— a precision 
supposed to have been impossible for any living prior to 
our day. 

The Pyramid, however, is but another evidence in 
contradiction of the Evolution theory. No doubt all of 
our readers have read STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 
III., the last chapter of which describes the Pyramid and 
sets forth much of the wonderful symbolic teachings 



shown in its construction. It shows the Pyramid to be 
in exact harmony with the Bible. Indeed, some, after 
reading this volume, have referred to the Great Pyramid 
as "The Bible in Stone." 



page 95 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study V.— The Organization of the New Creation. 
MAY 7 
THE APOSTOLIC COMMISSION 

(28) Is there any suggestion in Scripture that the Apostles 
were to be lords over the Church, or especially different 

in any respect from the other members of the Body? 
P. 211, par. 1. 

(29) What was the character of their commission? 
P. 212, par. 1. 

(30) What was the difference between the position of 

the Apostles previous to Pentecost, and their special powers 
of the Holy Spirit subsequent to that time? P. 212, par. 2. 

(31) Did these "gifts" take the place of the "fruits" of 
the Spirit? P. 213, top. 

(32) What was the purpose of the Lord's selection and 
instruction of the Apostles. P. 213, par. 1. 

(33) Were the Apostles strong characters, naturally? 

and what special privileges more than compensated for their 
lack of worldly wisdom and education? P. 213, par. 2; 
P. 214, par. 1,2. 

MAY 14 

(34) Why did the Lord specially reveal himself to the 
Apostles after his resurrection? P. 214, par. 3. 

(35) Why was it necessary for the Apostle Paul to see 

the risen Lord, "as one born out of due time"? P. 215, par. 1, 
first half. 

(36) For what reason may we suppose the Apostle Paul 
was granted such peculiar experiences, visions, etc.? P. 215, 
par. 1,2,3. 

(37) Quote Paul's own testimony as to his Apostleship. 
P. 216, top. 

(38) Was it the Lord's intention that the Apostles confine 
their efforts to the Jewish nation? P. 216, par. 1. 

MAY 21 

THE INSPIRATION OF THE APOSTLES 

(39) Were the characters of the Apostles such as to inspire 
confidence in their testimonies? P. 217, par. 1, first part. 



(40) In addition, what further Scriptural evidence should 
increase our confidence in their writings? P. 217, par. 1, last 
part. 

(41) What was the three-fold character of the Apostolic 
inspiration as promised by the Lord in John 14:26; 
16:13? P. 217, par. 2. 

(42) What internal evidence in the Apostolic writings 
would contradict the thought of verbal inspiration? and how 
may we harmonize the different statements of the writers? 
P. 218, par. 1. 

(43) How has the Lord's promise to guide the Church 
"into all truth" been fulfilled? P. 219, par. 1. 

MAY 28 

(44) What was the distinction between the Apostolic 
guidance and the experience of the prophets of olden times? 
P. 219, par. 2. 

(45) How do we understand the Apostolic commission 
with respect to "binding and loosing"? (Matt. 18:18.) 

P. 220, par. 1. 

(46) How shall we interpret Matt. 16:15-18, "Upon this 
Rock will I build my Church"? P. 220, par. 2. 

KEYS OF AUTHORITY 

(47) Explain how Peter used "the Keys of the Kingdom 
of Heaven." P. 221. 

(48) What Scriptural evidence that the Apostles were to 

be not only teachers, but also prophets or seers? Pp. 222, 223. 



page 98 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES L, "the Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Times of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 
1 and 2), 

and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 97 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII APRIL 1 No. 7 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Do You Believe in the Resurrection of the 
Dead? 99 



Which Shall We Believe-God or Satan? 100 

"As Dieth the One, So Dieth the Other, 
They Have All One Breath" 101 

"Blessed and Holy are They Who Have 
Part in the First Resurrection" 102 

The General Resurrection to Be a Raising 

Up by Judgment 103 

"A Thorn in the Flesh" 104 

"My Grace is Sufficient for Thee" 104 

The Song of the Vineyard 105 

The Kingdom of Peace 106 

God Works-We Work 107 

Blameless and Harmless, Without Rebuke 108 

Giants in the Earth 109 

Interesting Questions 109 

Some Interesting Letters 110 

Index to "The Watch Tower"-- 19 10 Ill 

page 98 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., MAY 7 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3 
p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Avenue 
and St. Felix Street. Topic, "The Resurrection Hope." 

LYNCHBURG, VA., MAY 14 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock. Discourse for the interested 
at 1 1 o'clock and Lecture for the Public at 3 p.m. 
All services to be in the Auditorium, Main Street, between 
11th and 12th Streets. 

BALTIMORE, MD., MAY 21 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock. Discourse for the interested 
at 1 1 o'clock in Lehman's Hall, 856 North Howard 
Street. Afternoon service for the Public at 3 o'clock in the 
Lyric Theatre, Mount Royal and Maryland Avenues. 

BOSTON, MASS., MAY 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 4 



"EVERYBODY'S PAPER" 

This title will take the place of PEOPLES PULPIT for use in 
announcing Pilgrim Meetings and for the "Bible Extension 
Course," of which we have advised all INT. BIBLE STUDENTS 
CLASSES. The PEOPLES PULPIT will continue. Reply to Cardinal 
Gibbons will appear in it. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR MAY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for May follow: (1) 283; (2) 
176; (3) 112; (4) 293; (5) 145; (6) 170; (7) 254; 
(8) 129; (9) 114; (10) 10; (11) 293; (12) 119; (13) 



155; (14) 222; (15) 41; (16) Vow; (17) 152; (18) 
332; (19) 6; (20) 279; (21) 7; (22) 62; (23) 208; 
(24) 35; (25) 109; (26) 117; (27) 264; (28) 67; 
(29) 127; (30) 165; (31) 108. 



R4791 : page 99 

DO YOU BELIEVE IN THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD? 

"He preached unto them Jesus and the resurrection." (Acts 17:18.) 

"And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, 

some mocked." (Acts 17:32) "If there be no resurrection 

of the dead,. ..then is our preaching vain, and your 

faith is also vain;. ..then is not Christ raised, and... 

ye are yet in your sins. Then they also which are 

fallen asleep in Christ are perished."— 1 Cor. 15:13-18. 

WHEN we remember that the word "resurrection" 

is used no less than thirty-seven times 

in the New Testament, besides various 

other words of similar import; and when 

we remember that all the prominent creeds 

of Christendom declare faith in a resurrection 

as an integral and essential part of 

Scriptural doctrine and of the hope of 

eternal life— in view of these facts, and of 

the strong language of the texts above 

quoted, whose inspiration is conceded by all Christians, 

it may seem strange that we should ask any Christian 

the question, Do you believe in the resurrection of the 

dead? 

Nevertheless, we have serious reason to doubt that 
a belief in the resurrection of the dead prevails amongst 
Christians to any considerable extent; and it is because 
we believe the resurrection to be a very important 
doctrine in its connection with other doctrines of 
Scripture (throwing light upon other doctrines), that 
we desire to call general attention to this subject and to 
invite an examination of our question in the light of 
facts and of Scripture; our hope being that after a 
careful examination of the subject many more of God's 
people will come to believe— consistently, logically, 
Scripturally— in a resurrection. 

RESURRECTION RARELY CHOSEN NOW AS A SUBJECT 
FOR SERMONS 

"Like priest, like people," is an old adage, which implies 
that the views of the teaching or clerical class on 
any subject may safely be considered an index to the 
views of their parishioners. It is not difficult to ascertain 
the views of the clergy of all denominations on the 
subject of the resurrection of the dead; for, although 
that topic is rarely chosen for discourse, except upon 



Easter Sunday, it is, nevertheless, indissolubly attached 
to every funeral service; and these numerous occasions, 
we believe, amply justify us in the statement that both 
the clergy of all denominations and their people have 
little or no faith in a resurrection of the dead. 

True, it is customary on every funeral occasion to 
read the words of the Apostle Paul, in which he sets 
forth the resurrection as the Christian's hope (I Cor. 15), 
but this seems to be a mere concession on the part of 
the officiating minister. He feels it to be his duty to read 
something on the subject, but his remarks following the 
reading prove most conclusively that, so far from believing 
that the person whose corpse is about to be 
buried is dead, he believes, and instructs his hearers that 
they should believe, that their friend and neighbor is 
"more alive than he ever was." Frequently, indeed, he plays 
directly into the hands of the "Spiritualists" and "Christian 
Scientists," by telling the audience that the spirit 
of their dead friend is with them in the room, hovering 
over them; and that if permitted to speak he would say 
to them, "Dry your tears; weep not for me; I am far 
better off in glory." 

TO MANY DEATH HAS BECOME A DELUSION AND NOT 
A REALITY 

Indeed, it has come to be the general belief among 
Christian people that death is a delusion, and not a 
reality; that people merely seem to die, and do not die; 
that they merely experience a change to a higher form 
of being; that so-called "Christian Scientists" are quite 
correct in saying, "There is no death." 

Whoever holds such views does not, cannot consistently 
believe in "the resurrection of the dead"; because 
if no one is dead, how can there be a resurrection of the 
dead? Wherein would be the sense in speaking of a 
resurrection of the dead to life, if they already have life 
more abundantly than they possessed it before they seemingly 
died? 

But thousands of ministers would answer us, saying, 
"When speaking of the resurrection, we merely mean a 
resurrection of the body— the bodies which we bury are 
all to come forth again from the grave, and the spirits 
which parted from them in death are to be rehabilitated 
in those bodies in the resurrection. This is what we mean 
by resurrection." 

"CONSISTENCY, THOU ART A JEWEL" 

Well, well! Who would have supposed such inconsistency 
on the part of so many learned and well-meaning 
men! Before taking up the Scriptural side of the question, 
to show that such expectations are at variance with 
the Scripture teaching, let us examine the proposition 
of these ministers in the light of its own inconsistency. 

(1) They tell us that the deceased is "far better 



off," in that he has gotten free from the "fetters of the 

R4791 :page 100 

flesh," and that now "his free spirit wings its flight to 
God, no longer hampered and hindered by the mortal 
dust." They go into ecstasies in describing the grandeur 
and liberty and blessedness of the one who has died, 
and who, by reason of getting rid of the body, has attained 
to life more abundant, knowledge a hundredfold, 
and blessings indescribable. 

(2) In the same breath they quote the Scriptures referring 
to the resurrection and (wholly misconstruing 
those Scriptures) tell us that by and by, at the second 
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, the same bodies of flesh 
that were buried will be reorganized (Dr. Talmage, in 
his famous resurrection sermon pictured the resurrection 
morning, and the entire sky darkened with the fragments 
of human bodies coming together from various 
parts of the earth, where a finger, a foot, or a hand 
had been lost by accident, disease or amputation); they 
tell us that then the spirit beings which, they say, left 
those bodies at death, will then return to them, as their 
everlasting habitations. Then, inasmuch as the resurrection 
is Scripturally set forth to be the grand and 
glorious result and consummation of our salvation, they 
feel compelled to go into ecstasies over their erroneous 
presentation of the resurrection, and to tell how glorious 
and grand will be the result. 

They seem to overlook entirely the inconsistency of 
these two propositions; and they expect that their hearers 
will be similarly inconsistent and illogical (and apparently 
their expectations are fully justified, for the 
majority of their hearers swallow the inconsistency without 
difficulty); yea, many of them seem to think that the 
more inconsistent and unreasonable their belief may be, 
the more reason they have to congratulate themselves 
that they have a very strong faith. However, the real 
fact is that they have a very strong credulity. But 
they will have no reward for believing unreasonable 
things which God's Word has not taught, but has contradicted. 

Who cannot see, if he will, that the man who dies 
fifty years old, if in dying he obtains life more abundant 
and knowledge a hundredfold, and a freedom to 
"wing his flight," etc., would be sadly disappointed by a 
resurrection— if it should mean to him re-imprisonment 
in a tenement of clay, with physical restrictions and 
human limitations? And then, if he had thus for centuries 
been a "free spirit," roaming at liberty throughout 
the Universe, untrammeled by a body and bodily limitations, 
where would be the consistency on God's part of 
re-imprisoning such an one in a human body, whose 
powers and uses would be entirely forgotten during those 
centuries of liberty? And if to be without a body is 
"perfect bliss," as the funeral orators tell, how could 
there be anything added to perfect bliss by a resurrection 



of the body, and a re-incarceration therein? 

THE SCRIPTURES HOLD OUT THE ONLY HOPE, THE 
BLESSED HOPE, THE CONSISTENT HOPE 

From the foregoing considerations, we feel that we 
are justified in our assumption that the vast majority 
of Christian people do not believe in a resurrection— 
neither the Scriptural kind ("a resurrection of the 
dead"), nor in the kind they themselves teach, namely, 
a resurrection of the body. With this preface to our 
subject, we go to the Scriptures to learn from them 
what is meant by "the resurrection of the dead," and 
in what manner and why the Scriptures speak of the 
resurrection as the hope, the only hope, the blessed hope, 
not only of the Lord's people, who are to have part in 
the "first resurrection," but of the world in general, 
who are to have an opportunity to share in the resurrection 
of judgment, improperly translated, "the resurrection 
of damnation."— John 5:29. 

Whoever would believe the Scriptural doctrine of the 
resurrection, must also believe the Scriptural doctrine 
respecting death— that death is death, the cessation of 
life. Then, and not until then, will he be able to understand 
the Apostle's words in our text, "If there be no 
resurrection of the dead,. ..then they which are fallen 
asleep in Christ are perished." Nor is this statement 
by the Apostle an exception to or different from the 
teaching of the Scriptures elsewhere. Their unanimous 

R4792 : page 100 

testimony is that the dead are dead; that "in that very 
day their thoughts perish." (Psa. 146:4.) Of the dead 
the Scriptures further declare, "His sons come to honor 
and he knoweth it not; to dishonor, and he perceiveth 
it not of them"; "for there is neither wisdom, nor 
knowledge, nor device in the grave whither thou goest." 
-Job 14:21; Eccl. 9:10. 

WHICH SHALL WE BELIEVE-GOD OR SATAN? 

Here is a direct conflict between modern teachers and 
the inspired Word, the Scriptures claiming that the dead 
know not anything, the modern theologians claiming that 
they know everything. The Bible claims that the dead 
are really dead, and have really suffered according to 
the Divine penalty for sin pronounced against our race— 
"Dying thou shalt die." The opposers take up with Satan's 
delusive statement to Mother Eve, "Ye shall not surely 
die," and attempt to prove that the dead are not dead; 
that God's penalty against sin did not go into effect, 
and that death, so far from being the sentence or curse 
upon our race, is a blessing, a step in a general process 
of evolution. The two theories are as far apart as the 
poles, and the two teachers of these two theories, as we 



have shown, are God, on the one hand, and Satan, "a liar 
from the beginning," on the other hand. Which shall we 
believe? 

The entire Plan of Salvation is connected with this 
question. If death was not the penalty of sin, incurred 
through Adam, then "life and that more abundant" is 
not the reward and blessing of God secured through 
Christ by a resurrection. Satan's proposition, which has 
been so widely accepted by the Lord's people, and which 
exercises so blinding an influence upon their minds, is 
the reversal, in every sense of the word, of the Divine 
proposition— that death is the curse or penalty of sin; 
that Christ died to release man from this sentence or 
curse, and that the release comes by the resurrection of 
the dead, who otherwise would never have future life, as 
says the Apostle in our text. Satan's theory declares 
death a blessing which brings the fulness of life and 
liberty and joy, and would make of the resurrection a 
curse, bringing imprisonment and difficulty and restriction 
and pain and trouble. 

THE APOSTLE PREACHED JESUS AND THE 
RESURRECTION 

No wonder that, blinded by this deception of the 
Adversary, the majority of the great theologians of 
Christendom— and rapidly their many followers— are 
leaving the doctrine of the Atonement, which declares 
that "as by a man [Adam] came death, so also by a man 
[the man Christ Jesus] comes the resurrection of the 
dead; that as all in Adam died, even so all in Christ shall 
be made alive."— I Cor. 15:21,22. 

If the reality of death is denied, it is no more difficult 
to deny the reality of sin. If it is claimed that 
Father Adam was not created in the image and likeness 

R4792:page 101 

of God, but was created a very close image and likeness 

of the monkey, it follows that in that low condition of intelligence 

he was unfit for trial for eternal life; and it is 

only a further step to deny that he ever had a trial, 

and that he ever failed and fell from grace. And if the 

fall is denied, and, instead, the claim is put forward that 

man has really been advancing even to the present time 

—losing his likeness to the monkey and gaining in likeness 

to God, then it will be consistent also to take the 

next step, and declare that since man did not fall he 

did not need to be redeemed from the fall. 

And hence, with all such reasoning upon false Scriptural 
basis, it appears logical to deny the oft-repeated 
declaration of God's Word, that our Lord Jesus is our 
Redeemer, and that "He is the propitiation for our sins 
[the Church's sins], and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world," giving for us as our Ransom 
or corresponding price, his own life, that he might buy 



back the forfeited life of Adam. 

We thus see that the leading lights of Christendom 
today, repudiate both of the cardinal features of the Gospel, 
which the Apostle preached of old: "He preached 
Jesus and the resurrection"— Jesus as the Redeemer of 
mankind from sin and its curse— death— and the resurrection 
as the grand result of that redemptive work, by 
which the blessing secured by the Ransom-sacrifice will 
be made applicable to and available for whosoever wills 
to accept eternal life upon the terms of this Age. We are 
reminded here of our Lord's own words respecting unbelief 
at the present time: he says, "When the Son of 
Man cometh, shall he find the faith on the earth?"— 
Luke 18:8. 

THE FIVE SENSES IN FULL ACCORD WITH THE 
SCRIPTURES 

The Scripture declarations respecting death are in full 
accord with the testimony of the five senses given us as 
men by our Creator; and this is what we should expect, 
though we should be ready to admit the possibility of our 
senses being in error if the Divine revelation contradicted 
our senses. But when our senses are contradicted 
by a human theory, contrary to Scriptural statements, 
the theory should be rejected and the testimony of the 
senses held to be true; and when the Scriptures and our 
senses together unite in one testimony, it is certainly 
wrong to hold to a theory of human dissolution, which is 
contradicted by Divine revelation and by our own senses 
as well. And whoever thus repudiates his God-given 
(though sin-impaired) senses and the Divine testimony, 
need expect nothing else than to be led into darkness 
and stumbling. Today, as eighteen centuries ago, the 
blind are leading the blind into the ditch of unbelief and 
error. 

"AS DIETH THE ONE, SO DIETH THE OTHER; THEY 
HAVE ALL ONE BREATH" 

The testimony of our senses, like the testimony of God's 
Word, is that death means the loss of life, and not an 
increase of life. Watch the dying one, and note his 
weakening powers, mental and physical, until the spark 
of life becomes extinct. You have seen nothing go from 
him, you have heard nothing but the death-rattle; you 
have felt the gradual cessation of the pulse, and noted 
the gasping for breath; and all of your senses which you 
can exercise upon the subject tell you that your friend, 
your loved one, is dead— alive no longer. You look 
about you and study the subject and inquire of others, 
"What next?" The answer to your senses is, "The next 
thing is corruption; when the spark of life has gone, the 
corpse must be buried; 'dust to dust, ashes to ashes.'" 
You note the similarity between the death of your friend 
and loved one and the death of the brute beast, and your 



senses can discern no difference between them; and the 
Scriptures declare, "As dieth the one, so dieth the other; 
they have all one [spirit of life] breath."— Eccl. 3:19. 

But with a longing for a future life, implanted in your 
nature by our Creator, you inquire, Is there no hope; 
hath a man no pre-eminence above a beast? The Scriptures 
answer your question, assuring us that, physically 
speaking man "hath no pre-eminence above a beast." But 
the Scriptures assure us that although mankind is not 
possessed of any power of life beyond that of the beast, 
the Creator has, nevertheless, made a provision for man 
that he did not make for the beast; and that provision is 
the very thing for which we long, namely, everlasting 
life. The Scriptures point out to us that this provision 
for man's everlasting life was made by the Lord in the 
beginning— not by implanting a deathless quality in the 
man's constitution, but by providing in the life-sustaining 
trees of the Garden of Eden, the means of continuing his 
life everlastingly; nevertheless this provision was conditional, 
dependent upon man's obedience to his Creator. 

The Scriptures point out that man's disobedience 
brought upon him the sentence of death, and that the 
execution of that sentence was effected by driving him 
out of the Garden and away from the life-sustaining 
fruit of its trees. Thus driven out, the sentence, "Dying, 
thou shalt die," took effect upon Father Adam gradually, 
and he lived out nearly to the end of the first thousand-year 
day. His posterity, becoming weaker and weaker as 
generations rolled by, are today (notwithstanding the 
many advancements in science, and medicine and sanitary 
arrangements) reduced to an average of about thirty-five 
years— "and if by reason of strength they be forescore 
years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow" and they 
are soon "cut off from the land of the living," to go 
into "the land of the enemy"— into the great prison-house 
of death, in which it is estimated that over twenty thousand 
millions of our race are already— "where the 
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest." 
-Job 3:17-19. 

"JESUS DIED, THE JUST FOR THE UNJUST" 

The Scriptures answer our inquiries respecting the 
dead. While assuring us of the justice of the Divine 
sentence of death, they nevertheless declare that our 
Creator is a God of mercy and of pity, and that when 
there was no eye to pity and no arm to deliver us, his 
Arm brought salvation to us. The Scriptures, moreover, 
point out to us the Lord Jesus Christ as the Arm of 
Jehovah, stretched down for our relief from sin and sickness 
and pain and trouble and for our deliverance from 
the prison-house of death, and for our restoration to the 
liberties and privileges of sons of God. 

It was in harmony with this Divine sympathy that, in 
due time, God sent his only begotten Son into the world 
for our redemption— to give for us the Ransom-price, and 



ultimately to recover all who will accept of Divine 

mercy, from all the consequences of the fall by a resurrection 

from the dead. But Divine Love could not make 

void Divine Justice; it was necessary that God should be 

just, if he would be the justifier of them that believe in 

Jesus; hence the demands of Justice— the penalty for 

sin— must be paid by our Redeemer, before the work of 

release and restitution could begin. And here we have 

the best of evidence respecting what is the penalty of sin, 

and what is not; because, since our Lord Jesus pays for 

us the just penalty of sin, what he laid down for us will 

R4793 : page 102 

prove what was the penalty against us. What did he do 
for us? The Scriptures answer: He laid down his life 
for us; "He died for our sins"; "He died, the Just for the 
unjust"; "He poured out his soul unto death"; he "made 
his soul an offering for [our] sin," and "by his stripes 
we are healed."— Isa. 53:4-6,10,12. 

Nothing is more evident than that our Lord Jesus did 
not suffer an eternity of torment as the price of our redemption; 
and hence, if the matter needed proof we have 
here the proof that eternal torment was not the penalty 
for our sins. On the contrary, the fact that our Lord 
Jesus died for our sins, and that the Heavenly Father 
accepted of that sacrifice of his life on our behalf, proves 
that it was our lives that were forfeited by sin; that the 
full penalty of the Divine Law against us as a race was 
the deprivation of life. The whole race, under sentence 
of death, has gone down to the great prison-house of 
death— the grave, sheol, hades. And so our dear Redeemer, 
when he gave up his life for us, went also to 
sheol, hades, the grave. He took our place, and suffered 
for us the penalty for our sins. 

But as Jesus' death ransoms man from the sentence of 
death, so his resurrection from death became the assurance 
of the justification of all who accept and obey him. 
The Heavenly Father gave evidence that the Ransom-price 
was entirely satisfactory; and our Lord, who was 
thus obedient to the Father, was raised from the dead, 
and, as the Father's Agent and Representative, will soon 
begin the work of blessing the entire world redeemed by 
his precious blood. 

THE PRISON-HOUSE OF DEATH TO BE OPENED AND 
THE PRISONERS SET FREE 

The blessing of the world means the breaking open of 
the prison-house and the setting at liberty of the captives, 
who for six thousand years have been going into 
the prison-house of death. For this reason our Lord is 
called the Life-giver, because his great work will be to 
give back life to the world of mankind, who lost life in 
Adam. And since the restoration of life to mankind will 
mean the removal of pains and sicknesses and troubles, 



which are a part of the dying process, our Redeemer is 
styled the Great Physician. 

The prophecy which mentions the breaking open of 
the prison-house of death, and the setting at liberty of 
its captives (Isa. 42:7), was applied, and unquestionably 
correctly, by our Lord to himself; but he did not break 
open the prison-house of death, and set all the captives 
free by resurrection immediately upon his own resurrection. 
He tells us when this work will be done, saying 
(John 5:25-29), "The hour cometh in the which all that 
are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, 
and come forth"; "and they that hear [obey his voice 
then, Acts 3:22] shall live." 

Our Lord thus passed over the interim of the Gospel 
Age, and pointed to the grand consummation of his work 
in the incoming Age, because such was the Father's 
prearranged Plan. The Father sent the Son, and the 
Son willingly undertook the work of redemption, at a 
time sufficiently in advance of the "Times of Restitution," 
or resurrection, and the general blessing of the 
world during the Reign of Messiah, to leave the interim 
of this Gospel Age for another work, namely, for selecting 
from the world a "little flock," a "royal priesthood," 
a "peculiar people," a "holy nation," to be joint-heirs 
with Christ Jesus their Lord in the honors of the Mediatorial 
Kingdom. These shall be associated with the Redeemer 
in the grand and glorious work of destroying 
the Prince of Darkness and breaking open the prison-house 
of death, and setting at liberty the captives of sin 
and ignorance and superstition; and in fulfilling generally 
all the provisions of the gracious promises of God 
made to Father Abraham, that in his Seed (Christ, and 
his elect Body, the Church), "all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed."-Gal. 3:8,16,29. 

"BLESSED AND HOLY ARE THEY WHO HAVE PART IN 
THE FIRST RESURRECTION" 

This brings us to the Scriptural proposition, that there 
is a first, a chief or special resurrection, and a general 
one later. The first or superior resurrection includes the 
resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ and of the entire 
elect "Church which is his Body"— no more, no less. 
"Blessed and holy are all they that have part in the First 
Resurrection; on such the Second Death hath no power, 
but they shall be kings and priests unto God and shall 
reign on the earth"— the Messianic Kingdom class. Those 
who will share in this First Resurrection will experience 
an instantaneous "change" from the human nature to the 
divine nature— the highest of the spirit natures; not 
human, not flesh and blood, for "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God."* Their trial and perfecting 
of heart takes place beforehand, and only the "overcomers" 
will receive this blessing. Some of the characteristics 
of their change are indicated by the Apostle as 
a change from weakness to power, from dishonor to 



glory, from corruption to incorruption, from a natural 
[human] body to a spirit body. 

The time for this best, or chief resurrection, is everywhere 
in Scripture indicated to be at the close of the 
Gospel Age, at a time when the entire Gospel Church will 
be completed. This includes the living members, whose 
"change" to spirit nature will be instantaneous, so that 
the moment of their dying as human beings will be the 
moment of their "change" to perfect spirit beings. Meantime, 
the Scriptures declare that the Lord's people who 
have died, like the rest of mankind, are really dead, 
as human beings, and know not anything; but inasmuch 
as God has provided for their resurrection, and inasmuch 
as they have been informed respecting it, and have hopes 
therein, therefore they are spoken of as being merely 
asleep— resting from their labors; waiting for "the crown 
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, 
shall give me at that day, and not to me only," as the 
Apostle declares. 

And, likewise the world of mankind, even though they 
know not of the Lord as yet, are spoken of as being 
"asleep in Jesus," because, as the whole world was under 
condemnation of death through Adam, and that without 
knowledge or volition on their part, at the time of the 
sentence, for they were then in the loins of their father, 
Adam, so now, since Jesus laid down his life a Ransom 
for all, and because they all shall be awakened from 
death, therefore it is proper for all those who are aware 
of the Divine provision for the awakening, by faith to 
speak of the interim figuratively as a sleep. Thus the 
Apostle exhorts us to trust and hope in the resurrection 
as respects all our dear friends who go down into the 
prison-house of death, and not merely as respects those 
who were sanctified in Christ Jesus, which would include, 
as a rule, only a small proportion of those for whom we 
would be inclined to sorrow. He says, "I would not have 
you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are 
asleep [all our sleeping friends], that ye sorrow not even 



*Some are confused by this expression, "flesh and blood"; they fail 
to see that it signifies human nature; we therefore invite such to 
examine the use of the same phrase elsewhere, by the same New Testament 
writers. In so doing they will be convinced that our definition, 
human nature, is the correct one, the Scriptural one. See the following 
uses of the phrase: Matt. 16:17; John 3:5,6; 1 Cor. 15:50. 

R4793 : page 103 

as others, who have no hope. For if we believe that 
Jesus died [a Ransom for all] and rose again [that he 
might be Lord and Life-giver to all] even so [let us believe 
as truly that] those also which sleep in Jesus [all 
whom he purchases with his precious blood] will God 
bring by him [from the prison-house of death]." 



THE GENERAL RESURRECTION TO BE A RAISING UP 
BY JUDGMENT 

But as the First Resurrection is the resurrection of the 
blessed and holy, of the sanctified in Christ Jesus, his 
Body, so the general resurrection, which is for the world, 
is designated as "a resurrection of judgment," mistranslated 
in our common version "resurrection of damnation." 
It is styled a "resurrection of judgment" because, 
while all the preparation has been made, so far as God 
is concerned, for granting to the world of mankind a 
full resurrection or restitution back to all that was first 
given to Adam, and lost by his disobedience, to be recovered 
by our Savior's precious blood, yet there are 
certain conditions attached to this blessing upon which 
it depends, namely, the conditions of the New Covenant. 

God does not propose to give eternal life through 
Christ to any others than those who earnestly desire it, 
and who are in heart sympathy with the principles of 
righteousness which must always be the Law of the 
Divine Government. Hence, when the world is awakened 
from the sleep of death, it will not signify resurrection, 
but much less; for resurrection, in its full, complete, 
Scriptural sense, signifies a complete raising up, out of 
sin and out of death, to perfection of being, perfection 
of life. 

The first work of Christ and the Church in the world, 
for those who have gone down into death, the prison, 
will be their awakening to physical conditions similar to 
those in which they died. The surrounding conditions 
of society will then be greatly improved; knowledge will 
have taken the place of ignorance, and the reign of 
righteousness and the law of love will at that time 
have superceded the rule of sin under the law of selfishness; 
and Satan will be bound, that he shall deceive the 
nations no more for the thousand years. Under the 
favorable conditions of that Mediatorial Kingdom, all 
mankind will be required to make progress in the knowledge 
of the Lord and in the bringing of their own hearts 

R4794 : page 103 

and lives into accord with his law of love. Whosoever 
then will make no effort in the right direction will be cut 
off from life, in the Second Death, after one hundred 
years of trial (Isa. 65:20), although he would then, 
under the changed conditions, be properly reckoned as 
only a lad. 

But while judgment will thus pass against one who 
fails to make progress, and will cut short his further 
opportunity, the same judgment, by the same Judge, will 
operate favorably to all who will seek righteousness, and 
make progress in harmony with the laws of the Kingdom; 
so that year by year they will be growing mentally, 
physically and morally stronger— approximating gradually 



the full, complete standard of perfect manhood, the 
image and likeness of the Creator, as first represented 
in Father Adam. Thus the resurrection, so far as the 
world is concerned, will be a gradual work; its first step 
an awakening from the sleep of unconsciousness and nonentity; 
its succeeding steps will be along the lines of 
judgment, the conduct of those who are on trial being 
either approved or disapproved; and culminating either 
in their sentence to the Second Death, incorrigible, and 
unworthy of the gift of God, eternal life— or in their perfection, 
and their final adjudgment of worthiness to have 
and enjoy the great boon of Life Eternal, under the 
blessed conditions which are then promised to prevail- 
when there shall be no more sighing, no more dying, no 
more crying, because there will be no more sin and none 
of the penalties for sin, for all the former things shall 
have passed away.— Rev. 21:4. 

THE CONDITION OF THE DEAD SPOKEN OF AS A SLEEP 

The condition of all the dead, up to the time when the 
resurrection work begins, is one of total unconsciousness: 
"There is neither wisdom, nor knowledge, nor device in 
the grave whither thou goest"; "His sons come to honor 
and he knoweth it not, to dishonor, and he perceiveth 
it not of them." Of each of the Patriarchs of the past it 
is written, "He slept with his fathers"; "He fell asleep." 
And so also in the New Testament we have a similar 
record: "Stephen fell asleep." The Apostle Paul speaks 
of those who saw the Lord after his resurrection and 
says, "He was seen of above five hundred brethren at 
once, of whom the greater part remain to this present 
time, but some are fallen asleep." Again he speaks of 
some which are "fallen asleep in Christ," here distinguishing 
between the Church, who are in Christ,* as 
members of his Body, and the world of mankind in general, 
who "sleep in Jesus."— Eccl. 9:10; Job 14:21; 
I Kings 2:10; 11:43; Acts 7:60; I Cor. 15:6,18; 
IThess. 4:14. 

The Apostle shows that this sleep-condition will prevail, 
even as respects the Church, until the time of the 
second coming of Christ, assuring us that the living 
members of the Church at the time of the Lord's Second 
Advent will not be blessed prior to those that have fallen 
asleep, but contrariwise, the living "shall not prevent 
[hinder] them that are asleep," for the dead in Christ 
shall arise first; then we who are alive and remain will 
be blessed, and ultimately experience our "change." 

"THOU SOWEST NOT THAT BODY WHICH SHALL BE" 

The moment of re-awakening will seem to the awakened 
ones to be the next moment after their death— "for there 
is neither wisdom, knowledge nor device in the grave." 
The bodies in which the world will be awakened will be 
practically the same as those which died, though not 



the same atoms of matter; for in the hands of our 
Creator one atom of dust is as good as another in this 
great work. Thus the Apostle says, "Thou sowest not 
that body which shall be." The bodies of the world, as 
they shall be when awakened, will be really new bodies, 
in the sense that they will be different atoms of matter; 
but they will be old bodies, in the sense that they will be 
duplicates of those which died and went to dust. We 
cannot wonder that the worldly mind, which knows not 
God and knows not of his power, cavils at the thought 
of resurrection. It will be a most stupendous work, more 
wonderful by far than man's original creation; it will 
thus be to the world of mankind, and to the angels of 
heaven also, the grandest exhibition ever given of Divine 
Omnipotence. 

He who formed man in the beginning, in his own 
image, has the power not only to form him again of 
the dust of the ground, and to re-enkindle the spark of 
life, but yet more than in these will he exhibit both 
his omnipotence and his Infinite wisdom in the restoration 
to each being of a brain like his present one, having 
recorded therein the events and circumstances which 
have transpired in the present life— just as the wax 
cylinder of a phonograph bears in itself the recorded 



*Christ is the title of our Lord as the New Creature, and of his office; 
while Jesus is the name for the Redeemer, through whose sacrifice 
comes to all men an opportunity to share in a resurrection of the dead. 

R4794 : page 104 

words of the speaker, which can be reproduced at another 
time and place. None but an Infinite Being could 
claim the power thus to reproduce the very thoughts of 
the billions of mankind. He of whom it is said that he 
knows the very hairs of our heads and their number, and 
that not a sparrow can fall to the ground without his 
notice— only he could do so great and wonderful a thing; 
and only as we have learned to have confidence in him 
through the revelation of his Word could we exercise 
faith in such a stupendous miracle as he has promised 
shall be performed. 

Nor need we expect that the world of mankind will all 
be awakened simultaneously, but rather that the first 
work of the Messianic Kingdom will begin with those 
who have not gone down to the tomb, but who are 
nevertheless in death, in the sense that they are not alive 
in the complete, full measure of freedom from the power 
of death. When the work of restitution shall have progressed 
to some extent with these, we may expect that 
some of those who have previously fallen asleep in 
death will be awakened, and share in the blessings of 
that glorious Day. Later, others, and still others, will 
arise, until eventually it will be true that, in that Day, 



the Day of Christ, "all that are in the graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of Man"— shall obey the mandate, 
"Come forth"— and shall be brought to a knowledge of 
the goodness and love and mercy of God; and, if they 
will, ultimately to the full perfection of human nature— 
the earth, meanwhile, being fitted and prepared as a 
Paradise of God for his restored human family. 

Meantime, the exhortation to all the "called" in the 
present Age is that we should seek to make our "calling 
and election sure" to a place in the Kingdom class, to a 
change of nature, from human to divine, and thus have 
a right, under the Divine arrangement, to have a part in 
the "first resurrection"— the chief resurrection, the resurrection 
to the perfection of the Divine nature with its 
glory, honor and immortality. 



R4794 : page 104 

"A THORN IN THE FLESH" 



"And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance 

of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in 

the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should 

be exalted above measure. For this thing I besought 

the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And 

he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for 

my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most 

gladly, therefore, will I rather glory in my infirmities, 

that the power of Christ may rest upon 

me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, 

in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, 

in distresses for Christ's sake; for 

when I am weak, then am I strong."— 2 Cor. 12:7-10. 

THIS was the language of an overcoming 
saint, meekly bowing to the Divine will. 
Noble and loyal and true and strong in 
character as the Apostle Paul was, he yet 
realized that he was a member of the fallen 
race, and, in common with all humanity, 
subject to frailties. God had called him to a 
most important and glorious work— that of 
bearing the Gospel to the Gentiles; and, 
for the benefit of the whole Church, to him 
were granted special and wonderful revelations, even 
above all the other honored and beloved Apostles. 
He was caught away in mental vision to the third 
heaven— the New Dispensation, the Millennial reign of 
Christ— and shown things (doubtless the Plan and purpose 
of God, as now made manifest to us, largely through 
his writings, in the light of this harvest period, but) not 
lawful to be uttered then, because not then due to the 
Church. (2 Cor. 12:4.) Upon him devolved the care 
of all the Churches of the Gentiles, and great were the 



responsibilities of his office. Though the position was a 
most laborious and trying one, requiring great fortitude, 
zeal, energy and self-denial to fill it, it was also one of 
great honor. 

"THE MESSENGER OF SATAN TO BUFFET" 

And Paul appreciated the honor of such intimate 
fellowship of service with the Lord, and manifested his 
appreciation by untiring zeal and enthusiasm. But even 
in this the Lord recognized a personal danger to his beloved 
and faithful Apostle— a danger of pride and self-exaltation, 
which, if it should develop, would soon unfit 
him for further service and rob him of his future reward. 
So the thorn in the flesh was permitted to come. It 
came, not from the hand of the Lord, though by his permission; 
but, as the Apostle affirms, it was "the messenger 
of Satan to buffet" him. 

A thorn in the flesh is always a painful thing; and 
whatever this may have been, it was something severely 
trying to Paul. At first he thought only of the pain and 
annoyance it caused him, and of its hindrance to him in 
the Lord's work; it was a messenger of Satan that he 
was anxious to get rid of. Three times he besought the 
Lord for its removal. But no, it had come to stay, and 
the Lord mercifully made him to realize that though it 
was very undesirable to the flesh, it was, nevertheless, 
profitable to him spiritually; for otherwise he might become 
too much exalted. 

MY GRACE IS SUFFICIENT FOR THEE-MY STRENGTH 
IS MADE PERFECT IN WEAKNESS 

This implication of weakness the Apostle humbly accepted. 
He did not resent it and begin to boast of his 
strength and to reproach the Lord for not exerting his 
power for its removal; but, on the contrary, with grace 
and gladness he accepted the Lord's judgment of his 
heart, and his estimate of his strength, and appreciated 
the love that thus cared for him personally, while through 
him he was ministering to the whole Church. 

Yes, praise the Lord! he chooses his own instruments, 
and whets and grinds and polishes them for the more 
effectual service, and wields them with force and power 
in the service of his people; but in all the painful and 
laborious service he has special care, also, for the willing 
and faithful instrument. He will not suffer it to be 
tried beyond that which it is able to endure; nor will he 
suffer it to be exalted without some counterbalancing 
thorn in the flesh to preserve its equilibrium. 

The answer to the Apostle's prayer, although not in 
accordance with his request, was a blessed consolation— 
"My grace [my favor] is sufficient for thee; for my 
strength is made perfect [made manifest] in [your] 
weakness." 



"MOST GLADLY WILL I GLORY IN MY INFIRMITIES" 

This is also the blessed consolation of every truly submissive 
heart. How many of the Lord's people are 

R4794 : page 105 

tempest-tossed and sorely tried in these days; and, doubtless, 
many of them have earnestly besought the Lord to 
remove this or that trial or affliction; but the piercing 
thorn still remains for their discipline and perfecting ! 
Let all such, like Paul, give ear to the Master's voice— 
"My favor is sufficient for thee." What if other friends 
forsake thee, and hosts of foes seek to overwhelm thee, 
if thou hast my favor, my love, is not that sufficient? 
And what though the flesh be weak and the heart sometimes 
faint, my strength shall supply your lack; and 
while you walk in the way of my appointment your weakness 
shall only the more manifest the power of God working 
in and through you. 

What sincere child of God has not realized in times 
of greatest need and weakness, the power of God on his 
behalf supplementing his weakness with strength from 
above? And when the task was accomplished to which 
the Lord had called him and for which he felt so incompetent 
of himself, has he not realized in the outcome 
the wonder-working power of God? 

In view of such a gracious provision to supplement his 
weakness with Divine strength, the faithful Apostle 
meekly responded, "Most gladly, therefore, will I rather 
glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest 
upon me." Having put forth all his own energies and 
faithfully used his own ability to its fullest extent as a 
wise steward, it was his joy to recognize the hand of the 
Lord working with him— by miracles and signs and with 
demonstrations of the spirit and of power. (Heb. 2:4; 
Acts 19:11; I Cor. 2:4.) These demonstrations of Divine 
power, supplementing Paul's faithful use of his natural 
abilities, were the Lord's endorsement of all he did— the 
manifestations of Divine approval, both to himself and to 
others, and, consequently, cause for great rejoicing. 

TO REJOICE IN TRIBULATION NOT POSSIBLE EXCEPT 
ONE IS IN FULLEST ACCORD WITH GOD 

With the Apostle it is also the privilege of all God's 
children to have their weaknesses supplemented by Divine 
grace, while they meekly and faithfully use their talents 
in the Lord's service. And so all the faithful may rejoice 
in tribulations and infirmities, while God overrules the 
former, and supplements the latter to his praise. 

But to rejoice in tribulations, to endure meekly and 
patiently a sore thorn in the flesh, and even to glory in 
such personal infirmities as make the power of Christ the 
more manifest, is not possible except to those whose 
hearts are in fullest accord with the loving purposes of 



God. If the heart be influenced by pride or ambition or 

love of fame or wealth or any worldly craving, joy in 

tribulation is impossible. But if the old ambitions and 

desires of the flesh are kept under, and faith, love, hope 

and zeal are all alive and active, we shall have the consciousness 

of the Divine favor, and then we can rejoice 

in every experience. 



R4794 : page 105 

THE SONG OF THE VINEYARD 

--MAY 21. -ISAIAH 5:1-12.- 

"Let me sing to my Well-Beloved a song 
of my Beloved touching his vineyard." 

TO THIS LESSON, as to the last, we have 

a Divinely-inspired key, for the words were 

quoted by the Great Teacher and applied 

by him to the Jewish nation, as indeed the 

Prophet himself explains. What the Prophet 

styles a song we might properly term 

a parable or story. God is represented as 

having planted the nation of Israel as his 

own vineyard. He gathered out the stones, 

or removed the difficulties, and planted in 

it the choicest vine, the richest promises— promises of 

the Messianic Kingdom and the blessing of Israel and all 

the families of the earth. He provided a watch tower 

for it in the Prophecies and a hedge about it in the Law 

and the Prophets and in all the arrangements made for 

that holy nation. It was proper that he should look for 

choice fruitage from so favorably-situated a vineyard, 

but the results were unsatisfactory. The fruitage was 

not in harmony with the promises he had planted, but 

wild grapes, sour, small. 

This condition prevailed until the time of Jesus. Although 
troubles upon the nation were from time to time 
permitted by the Lord, the breaches were always healed 
and the nation was preserved. Its walls of Divine protection 
and guidance were maintained and its watch 
tower. John the Baptist was the last of the Prophets. 
Since his day the Lord has fulfilled to natural Israel the 
things mentioned in this prophecy. The hedges have 
been broken down. It has been laid waste. No care has 
been taken of it. The beasts of the field, the Gentile 
nations, have ravaged this vineyard and, by Divine intention, 
no rain of Divine blessing, comfort, encouragement 
and fructification have come upon the Jewish people 
in all these more than eighteen centuries. 

THE PROPER KIND OF FRUIT 



What was the proper fruitage which the Lord had a 
right to expect from this vineyard and why did he not 
find it? He tells us in this very prophecy: "For the 

R4795 : page 105 

vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel and 
the men of Judah his pleasant plant: God looked for 
judgment, justice, but behold oppression! He looked for 
righteousness, but instead, heard the cry of the oppressed." 
In other words, God's Covenant with Israel 
was that they should have the blessed privilege of being 
his people, and the having of his Divine favor was 
dependent upon their faithful observance of the Divine 
Law. He knew that they would not be able to keep the 
Law perfectly. He knew that he would not get perfect 
grapes, but he had a right to expect much better than he 
found— to expect heart endeavors, even if there were 
fleshly imperfections. 

The demands of the Law were supreme love for the 
Almighty, governing every thought and word and act, 
and a love for the neighbor as for oneself— an unselfish 
love. The observance of this Law, in its spirit at least, 
to the extent of the ability of the flesh, was the requirement. 
Had there been such fruitage in Israel at the 
time that Jesus presented himself to them eighteen centuries 
ago, they would have been ready to constitute the 
spiritual Kingdom, which would then and there have 
been established, according to Divine promise. But their 
unreadiness led to the breaking down of their entire system. 
They did not have love enough toward God, nor 
love enough toward their fellows. 

We are not to understand from this that Israel was 
more degenerate than the remainder of the world. The 
contrary of this, we believe, is true. But then the other 
nations had not been specially planted and specially 
hedged about and specially watered and specially guarded. 
Where more was given more was required. And when 
more was not found the faithful few were gathered out 
and the vineyard temporarily abandoned. We are glad, 
indeed, to note from the Scriptures that the time is coming 
when that same vineyard shall be restored under still 

R4795 : page 106 

more favorable conditions, during the Messianic reign of 
glory and heavenly power. But it is still in disorder. 

The succeeding verses of the lesson complain of the 
disposition of the Israelites to take advantage of each 
other; and the result of this was great riches on the one 
hand and great poverty on the other. This Prophecy 
reminds us of the Great Teacher's words when he said, 
"Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, for ye devour 
widows' houses"— you take possession of the property of 
the poor, perhaps, sometimes, in a technical, legal way. 
You are not filled with that love for your neighbor as 



yourself which would lead you to assist the poor, the 
widow and the fatherless and to be generous toward 
all. The sin of selfishness, avarice, indicates a lack of 
the Spirit of the Lord and good will toward all. The 
majority of the Jews of our Lord Jesus' day were tinctured 
with such selfishness and hence were not in a condition 
of mind acceptable to the Lord for constituting 
the spiritual, the Bride class— except the few, "the 
remnant," mentioned by the Prophet. 

The Lord indicated how he would punish the selfish. 
Ruin would come upon the great estates and the earth 
would not yield returns for the labor. Thus selfishness 
would have its reproof and penalty along temporal lines, 
as well as costing the loss of spiritual privileges. 

APPLICATION TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

God's dealings with fleshly Israel not only represent 
the principles of Divine government and requirements, 
but also the requirements of natural Israel's service, as 
the Scriptures show, and they typify spiritual Israel. As 
natural Israel failed to be ready to accept Jesus at his 
first advent— except "the remnant"— so spiritual Israel, 
called "Christendom," will fail to be ready to receive him 
as the great Messiah at the establishment of his Kingdom. 
Note the care with which the Lord planted his Church, 
gathering out all the difficulties at the time of its establishment. 
Note the heavenly, spiritual promises, exceeding 
great, with which he surrounded the Church, as 
his vineyard. Note that it is of the Father's right-hand 
planting. Note the Watch Tower of Grace and Truth 
established by the Apostles. Note the blessing of the 
Holy Spirit. 

In the end of this Age comes a harvest time for 
spiritual Israel, as in the end of the Jewish Age there 
was a harvest time for natural Israel. Here, as there, 
only "a remnant" will be found worthy of the Kingdom 
—the great, nominal mass will be found unworthy. And 
why? Because the spirit of worldliness and selfishness 
is the prevalent one, instead of the spirit of the Lord, 
the spirit of meekness, gentleness, love. Only with the 
few is God first. Only with the few is there a spirit of 
full consecration to do the Divine will. Only with the 
few is there love of the brethren and a willingness to 
lay down life one for another. (John 15:13.) Only with 
the few is there even business honesty, justice. Today 
selfishness is heaping up treasure and the results, we 
may be sure, will be unsatisfactory— "a time of trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation."— Dan. 12:1. 

Moreover, as the Prophet proceeds to show, the accumulation 
of wealth has generally an injurious effect 
upon the rich— idleness, music and wine and disregard 
of things Divine. The "remnant" now will be a sufficient 
number to complete the "elect." The Kingdom of glory 
will be established and all the families of the earth will, 
shortly after the time of trouble, begin to recognize the 



long-promised blessing. Indeed, the "time of trouble" 
will be used of the Lord to humble the world— to 
prepare mankind to receive properly the blessings of the 
Kingdom. 



R4795 : page 106 

THE KINGDOM OF PEACE 

-MAY 28.-MICAH 4:1-8.- 

"Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, 
neither shall they learn war any more." 

THE whole world has for a long time been 

boasting that civilization and Christianity 

have won the day, that the world has become 

God's Empire and that the blessings 

of the Millennium are ours to enjoy. Aid 

Conferences and Peace Councils and Peace 

Commissions have flared up for the moment, 

only to die down. The cry of "Peace, peace," 

has brought no peace. We are beginning 

to see that we have been deceiving ourselves 

into thinking that the nations of the earth are 

kingdoms of God. We are beginning to see that the 

Bible styles them "kingdoms of this world," kingdoms of 

the Gentiles, and that it tells us that "the Prince of this 

world, who now worketh in the hearts of the children of 

disobedience," is Satan, the Usurper, "a liar from the beginning 

and abode not in the truth." 

We see it all. The Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of 
Heaven, for which the Master taught us to pray, has not 
yet come. We are glad, however, that the Divine promise 
assures us that it will come and explains to us that the 
All-Wise Creator is now, first of all, preparing for his 
Kingdom by gathering from amongst mankind a worthy, 
saintly few, to be associates of their King and Redeemer 
in that Kingdom of glory, by which the world is to be 
blessed. 

But all are not yet convinced of these Bible truths. 
Some point to the coins of the various kingdoms, which 
declare that "In God we trust," and that the several emperors 
and kings of earth are reigning "by the grace of 
God" and claiming that they are of Divine appointment; 
while the Pope also makes the still greater claim that he 
is the personal representative of Messiah and his Kingdom 
and the only one authorized to reign over and to govern 
the kings of the earth. 

To convince the more prejudiced nothing further 
should be necessary along these lines than to point out 
the difference between present conditions and those which 
the Scriptures declare will prevail when he who redeemed 
the world by the sacrifice of himself will take his great 



power and reign as Messiah, the King of glory, to put 
down sin in its every form and death in its every form 
and to release and uplift all the willing and obedient of 
the families of the earth— including 
those who have gone down into the 
great prison-house of death— the 
grave, sheol, hades. 

[Original Tower has a pie-chart divided in 2 sections. About 62% of 

the chart is entitled "FOR WARS PAST & PROSPECTIVE" and the remaining 

38% is entitled "FOR ALL OTHER PUBLIC APPROPRIATIONS". The chart is 

entitled:] 

RELATIVE EXPENDITURES OF THE UNITED STATES IN 1908 

IN OUR FAVORED LAND 

The United States of America 
does not lead the world in the size 
of its standing army and in great 
battleships. She has no need to do 
so, having no threatening Christian 
(?) nations to menace her. Yet even 
this nation, walled about by thousands of miles of ocean, 
is making enormous expenditures on account of war, as 
the above diagram well illustrates. 

R4795 : page 107 

[In original Tower there is a small picture entitled:] 
BATTLESHIP NORTH DAKOTA $10,000,000 

[The above picture is inset in a larger picture entitled:] 
What the cost of a Battleship would do in a State 
THE MINNEAPOLIS JOURNAL. 

One of the most modern of the battleships of the 
United States Navy is named the North Dakota, after 
one of the 
States. She cost 
$10,000,000. 

The Minneapolis 
Journal shows 
what the money 
expended for this 
battleship would 
have accomplished 
in the State for 
which she is named. 
It would have provided 

a $25,000 agricultural school and experimental farm 
in its every county, with an endowment fund of $175,000 
for each school, the interest on which would have provided 
$10,500 annually for the maintenance of each school. 
Additionally, it would have left $1,000,000 of an endowment 
for the State Agricultural College. 



The situation in Europe is still worse. Does not this 
preparation of the so-called Christian nations of the 
world to destroy one another prove to us that there is a 
mistake— that the term Christian has been misapplied 

R4796 : page 107 

to them? Nor can we say that there is no danger, for 
only fear could lead to such costly preparations for war. 

PRAY FOR MESSIAH'S KINGDOM 

The hope for humanity is the Messianic Kingdom described 
in this lesson. The "mountain of the Lord's 
house" signifies the Kingdom of God's house, his church. 
It will be established in the top of, or above the kingdoms 
of the world. It will be exalted amongst the nations and 
all peoples will flow to it. There will be an attraction 
in it for all peoples. It will lead them to climb upward. 
The attraction which will thus draw mankind will be the 
blessings of health and restitution, which the Kingdom 
will be prepared to grant to all peoples as they shall come 
into harmony with its requirements.— Acts 3:19-23. 

That Kingdom will be closely identified with the Zionist 
movement and the Holy Land. The Kingdom itself 
will be spiritual, invisible to men, but its earthly agents 
will be visible and they will be Jewish— "Ye shall see 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets in the 
Kingdom," etc. (Matt. 8:11.) The Jews, already impulsed 
toward the Land of Promise, will go thither in increasing 
numbers, and all of the faithful of them will go in sympathy 
and representatively, through financial assistance. 
The Israelitish hopes and promises will attract that number 
strongly first. And gradually all the nations, learning 
of the grace of God, and the blessings of restitution 
to be bestowed, will say, "Come, let us go up to the mountain 
of the Lord and to the house of the God of Jacob; 
and he will teach us (as well as the Jews) of his ways 
and we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go 
forth the Law and the Word of Jehovah from Jerusalem." 
-Isa. 2:3; Mic. 4:2. 

THE PEACE OF GOD ESTABLISHED 

Verse 3 tells of how Messiah's judgments will be manifested, 
favoring most the nations which are most righteous 
and rebuking all unrighteousness. The effect will be that 
wars will cease. The metal previously used in weapons 
of destruction will be used in plowshares and pruning 
hooks. The earth shall no longer be soaked with human 
blood, but be tilled for the blessing of the race, with none 
to molest nor make afraid. The Lord's people, at the beginning 
of that time, are represented as saying, Let each 
follow his own conception of God, but Israel must follow 
Jehovah. And at that time he will assemble her and 
gather her back into her own land— "a remnant." Then 



the Lord shall reign over them in Mt. Zion. 

The original dominion was given to Adam, but lost 
through sin. Jesus, by his obedience even unto death, 
has become the strong Tower, the Fortress, the Protection, 
to all of God's people. "To him will come the first 
dominion" and for a thousand years he shall reign for 
the blessing and uplifting of all the willing and obedient. 



R4796 : page 107 

GOD WORKS--WE WORK 

"Beloved,. ..work out your own salvation with fear and trembling 
for it is God which worketh in you both to will and 
to do of his good pleasure."— Phil. 2:12,13. 

THE GOSPEL CHURCH has been called with 

a "high calling." The fact that we accept 

the "call" signifies that we appreciate it and 

consider it something very desirable. The 

condition upon which it is offered is the 

giving up of everything that we have. By 

our acceptance of these terms we demonstrate 

our appreciation of the great opportunity 

thus granted us. If, therefore, we 

recognize the call that has come to us, we 

may know that God is willing for us to accept that call. 

It is important, therefore, that we understand the conditions 

in order that we may make our "election sure." 

The suggestion of the text is that to accomplish this 
end we must do some kind of work. Our salvation must 
be worked out. God does not purpose to take us to glory 
regardless of our own endeavors. True, these endeavors 
would not take us there; but, on the other hand, we shall 
not get the glorious things unless we strive for them. 
Hence, the exhortation is to "work," to "labor," to 
"strive" for the prize. But whatever may be our endeavors 
to keep the Divine Law, we are assured that 
success is not brought about merely by our own aspirations 
and best endeavors; but that he who called us has 
himself begun a good work in us which he is both able 
and willing to accomplish. 

We are not alone, therefore, in working out our 
salvation. God is working in us and has already worked 
in us; and his promises confirm this fact with enlivening 
power. He works in us not only to "will," as when we 
made our consecration, but, the Apostle says, he works 
in us to "do." That is to say, it is not sufficient for us 
to have good intentions, but these must be brought into 
practical relationship with our lives and must serve for 
development of our characters. Thus God works in us. 
Thus we are co-laborers with God in the work of this 
present time, of building up the Church and in making 
our "calling and election sure." 



LET US FEAR LEST WE SHOULD COME SHORT 

The Apostle admonishes us to work out our own salvation 
with "fear." The Scriptures declare that "The fear 
[reverence] of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." 
(Prov. 9:10.) Our first thought of the Almighty is, very 
properly, an apprehension of his greatness and our own 
insignificance. But as we come to know of his arrangement 
and Plan, this kind of fear gives place to respect 
and love, for he is very gracious toward all who are inclined 
to be in harmony with his beneficent arrangements 
and purposes. We find that he has made glorious plans, 
which are working out day by day, and that we have 
a share in them. Hence, this kind of fear casts out dread. 

There are Christian people, however, who have not 

R4796 : page 108 

progressed far along the Christian way, but who are 
bound up in false doctrines. Of these the Scriptures say, 
"Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of 
men." (Isa. 29:13.) Greater knowledge of God and of 
his character will dispel this kind of fear. 

The "fear" of our text seems to be a fear of non-attainment 
of the glorious promises; of failure to become 
partakers of the divine nature. The Apostle counsels 
us, "Let us, therefore, fear lest a promise being 
left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem 
to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

"Let us work out our own salvation with fear and 
trembling" as we recognize how great and blessed are the 
things in reservation for us if we are faithful, and yet 
how we may miss this wonderful opportunity of glory, 
honor and immortality. Whatever is of sufficient value 
for us to greatly desire, is worthy of great care in 
respect to our attitude toward it. While the fear in this 
case may not indicate a literal trembling, yet it implies 
alarm lest we, having had the courage to undertake to 
run the race for the prize, should allow anything to impede 
our progress or, possibly, lead us to abandon the 
race. This course would effect our ruin. Recognizing 
the great prize, we should fear and tremble lest we 
should let it slip from us and so lose it. 

OUR LORD WAS HEARD IN RESPECT TO THAT WHICH 
HE FEARED 

The same sort of care which always attaches to fear 
is indicated in our Lord's case where we read that "he 
offered up strong crying and tears" and, as the Apostle 
says, "He was heard in [respect to the thing] that he 
feared." (Heb. 5:7.) He feared lest in some particular 
he had failed to carry out the will of God; lest he might 
have failed to do the Father's will so perfectly as to attain 
to glory, honor and immortality; lest his death might 



be the Second Death. But he was heard in respect to 
that which he feared, and an angel was sent to give him 
assurance of his acceptability. As he never feared the 
Father in the sense of experiencing dread or terror, so 
should it be with all those who love him. 

While our text says that we should "work out our own 
salvation," another Scripture states that the reward 
which we seek is, "Not of works, lest any man should 
boast." (Eph. 2:9.) These two texts, however, are not 
out of harmony. No Scripture implies that we can be 
independent of our Lord in the matter of working out 
our own salvation. The perfect work of Christ is the 
basis of our own work. Unless he had redeemed us we 
could have no basis for hope of eternal life. 

Hence, our attainment of the prize of our "heavenly 
calling," based upon certain conditions which we are 
striving to meet, is not dependent upon our own perfection 
or anything that we could do. The basis of it is the 
knowledge of our own imperfection and our acceptance 
by the Father because of the merit of our great Advocate 
imputed to us. 

It was God who provided for the redemption which is 
in Christ Jesus; and it is God who has drawn us to himself 
and who gives us grace to follow in the footsteps of 
Jesus in the way of self-sacrifice. While with fear and 
trembling or, as we have shown, with great carefulness, 
we work out our salvation, we realize the promised grace 
in every time of need; and we may be confident that our 
best efforts toward righteousness are acceptable to God 
only when presented through the merit of the righteousness 
of Christ, imputed to us by faith.— Heb. 4:16; 
Eph. 2:8. 



R4797 : page 108 

BLAMELESS AND HARMLESS, WITHOUT REBUKE 

"That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God without 
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, 
among whom ye shine as lights in the world, 
holding forth the Word of life."-Phil. 2:15,16. 

TO BE BLAMELESS is to be devoid of any 
disposition to do evil; not controlled by 
anger, malice, hatred, strife; but, on the 
contrary, to be disposed to do all the good 
possible to all with whom we have contact. 
We should be harmless, not merely so far 
as God would see, or so far as the brethren 
would see, but, so far as possible, harmless 
in the sight of the world, before whom we 
are to shine. 

Blamelessness does not necessarily mean perfection. 
One might be blameless and yet imperfect on account 



of natural weaknesses. To be blameless in the sight of 
God is to live so that he may see one's intentions always 
to be just, loving, kind. The world will speak evil of us 
even as they spoke evil of our Lord, and will hate us; 
for the darkness always hates the light. If we have the 
friendship of the world, we are not in accord with God. 
The Apostle James asks, "Know ye not that the friendship 
of the world is enmity with God? Whosoever, 
therefore, will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of 
God." (James 4:4.) But if we are friends of God, the 
world will seek to do us injury as evil-doers— "as deceivers, 
and yet true." While not "friends of the world," 
we must endeavor to be at peace with them, so far as lies 
in us. 

We cannot, however, expect to please everybody. We 
are to be blameless in the sight of those of mankind who 
are recognized as having the best judgment amongst the 
people. Thus it was with our Lord. While the world 
blamed him, yet in their private councils they recognized 
the fact that he was harmless. Pilate, who put him to 
death, was honest enough to state, "What evil hath he 
done? I find no cause of death in this man"; "I am innocent 
of the blood of this just person."— Luke 23:22; 
Matt. 27:24. 

In the text under consideration the thought of the 
Apostle is that whatever charges may be made against 
us, our course of conduct before the world should be 
such that only the perverse of mind will think wrongly 
of us; that the better minds would think justly and note 
that the lives of the Lord's people are indeed blameless, 
not blameworthy. 

The disciples were dwelling in the midst of a perverse 
generation, their own Jewish nation, among whom they 
were so to conduct themselves that their lives would be 
a light to their fellowmen. Perverseness implies unwillingness 
to be guided by the Lord; crookedness seems to 
apply to their course of life, not always a way of open 
wickedness, but a crookedness, doing both right and 
wrong. On the one hand was an evil heart of unbelief; 
on the other were forms and ceremonies. 

For more than eighteen hundred years these conditions 
have followed the Lord's people. Everywhere there is 
a great deal of crookedness and self-will. Many things 
are done which are known to be contrary to the will of 
the Lord. Amidst these conditions the Lord's people are 
to shine as lights; they are to seek to walk in the Lord's 
ways, that they may "show forth the praises of him who 
has called them out of darkness into his marvelous light." 



R4797 : page 109 

GIANTS IN THE EARTH 
"As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also 



in the days of the Son of Man."— Luke 17:26. 

IN CONSIDERING our Lord's statement- 

that as it was in the days of Noah, so 

shall it be at his coming [parousia, presence], 

in the end of this Age— it should 

be noted that the Lord's presence will be 

unknown to the world; for this particular 

statement follows, that "As in the days 

that were before the flood, they were eating 

and drinking, marrying and giving in 

marriage,. ..and knew not,. ..so shall 

also the coming [parousia, presence] of the Son of Man 

be."-Matt. 24:37-39. 

This statement, however, does not imply that there is 
anything wrong in eating and drinking, etc., but rather 
that there will be little in an outward way to disturb 
man, in the crisis at the end of the Age. At the time of 
the flood, at the end of the First Dispensation, there was 
apparently nothing to indicate that anything unusual was 
about to happen. Evidently the Lord meant us to draw 
conclusions from this fact, that as calamity was inevitable 
then, so it will be inevitable now. 

The end of the First Dispensation and that of this present 
Dispensation are wonderfully similar. Previous to 
the end of the First Dispensation a superhuman influence 
had entered into the world. Power from an angelic 
source had produced very undesirable conditions, to the 
extent of bringing into unauthorized existence a race who 
were "men of renown" and "giants" in strength. (Gen. 6:1-4.) 
Today we find a similar condition. Whatever 
portion of the spirit of truth has entered into an evilly 
disposed human mind evil conditions on a gigantic scale 
have often been produced. Where else in the whole 
world can we find more intellectual power than in those 
who have come in contact with the Spirit of the Lord, 
the spirit of the Truth? But when this spirit of knowledge 
enters into an evil heart, evil will result. 

This spirit has produced men of renown, men of 
mental acumen, men who are able to do wonderful 
things. The remarkable achievements of our time, the 
wonderful inventions of all kinds, would not have been 
possible except for the fact that the Spirit of the Lord 
is abroad in the earth. But the general tendency of 
this combination— the spirit of knowledge in an evil 
heart— has been to produce giants, who "walk up and 
down" the land and are known as the Sugar Trust, the 
Coal Trust, etc. As the giants were in control in the 
days of Noah, so the giants are getting more and more 
control of the situation now. Just as it was then, so today 
the giants are liable to capture the whole world. As 
the flood destroyed those giants, so at this time the 
great cataclysm of trouble will drown all trusts and 
other commercial agencies which oppress mankind. We 
read that they will be utterly destroyed; that there will 
be no hope of resuscitation. 



R4797 : page 109 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

Question.— Since Adam was a wilful and intelligent 
sinner, and was individually sentenced, and since the 
sentence has been executed upon him and he is now 
under that sentence, and now has nothing and is nothing, 
how much of the merit of Christ will be necessary for 
his release from his condemned condition? 

Answer.— We understand that Adam, having been 
tried and found guilty and sentenced to death, and having 
gone down into death under that sentence, has done 
nothing to liquidate his obligations in any sense of the 
word; and that it will require the full satisfaction of a 
ransom-price to set him free and permit him to have 
another trial. In a general way, this is, of course, true of 
the entire human family. As Adam's children, we are 
dealt with as a race, instead of as individuals except in 
the case of the Church and of the Jewish Nation under 
their Law. 

During the Millennial Age there will be no imputation 
of Christ's merit to anybody, as it is now imputed 
to the Church. It is imputed to us for a special purpose 
—to enable us to offer acceptable sacrifices. In the 
Millennial Age no one will need the righteousness of another 
to make him acceptable. On the contrary, the whole 
world, counted in as one, will be dealt with from that 
standpoint; and Christ, as the great Mediator, Prophet 
and King, will make satisfaction to Justice for Adam and 
all his children, dealing with them as one. After making 
satisfaction to Justice, and thus purchasing the whole 
world of mankind, the great Mediator of the New 
Covenant will put it into effect, and under that New 
Covenant the blessing will begin with Israel; but every 
member of the human race will have an opportunity of 
coming to perfection, as heretofore shown. 

To get at the real gist of the question, we will put the 
matter in another form and say: If Adam had been living 
during the Gospel Age, to our understanding, he would 
not have been eligible to the offer of this Gospel Age 
—that it would not have been consistent with the Divine 
arrangement to have dealt with Adam as the Lord is 
dealing with the Church, because he, as personally condemned, 
would have had nothing that he could present 
as a sacrifice. We, on the contrary, have something to 
present— "Present your bodies living sacrifices." While 
our bodies are blemished, we have, nevertheless, some 
powers, and these we are invited to present. We have 
bodies which we are willing to coerce into submission. 
This is our hope— that we may be permitted to suffer 
with Christ, that we may be sharers in his glory. 



R4798 : page 109 

The Apostle says, "Ye are not your own; ye are 
bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body." 
(I Cor. 6:20.) This seems to imply that we had something. 
Having recognized Christ as the center of God's 
Plan and as our Redeemer, we are called upon to renounce 
sin— glorifying God by consecrating our lives, 
our bodies, to his service. But if we had been the original 
sinner, and had been originally sentenced, we see 
nothing that we should have had that we could call our 
own that we could have given. 



Question.— Should Sisters teach Sunday School classes? 

Answer.— Usually Sisters are better teachers of the 
young than are brethren. Nothing in the Scriptures forbids 
their teaching such classes. The Apostle's words are: 
"I suffer not a woman to teach or to usurp authority over 
a man." His words apply specially to the Church. 

As for the advisability of having Sunday Schools! We 
have not changed our judgment from what we have written 
in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. VI. 

We still believe that God holds the Christian parents 
responsible for the spiritual education of their children, 
and that they get a special blessing in fulfilling his requirement. 
If Sunday Schools are ever advisable, we believe 
they would be only for orphans or worldlings, or for 
children already taught at home. 



page 110 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR PASTOR:- 

I write you as an Elder of the Church to express our 
appreciation of your service to us as Pastor during the past 
year. 

We hold at least five meetings each week. The Berean 
lesson Monday evening, TABERNACLE SHADOWS Wednesday 
evening, SCRIPTURE STUDIES Friday evening, a lesson on a 
chapter in the Bible Sunday morning, testimony meeting and 
lesson in SCRIPTURE STUDIES Sunday afternoon. 

In all these lessons, dear Brother, you are certainly with 
us as Pastor. Then, we have the sermon every week and 
the dear old WATCH TOWER twice a month, so we do thank our 
Heavenly Father and our dear Lord for such a bountiful 
supply of the pure food, cleansed of all poisonous matter. 
So bountifully are we supplied with this precious food that 
we have no time nor desire for the things that the world loves 
so well. 

We cannot express, dear Brother, how much we appreciate 
this loving arrangement that the dear Lord has provided 



for us through you, as our dear Pastor; and we wish 
to say that our hearts abound in love to you and our prayer 
is that your loving zeal may continue, and that knowledge 
and wisdom may be supplied you to give the "meat in due 
season" to the end. 

With unbounded love to you from each one of the dear 
ones here, I remain, 

Your brother in the precious Faith, 

J. H. WRIGHT.--ALA. 



R4798 :page 110 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I feel it my duty to write you a few lines to say how 
thankful I am that, through the instrumentality of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, I have been led to abandon a life of sin and disgrace. 
I have found that which I needed to give me peace 
and joy, and, thank God, I know I shall never give it up. 
For several years I was separated from my family and leading 
a reckless life, but through his mercy I am again with 
my family and we are happy and contented. 

I had about given up all hope of ever being anything in 
this life but a drunkard, when I came across STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, also other of your literature, which gave me the 
light I so much needed. God's Plan is surely a marvelous 
one, and it is so plain to those who really seek the Truth. 

My prayer will ever be that God's blessing may rest upon 
you and your co-laborers in the "Harvest work," and especially 
upon the Colporteurs in their work of spreading the 
Truth. No one knows what good may result from placing 
the STUDIES even in homes where there is no interest. I believe 
my first reading of volume one was in the home of a 
family who had never read a page of it, but were talked 
into buying it by one of the Colporteurs. I was very much 
interested in it at the time, and tried to find out where the 
lady got it, thinking to get more literature along the same 
lines; but, after leaving there, I thought no more of it until 
God led me into the home of a Sister where I got more of 
the Truth, both by reading and from her explanations of 
points I did not understand. I am intensely interested in this 
glorious work, and my desire is to live nearer to God, who 
has done so much for me. 

Yours in the Blessed Hope, JOHN HOOPER.--CANADA. 



page 110 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am writing a brief letter to tell you that by his grace 
I am still sound in the doctrine, still abiding in the faith, 
and am still standing; still rejoicing and praising him for 
making known to me his wonderful Plan. 

Each day I am more satisfied with the food of the Lord's 



providing-the Bible with comments, the SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
and THE WATCH TOWER. These, with the DAILY MANNA 
and hymns and weekly sermon, are my diet and I do not 
need nor crave extras. I am hungry for just this and no 
other kind of food. 

Study and prayer are developing in me more of the 
fruits of the spirit, more love to God and more compassion 
for my neighbor. I am thankful there is a growing love of 
righteousness for its own sake, as I begin to feel that by 
the Lord's grace my present development would continue 
along the same line if 1914 did not give evidence of all that 
I am expecting and believing it will. In brief, my faith in 
the Plan and my study of the Scriptures would continue as 
at present. 

In so many ways, by your words and your works, you 
are helping me, and my heart is full of gratitude. I know 
the Lord is nigh unto you. May he bless you richly and keep 
you safe until he receives you unto himself. 

Your sister in Christ, I. M. F.--PA. 



R4798 :page 110 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Enclosed please find five dollars, for which please send to 
me by mail one of your WATCH TOWER Bibles, and THE 
WATCH TOWER for one year. 

I have all your volumes and have read them over and 
over and over. This is the greatest satisfaction of my life 
in my old days. I am now seventy-seven years old. 

I remain your brother in the Lord, 

N. SHEPHERD. -CAN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Owing to much literature being circulated by the opposition 
within our ranks some time ago, I concluded it wise to 
discontinue the distribution of the "Questions Answering 
Questions" booklet. Since then I have received many orders 
for these booklets from friends who are not advised of their 
discontinuance, and some do not understand why they are 
refused. 

I would thank you for the publication of this letter in THE 
WATCH TOWER, notifying the friends of their discontinuance 
and of my reason for this. 

Prayerful meditation upon Mark 9:38-40, leads me to the 
conclusion that we can be workers in the Harvest, and yet not 
followers of the Lord. To be followers of the Lord, we must 
not only be workers in the Harvest, but must also be workers 
according to his will. The fact that the majority of the 
Lord's "little ones" now disapprove of the circulation 
all literature other than that published by the Society, and 
my belief that the expression of the majority in such matters 
is the expression of the will of the Lord, are other reasons for 



its discontinuance. 

Feeling sure that all of the Lord's faithful ones will agree 
with me in oneness of the work, as well as oneness of hope, 
faith, and baptism, and trusting that all may receive a greater 
blessing by the discontinuance, than by the circulation of the 
booklet, I remain, 

Yours in the Master's service, A. B. DABNEY.--VA. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Does it not seem strange that so many of the dear friends 
worry about the Time of Trouble? How can an event arrive 
before it comes? What do we know about it? Nothing, by 
sight, would you not say? If by sight, then when did we 
quit walking by faith? 

How can Gentile nations continue after their lease expires? 
If they existed before the formal confirmation of the "lease" 
they were "tenants by sufferance," it would seem. 

You have taught clearly enough that they will resist ejectment 
proceedings, and this dispossession will be "the time of 
trouble" and the daily papers will probably not record the 
event! 

Would it not be well for the dear friends to re-read 
volumes two, three and four— as I am doing with much profit? 

With much Christian love, and gratitude and best wishes, 
A. M. MERRELL.-OKLA. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I have received your kind letter and the second volume of 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Thank you. I have begun the 
careful study of the volumes, and find them so good! They 
help me to understand parts of the Scriptures that I was not 
able to understand. When I asked questions of those who 
are teachers of the Bible, they told me, "We are not expected 
to understand it all." 

I feel that God has answered my prayer for Truth by 
putting your little paper into my hands by one of his servants. 
Some one put a paper into my buggy one day while I was in 
Lawrence. I had only partly read it when it disappeared, and 
I did not know where to get another. So I asked my 
heavenly Father to let me get another, and after waiting a 
couple of weeks, behold! another was put into my buggy. I 
took better care of this one. 

My husband is a Lutheran. I was reared a Quaker, and 
all my people belonged to the Friends, but I joined the Lutheran 
Church with my husband. Many times have I come 
home from listening to a sermon on eternal torment, crying 
because the minister made God out such a cruel God. Now, 
I thank his name that I know him as a God of Love, who is 
able to help us and who will soon open all the blind eyes. 

I am sending your books, as fast as I can read them, to 
my brother. He held up his hands in warning to me when I 
told him of them. He reminded me of what the Scriptures 



say about following after false prophets. He, like many others, 
is afraid to investigate anything for fear of being led away 
from the doctrine he grew up with. 

MRS. VIOLA J. S. SHIRAR. 



page 114 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



SERIES I., "the Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Times of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 
1 and 2), 

and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 113 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII APRIL 15 No. 8 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower 115 

The Day Has Not Come 115 

China's Cry for Pity 115 

To Shorten the Commandments 116 

Church Unity Congress 116 

The Good Tidings Abroad (No. 1) 117 

Reminders of Apostolic Days 118 

"Until the Lord Come" 120 

The Day of the Lord Has Come 120 

The Church's Judgment Now— The 

World's Not Yet Here 120 

"Consider Him Lest Ye Be Wearied" 122 

What Our Lord Feared and From What 
He Was Saved 124 

"Offered Up Strong Cryings and Tears 

to Him Who Was Able to Save Him" 125 

Sin Not With Your Tongue 126 

We Should Daily Render Our Accounts 126 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 127 

page 114 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., MAY 7 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3 
p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Avenue 
and St. Felix Street. Topic, "The Resurrection Hope." 
Visitors and friends will be cordially welcomed. 

LYNCHBURG, VA., MAY 14 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock. Discourse for the interested 
at 1 1 o'clock and Lecture for the Public at 3 p.m. 
All services to be in the Auditorium, Main Street, between 
11th and 12th Streets. Visitors and friends will be cordially 
welcomed. 

BALTIMORE, MD., MAY 21 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock. Discourse for the interested 
at 1 1 o'clock in Lehman's Hall, 856 North Howard 
Street. Afternoon service for the Public at 3 o'clock in the 
Lyric Theatre, Mount Royal and Maryland Avenues. 

BOSTON, MASS., MAY 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 4 

HOW YOU CAN ASSIST US 

Our dear readers can save much of our time: 

By writing their letters plainly. 

By putting their full address at the head of the letter. 

By putting their orders on a separate piece of paper from 
their correspondence. 

By giving our file reference in replying to any communications 
from our office. Write "File A," "File B" or "File R," 
as the case may be, on face of your addressed envelope or 
postal card and at beginning of your letter. 



Some, we notice, are using a small rubber stamp for their 
address. This is convenient and may also be used for stamping 
return address on your envelopes. 

We thank you for interesting clippings sent in, but request 
that you give name and date of the publication. If you 
send the paper be sure to mark the articles distinctly. 



R4799 :page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE DAY HAS NOT COME! 
SAYS ARCHBISHOP IRELAND 

The night of weeping is to give place to the morning 
of joy, says God's Word. 

Messiah is to establish his Kingdom of Peace and compel 
the abolition of war, so the Bible declares, and so both 
Catholics and Protestants agree. 

Yet both Catholics and Protestants agree that Messiah's 
Kingdom was set up in power and great glory 
more than eighteen centuries ago. Why, then, has it 
failed of its mission? Can either Catholics or Protestants 
explain? 

Hear Archbishop Ireland at Peoria, 111., on February 
23, as follows:— 

"Has the day come of such eminent prepotency of the 
principle of arbitration that a great nation, such as the 
United States of America, may safely turn all its swords 
into plow-shares and all its spears into sickles? No one 
will make the affirmation. 

"No, the day of assured and lasting international peace 
has not arrived, if ever ambitions and pride of nations 
permit it to arrive. 

"Today the nation that dismantles its ships of war and 
disbands its soldiers puts itself in danger of gross humiliation, 
if not fatal disaster. Today America is respected 
by its sister nations— it is respected because, also, it is 
feared. 

"Peace America invokes, but to be the more sure of 
peace America must be ready at a moment's notice to 
summon to its defense an army and a navy to whom defeat 
is impossible." 

THE EXPLANATION 

God's Kingdom, Messiah's Kingdom, was not set up 
eighteen centuries or more ago. That is the mistake! It 
is not yet set up! The Church was not commissioned to 
conquer the world and to reign as and for Christ during 
this time. Her commission was to "make herself ready." 
(Rev. 19:7.) She is to be her Lord's mouthpiece in calling 
and instructing the elect, who, at the First Resurrection, 
are to be "changed" to the "divine nature," as St. 



Peter declares, and then will inherit with their Redeemer 
his Messianic Kingdom, which will rule the world with 
a "rod of iron" for its blessing and uplift out of sin and 
selfishness.— 2 Peter 1:4. 

Christendom (Catholic and Protestant) has labored 
under the huge mistake of supposing themselves authorized 
to rule the world. The attempt to live by their erroneous 
opinions deluged the world with the blood of religious 
"holy wars" and cruel persecutions of each other and of 
the Jews. 

It is time to awake to the fact that the Lord's 
call now to his people is to show their loyalty by faith 
and obedience to the Divine law of love, even unto self-sacrifice, 
even unto death. So the Apostle wrote, "If 
we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him."— 
Rom. 8:16,17; I Cor. 6:2,3. 

The First Resurrection, like the second coming of 
Christ, will be invisible, except as the glory and power of 
the Messianic Kingdom will quickly follow. (1) A time 
of world-wide trouble. (2) A reign of righteousness 
world-wide, the cessation of wars, etc., as promised in 
the Prophets. 

Let us no longer deceive ourselves by speaking and 
thinking of civilized nations as Kingdoms of God 
in any sense. Let us recognize them, Scripturally, 
as "kingdoms of this world," Gentile kingdoms, permitted 
to hold sway until the time of Messiah's Kingdom 
—and no longer. (Daniel 2:44.) Let us not expect 
of these kingdoms the blessings promised only under Messiah's 
Kingdom. Let us, on the contrary, watch and pray 
for the Kingdom of Heaven and prepare ourselves, and 
all who have the hearing ear, for our promised resurrection 
"change;" and let us leave all else to God. He is 
able and willing to work all things according to the counsel 
of his own will. 



CHINA'S CRY FOR PITY 

The intoxicating curse of China is opium. Half a 
century ago, China endeavored to control the situation 
and to exclude all foreign opium. But wealthy Englishmen 
were concerned, because they had large interests 
in India, where the poppy, from which opium is made, 
grows profusely. 

The result was a war, in which the heathen Chinese, 
not having up-to-date Christian (?) cannons and ships, 
lost heavily. Then the British fastened themselves on the 
Chinese, took control of a liberal piece of territory, and 
made a treaty, which the conquered Chinese were forced 
to accept. That treaty stipulates the admission of opium 
into China. The Chinese cannot stop the traffic without 
precipitating war with the most powerful Kingdom of 
Christ (?) on earth, so far as naval strength goes. 

Now, after years of suffering, the Chinese are becoming 



civilized, or Christianized (?), to the extent of adopting 

cannon, rapid-fire guns, a regular army, etc. They 

are about to establish a Parliamentary form of Government 

also, and are arranging to school the rising generation 

in the English language. It is said that vast orders 

for these new school-books have been placed in the United 

States. 

R4799 :page 116 

Now China realizes that opium is her great curse; 
she has passed laws against the growth of the poppy and 
the manufacture of opium. But she finds that the imports 
of opium amount to 5,000,000 pounds per year. She 
cries out again, as in the past, that this Great Kingdom of 
Christ (?) (Great Britain) will have mercy upon her and 
cease to insist on this curse being introduced to blight 
China morally and physically. 

A MONSTER PETITION 

The young men of heathen China have started a 
monster petition for the cessation of opium importation. 
The signatures are to be 200,000, representing China's 
400,000,000 people. It is to be addressed to his Majesty, 
King George, of Great Britain and Ireland, and Emperor 
of India and the Isles of the Sea and Head of the Church 
of England— the mightiest Kingdom of Christ (?) on 
earth. 

The text of this appeal has already appeared in the 
New York Herald, February 17. It recounts that a previous 
appeal, of similar character, was made without avail to 
the King's royal grandmother in 1858, when she was the 
representative of this branch of Christ's Kingdom (?). 

Is not all this very incongruous! very strange? What 
hypocrisy we have indulged in! How we all should be 
ashamed of it! Think of one of the chief nations of earth 
sending Bibles and missionaries to the heathen in one 
hand and rum and opium in the other! Is it any wonder 
that the heathen reject our two-faced overtures as best 
they are able? Is it any wonder that the "common people" 
of Great Britain are unable to take their religion seriously 
and are falling away from all church association— into 
infidelity? 

It is no wonder! Let us get back to honesty and truth. 
Let us admit that Great Britain is one of the kingdoms of 
this world. Let us not charge the faults of our selfishness 
to God and to Christ's Kingdom. Let us stand for the best 
possible in worldly government and continue to pray for 
and to hope and wait for the Kingdom which is to come 
and to bring about the doing of God's will on earth as it 
is done in heaven, according to the prayer of our dear Redeemer 
and Lord. 



TO SHORTEN THE COMMANDMENTS 

Advices from London note that the highest counsels 
of the Church of England are considering the advisability 
of modifying and shortening the Ten Commandments— 
especially the second, fourth and tenth. 

Those who admit that God gave those commands must 
be egotistic in the extreme to attempt to correct the 
Almighty! 

Those who disbelieve in the Divine authorship of the 
commands would better repudiate them entirely and make 
new ones to their own pleasement and properly credited 
to their own wisdom. 

God's consecrated people, guided by his Word in the 
New Testament, realize that the law is just and good. But 
they see also that it was given to the Jew and not to the 
Christian "new creatures in Christ." 

These latter are spirit-begotten and are under the Law 
of the Spirit of Life in Christ— a superior Law— a Law 
which requires love to God supremely and love for our 
fellow-creatures as for ourselves. This Law of Love includes 
all of the requirements of the Mosaic Law and 
more. 

If the Jew could not keep the Mosaic Law, because of 
the hereditary weakness of his flesh, neither can the Christian 
"new creature" keep his still higher law for the same 
reason. 

But God is not judging these "new creatures" as flesh 
beings, but as spirit beings. They are being judged according 
to their minds, their hearts, their intentions. Thus 
"the righteousness of the Law of God is fulfilled in us, 
who are walking, not after the flesh, but after the spirit. 
-Rom. 8:1. 



CHURCH UNITY CONGRESS 

Early in March a "Church Unity Congress" at Los 
Angeles, Cal., is recorded. Its principal speaker was Bishop 
Johnson (Episcopalian). His address, as reported in 
the Los Angeles Times, is interesting, and was as 
follows:— 

"We are addressing ourselves to a project which, until 
within very recent years, has been regarded as fanciful. 

R4800 :page 116 

We are about to confer concerning the reunion of Christendom, 

than which, a quarter of a century ago, no proposal 

was regarded as more chimerical. And yet we are 

doing this at the present time, conscious that the convictions 

of Christian men have within twenty-five years so 

changed that, to a large extent, they coincide with the 

judgment that has brought us together. 

"Up until the early sixties, a fatal sense of security 



seemed to have blinded the Christian world to the inadequacy 
of the results attending the efforts of the churches. 

"Suddenly the Christian world began to realize that 
possibly it had attained all the success it could expect to 
have, or deserved to have, under existing conditions. 
Christendom divided, even if it be into friendly camps 
(which was not always the case), was not a condition 
favorable to the largest and best fruitage in the Christian 
church. Therefore, it is now demanding that at least this 
one adverse condition shall be changed, so that the church 
at large shall be able to do work worthy of Jesus Christ 
our Lord and of the character which he expected the 
church to do. 

"With such a cry ringing in our ears, you and I come 
together today and join in this conference, which, until the 
present time, has been deemed impracticable. I am glad 
to believe that should we get the ideal of what ought to 
be done clearly in our own minds, we could, in God's own 
time, bring about such a reunion of Christian forces as 
would make the united churches really a tremendous 
power in the world for God. 

"I am quite aware what this statement involves. I am 
prepared to say that I am, by conviction, committed to a 
policy which looks forward to its universal adoption, even 
to the obliteration of so-called denominational lines, and 
to a genuine effort so to re-relate Christian forces that 
they may, with no overlapping or friction, plan as with 
one mind for the upbuilding of the Kingdom of Christ in 
the world. 

"Yes, it is a great thing that we are undertaking to do, 
and we, in our own time, may only be able to make our 
own generation believe that the conception is practicable. 

"Some of our friends may say that we have not done 
much, and that may be true, but will it not be fine when 
we do appear before the Judgment Seat, should we be 
commended by God because we have not allowed the 
Christian world, in the presence of fearful social and civic 
problems, to fail of its duty, without some warning on impending 
disaster, due to our dismal and pitiable divisions? 

"We recognize that a century may pass before the end 
shall be attained, but if you feel as I do, my brethren, you 
want to be ahead of your time. 

WHAT HIS IDEAL IS NOT 

"In order to show what my ideal is, it has seemed well 
for me to show what it is not. Frankly, my ideal leaves 
the federation idea far in the rear, and I say it with a profound 

R4800 :page 117 

respect for federation. Right here in this city we 
have shown what federation may accomplish, and if it has 
done nothing else, it has made this meeting possible." 
[Great applause.] 
Bishop Johnson argued that, in case of federation, if 



the settled policy of any affiliated church was menaced by 

the action of the federation, the latter would be unable to 

carry out its policy. He declared that the towns and hamlets 

of Southern California are overchurched, and that 

in the cities the churches are scattered about in a most unstatesmanlike 

manner. He argued that the uniting of 

forces would bring about better results at a much reduced 

cost and more effectively reach the people who need 

to be reached, but it would probably not be accepted by 

many of those affected by such a move. 

"Of course," said the bishop, "there is something seriously 
wrong in this attitude, but it is the fact and we must 
face it. I am perfectly satisfied, however, that the churches, 
merely federated, will not be able to deal effectively 
with the problem. 

"You will see that I regard sectarianism not only as 
productive of evil, but as being evil and vicious in itself; 
that is, if the spirit of the greatest of the Apostles is any 
indication of the Master's aim and purpose. 

"It is my feeling that the time has come when we, as 
Christian leaders, ought to repreach the Pauline conception 
of the church. Of course, we will all find that there 
will be plenty of people in all of our congregations who 
are determined, at all cost, to be first, Episcopalians, Methodists, 
Presbyterians, Baptists and Congregationalists, and 
I suppose there always will be such, but I for one am praying 
that the time shall come when the necessity for these 
names shall have passed away (applause); that the Christian 
world will soon have formed a platform upon which 
every Christian may stand without any sense of loss, and 
with the satisfaction of knowing that it includes every essential 
to salvation in the Gospel of Jesus Christ." 

THE FINAL CONCEPTION 

Bishop Johnson's widest conception of this United 
Apostolic Church is to be found in the following 
paragraph:— 

"When a church regards herself as the enclosure for 
saints, rather than the refuge for those 'called to be such,' 
she is giving herself a character quite unlike and below 
that which Jesus had. If the church is the extension of 
the Incarnation, then she must welcome to her companionship 
and fold the publicans and sinners who are fascinated 
by her Master's message; she must so relate herself to 
them that she will neither suffer defilement nor have an 
unpleasant sense of contamination in such association, and 
they, on the other hand, must be led by association with 
her, to think of and to love noble things. 

"In a word, the church is to be the physician of the 
spiritually sick, and halt and blind, and yet the guide of 
the spiritually strong, courageous and brave, and for each 
in his own place and time, she is to bring a message of 
love and peace, so that she herself will ultimately become 
the spotless Bride of Christ." 

The speaker at great length pursued the discussion of 



the subject without attempting or desiring to enter into 
any of the details of the ideal church. He said: 

"We could most easily, while purring and smiling, enter 
upon a conflict to secure an intellectual victory, that 
would widen and not bridge the breaches." 

In conclusion the Bishop stated that when every man 
was sure of himself in God; when there was no sense of 
pride and no desire for petty victory, then the thing could 
be accomplished. 

The congress closed with a night session, at which Dr. 
Robert J. Burdette delivered an address on "The Church 
with an Alias," and Bishop W. M. Bell talked of "Christian 
Unity in the Foreign Field." A very large audience 
was present, and their delight was frequently expressed 
in laughter and applause. 



A GERMAN ANTI-MILITARY CRITIC 

Col. Gadke, a German military critic, has joined the 
chorus of civilization in protest against the huge waste 
of armies and navies. These armaments, he says, do not 
tend to preserve peace, but to menace peace; and, furthermore, 
upon the eight great nations they impose an annual 
expenditure of upward of $2,000,000,000. 

The argument is not new. The figures add nothing to 
public information. Interest in them is due almost 
wholly to the source from which they come. German authorities 
have hitherto upheld the military spirit and 
maintained that a standing army is a standing benefit. 
An opposing voice from that quarter naturally compels 
attention. 

In the course of events, however, it is fairly certain 
that German public sentiment will be forced into revolt 
against the Kaiser's militarism. It is either that or 
bankruptcy.— New York World. 



R4800 :page 117 

THE GOOD TIDINGS ABROAD 
NO. 1 

TO THE FAMILY OF GOD AT BETHEL-BROOKLYN: 

AS our vessel steamed out of New York harbor 
your good wishes and kind messages 
of love cheered us greatly. It was a 
pleasure to know that you regretted to 
have us leave, even for two months, but 
it was a pleasure also to know of your 
brotherly love toward God's people beyond 
the sea in Great Britain and Scandinavia. 
We will remember to tell them of your interest 



in their welfare, and of your desire 

that God's blessing might accompany us to the intent 

that our hasty visit might further spread the "good tidings" 

and might further deepen their knowledge and 

their zeal and assist them in making their calling and 

their election sure in the Kingdom. 

We had a pleasant voyage— uneventful. The first two 
days the water was a little rough, and we had little difficulty 
in practicing Lenten self-denial. Brother Rutherford, 
Jr., served as our stenographer, and, under the Lord's 
blessing, we were enabled to get out considerable work- 
answers to correspondence and matter for THE WATCH 
TOWER and newspapers. 

We landed at Plymouth (my stenographer and myself). 
Brother Driscoll, as representative of the Press 
Association, continued his journey, going direct to 

R4801 :page 117 

Vienna and beyond in preparation for our later coming. 

The London Bible Students' Ecclesia held a general 
meeting the night of our arrival. It was a very happy 
occasion. Some excellent testimonies were given, and 
later we had the pleasure of a special meeting with the 
Elders and Deacons. As arrangements for the use of 
the LONDON TABERNACLE were not fully completed, Manchester 
was given our first Sunday in Great Britain. We 
arrived at Manchester Saturday evening and were met 
by representatives of the Bible Students there and had 

R4801 :page 118 

a good night's rest in preparation for Sunday, March 19. 

The Hippodrome had been secured. The morning 
meeting was for the interested only. It was well attended, 
quite a number coming from surrounding places. 
We had a season of spiritual refreshment. A testimony 
meeting preceded our arrival, and our remarks, which 
concluded the session, were in the nature of a testimony 
to the grace of God on our behalf, and respecting God's 
blessing upon the work in general; of our constant endeavor 
to grow in grace, knowledge and love, and an 
exhortation that all of us continue so to do. 

The afternoon meeting was semi-public— that is, it 
had not been particularly advertised. The audience was 
approximately a thousand. We had excellent attention. 
The subject was, "The Two Salvations, but no Second 
Chance." The evening meeting was also in the Hippodrome. 
The topic was, "The Judgment of the Great 
White Throne." The friends had evidently advertised 
it thoroughly, as the audience was a very intelligent one 
in appearance. The number was estimated at thirty-two 
hundred, and it is said that hundreds were turned away. 
The aisles were crowded in a manner not permitted by 
the Fire Departments in America. For two hours the 
immense audience gave closest attention, many of them 



standing during the entire session. 

REMINDERS OF APOSTOLIC DAYS 

The night train took us to London, and the next evening 
we were en route for the Continent. We went direct 
to Vienna. Some Jewish friends in New York had 
urged this course, suggesting that Vienna, Budapest, 
Cracow and Lemberg were great Jewish centers, and 
that in these cities many would be rejoiced to hear us 
respecting "Zionism in Prophecy." 

According to all outward appearances these Jewish 
meetings were complete failures, but we are not so sure 
that they were such in reality, and from the Divine 
standpoint. 

A Jewish Rabbi of New York, who there tried to do 
us injury, continued his efforts of opposition in Austro-Hungary, 
and with considerable success. He evidently 
was grieved that we taught the people respecting the 
prophecies of the Bible. He cabled at considerable expense 
a long message of misrepresentation, warning the 
Jews to beware of us— that we were a missionary. 

A moderate-sized hall had been secured in Vienna 
and it was crowded. The audience was of average intelligence 
and appearance; about two-thirds of them appeared 
anxious to hear us, and the other one-third seemed 
determined that no one should hear us. From the very 
beginning of our address, from all over the hall, they 
shouted and screamed and some of them appeared possessed 
of demons. One would have thought that we 
had come to deprive them all of life and liberty, whereas 
our motive was purely benevolent and a desire to make 
them more happy— to tell them of God's love, and that the 
wonderful prophecies to which they are heirs, will soon 
be fulfilled. Evidently the many and severe lessons 
which the poor Jews have learned under the hand of 
oppression and injustice have not profited them greatly. 
Of justice they seem to know nothing. They neither 
respected our rights as friends nor even as they should 
have done had we been foes, neither did they respect the 
rights of their more intelligent brethren, who were 
anxious to hear what we had to say, without compromising 
their own liberty. 

We smiled upon them and motioned to them with our 
hands for order, but to no avail. Through our German 
interpreter, Brother Koetitz, we endeavored to speak a 
word or two to allay their fears, but to no purpose. They 
shouted and screamed and whistled and made Babel of 
the place. Several seemed anxious to get their hands 
upon us, but a strong cordon of the more sensible ones 
formed a barricade around us. We had no fear, but 
those who knew our opponents better seemed quite fearful 
for us. Finding that we could accomplish nothing, 
we smilingly waved our hand, indicating that we would 
give up the attempt, and left the platform. The same 
Jews opened the way before us and kept off any opponents 



and guided us out of the hall into which about six 
hundred were crowded. A number of young Jews followed 
to the hotel and questioned us until midnight and 
asked the privilege of coming the next day. 

About fifteen came the next day and questioned further 
respecting the Divine Plan and of the share of the 
Jews therein, for about two hours. They informed us 
that after we had left the hall on the previous night, the 
Jews got into a serious wrangle among themselves. (1) 
An atheistic, anarchistic and Zionistic class, influenced 
by the cablegram of Rabbi Magnus, the self-appointed 
head of the self-appointed society of New York, which 
styles itself the Jewish Kehillah. (2) An orthodox class, 
greatly excited, which joined with them in opposing us, 
believing the statement that our object was "mission," and 
evidently greatly in fear that we would undertake it. (3) 
More than half the audience, reasonable, intelligent and 
more civilized and sympathetic with Judaism and the 
Bible, but not sympathetic with the foolishness and 
superstition. This class was the one which was anxious 
to hear us. Our Jewish friends informed us that the 
three parties got into such a row after we left, that forty-six 
policemen came in and dispersed them. We presume 
that Rabbi Magnus and the New York Kehillah will 
feel very proud of their influence over the hoodlum class 
of their people— the anarchists. False words may prosper 
for a time, but eventually the falsifiers will be known 
and be disesteemed by all whose esteem is desirable. 
We arranged to have a large number of Yiddish 
papers circulated in the Jewish quarter of Vienna, so 
that those anxious to know respecting "Zionism in Prophecy" 
might not be hindered entirely by their insanely 
fearful brethren. 

We had intended a Jewish meeting at Budapest, but 
the advance agent reported adversely. The Hungarian 
government, as explained by one of the nobles, has long 
been trying to break down the lines of Judaism, and to 
have the Jews become Hungarians and become dead to 
any national hopes and promises. Evidently they have 
been successful to a considerable degree. The prominent 
Jews showed little interest in Zionism and preferred that 
their more ignorant brethren should abandon all Zionistic 
hopes. Added to this no moderate priced hall was 
available in Budapest, and Brother Driscoll's financial 
allowances would not permit the renting of such halls as 
were available. 

At Cracow no meeting was held because of the Governmental 
restrictions. It is on the border of Russia, 
and Russian usages prevail to a considerable degree. It 
would have required some resident to become responsible 
to the government in respect to the meeting and what 
should be said thereat, and no interest was manifested 
by the Jews or others to this extent. 

At Lemberg the situation was similar, but as Brother 
Driscoll had about given up his endeavor, a Jew of some 
prominence seemed to be Providentially sent forward. 



He took an active interest in the matter, signed the 
papers securing the government approval, etc. We had 
every reason to expect that the two meetings there, afternoon 

R4801 :page 119 

and evening, would prove very interesting to the 
Jews, who constitute about 28 per cent, of the entire 
population; but we had miscalculated. The message 
from America to Vienna was forwarded to Lemberg. 
"Pastor Russell is a missionary and the greatest possible 
menace to our race," seems to have been the substance 
of the message. As at Vienna, the Jews were of two 
parties— one party anxious to hear, the other determined 
that no one should hear. Again the opposing Jews acted 
like insane people— as though possessed of evil spirits. 
"They gnashed on us with their teeth," would pretty 
nearly fit the situation. We were reminded of Apostolic 
times. No meeting could be held. Again we smilingly 
yielded to the situation and bowed adieu to the audience. 
Some cheered us and some cheered our opponents 
for having gained a victory over us. We withdrew. 

We had determined not to attempt to address the 
evening service, and had sent a written note to this 
effect. In it we mentioned our interest in the Jews, 
assuring them that we were not endeavoring to proselyte 
them to Christianity; but that since the disorderly element 
was so large we declined to even appear to thrust 
ourselves on their attention. 

Then a special message came from the hall to inform 
us that there was a large and intelligent audience waiting 
for us and that certain Jews had provided military police 
to keep order, and that we must surely come and give 
the address. We went, but the wild, fanatical, foolish 
and almost insane conduct of the afternoon was repeated. 
Again we smilingly bowed to the audience that 
we would give up any attempt to address them. In the 
ante-rooms prominent Jews apologized, one a banker, 
another a lawyer and it should be mentioned that a 
prominent Rabbi made an endeavor during the meeting 
to have order. Nevertheless the friendly Jews were so 
fearful that something would happen to us that we were 
taken from the hall by a back way to a waiting automobile. 
Three of our friends stuck to us until we took our 
train, nearly an hour past midnight. They at least did 
show us that all Jews are not fanatics and insane. Indeed, 
they had become our fast friends, and the fact that 

R4802:page 119 

we took the matter so patiently, kindly and without bitterness 
towards our enemies, made them interested in 
our message, and they requested reading matter— for 
themselves and some to circulate. 

God alone knows what his providences may be in 
connection with these experiences. In our estimation, 



however, no higher compliment could possibly be paid to 
human tongue. Think of it! The Church of England 
Mission to the Jews has had a regular station at Lemberg, 
we believe also in Vienna, for years, ably and expensively 
managed, but these have no terror for the 
Jews. It was the coming of an American to speak for 
a few hours that threw them into such paroxysms of 
excitement, fear, dread of some wonderful bewitching 
power which would attend his utterances and sweep off 
a large proportion of the Jews into Christianity in two 
hours. Poor Jews! We must acknowledge that we are 
unworthy of such a tribute. Quite probably, however, 
their excitement on the subject may lead some to a 
deeper investigation than if they had heard us in a decent 
and orderly manner, or, not desiring to hear, had properly 
stayed away from the meetings to which only those interested 
in "Zionism in Prophecy" were in any sense of the 
word invited. 

BERLIN CHRISTIANS AND JEWS 

Our next appointment was at Berlin. There we met 
a very interested company of believers in Present Truth, 
some of whom had come about two hundred miles. We 
addressed them for about half an hour following their 
testimony meeting. Then came a general luncheon. The 
afternoon session was adapted to both Christians and 
Jews, but the topic seemed to bring an audience in which 
the Jews predominated— in all nearly a thousand. 

Messages respecting us had been forwarded from 
Vienna, and there was manifested great fear lest we 
should convert them all in one short talk. It was surprising 
to us for two reasons: (1) It was in Berlin, a 
city of modern thought, and (2) the leader of the opposition 
was a Dr. Loewe, a man of fine appearance. Those 
who did not believe in the Bible should not have attended 
a meeting to which they were not invited, and if they 
came through any misunderstanding, justice would have 
demanded that they withdraw with as little disturbance 
as possible. It furnished a fresh illustration of how 
even intelligent people may be swayed by false words 
and prejudice. Our address had not proceeded very 
far until the Doctor and about 120 followers arose and 
retired to the rear of the room, where they made demonstrations 
of opposition. We judged that they were 
Socialists and unbelievers, because their withdrawal took 
place as soon as we began to refer to the prophecies of 
the Bible. 

HOW STRANGE IT SEEMS! 

How strange it seems that those who disregard the 
promises made to Abraham, and who even question 
whether any such person ever existed, should pride 
themselves upon belonging to his family. How strange 
it seems to us that any who disregard the promises of the 



Scriptures should take any interest in the land of Palestine 
—the land of promise. Surely there is more desirable 
land to be found in many parts of the earth and 
much more accessible. Surely Zionism, without a religious 
basis, will never amount to anything. 

The remainder of the audience, approximately eight 
hundred, remained and gave earnest attention as we set 
forth the interests, both to the Jews and Christians, of 
Zionism from the Biblical standpoint. At the conclusion 
of the service several Jews came forward and requested 
opportunity to apologize publicly for the conduct of those 
who had withdrawn boisterously. They spoke in the 
highest terms of the address they had listened to, assured 
us of their appreciation, and that they were not used to 
hearing such words from Christians, and that their 
brethren who had withdrawn had surely done so under 
misapprehension. They inquired when we would address 
them again, assuring us of a great audience. When they 
learned that we would depart the same night, they expressed 
regret, but warmly urged us to come back at a 
future time. 

On the whole, who can tell but that, even in Berlin, 
the results may have been better for those who 
heard than if no prejudiced opposition had been manifested. 
We will leave the results with God. If the time 
has come for the Jews to hearken to their prophets, and 
for Zionism to take on a religious aspect, then it will be 
so. If we are mistaken, if God's time for Zionism is 
not yet, nevertheless Zionism, in the broadest sense of 
the term, is the hope of the world as well as for Israel. 
Whenever it shall come to pass, the Law will go forth 
from Mt. Zion, the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, the glorified 
Church, the great Messiah, with Jesus as the Head; 
and the Word of the Lord will go forth from Jerusalem 
—through the Natural Seed of Abraham— through the 
Ancient Worthies, and so many other believing ones as 
will then associate themselves with that nucleus of 
Messiah's earthly Kingdom. 



R4798 : page 120 

"UNTIL THE LORD COME" 

"Therefore, judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, 
who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, 
and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts; 
and then shall every man have praise of God." 
-1 Cor. 4:5. 

THE TEACHING of the Apostle here is parallel 

to that of our Lord in his parable of 

the wheat and the tares. (Matt. 13:24-30,36-43.) 

When the zealous servant in the 

parable inquired, "Wilt thou then that we 



go and gather them [the tares] up?" the 

Lord answered, "Nay; lest while ye gather 

up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with 

them. Let both grow together until the 

Harvest; and in the time of Harvest I will 

say to the reapers,* Gather ye together first the tares, 

and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the 

wheat into my barn." 

All through the Gospel Age the wheat and tares have 
grown together, and only the Lord, who could read the 
hearts, could distinguish between them with unerring 
precision. But both the Lord and the Apostle, in the 
above Scriptures, indicate a difference in the time of 
Harvest, and show that it will then be possible for the 
faithful saints to judge also. With this thought in view, 
they are told to "judge nothing before the time, until the 
Lord come." 

THE DAY OF THE LORD HAS COME 

And now the day of the Lord has come: we are now 
living in the days of the parousia (presence) of the Son 
of Man— "the Lord of the Harvest," "having on his head 
a golden crown [Divine authority] and in his hand [in 
his power] a sharp sickle"— the sickle of "present truth," 
the clear unfolding of the "Word of God [which] is quick 
and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword 
...and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the 
heart." (Heb. 4:12; Matt. 9:38; Rev. 14:14.) And he 
is sending forth such "laborers," "angels" or "messengers" 
into this harvest as he sent forth into the harvest 
of the Jewish Age, viz., his consecrated and faithful 
disciples, bearing the Harvest message— the now fully 
revealed Plan of God and its appointed times and seasons. 

The Truth thus sent forth is doing its appointed work. 
Like a magnet, it gathers to itself all who have an affinity 
for it. Thrust it in wherever you will, it will invariably 
accomplish its work of finding the loyal and faithful. 
And we can readily judge, from this affinity for the magnet, 
who are at heart true and loyal and faithful to the 
Lord. "My sheep hear my voice," said the Master, "and 
I know them, and they follow me;... for they know 
my voice [they are able to recognize his voice of Truth]; 
and a stranger they will not follow, but will flee from 
him; for they know not the voice of strangers." (John 10:27,4,5.) 
Again he says, "He that rejecteth me, and 
receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him; the 
Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in 
the last day. "-John 12:48. 

THE TRUTH IS DOING ITS SEPARATING WORK 

Thus, in this last day, the Harvest of the Age, this 
day of the Lord's invisible presence in the world, the 
Truth concerning the Divine Plan, which he has been 
revealing since 1874, and which is now being widely testified 



for the sealing of the elect, is doing its separating 
work; and the saints, who understand the present situation 
and watch with interest the progress of the harvest 
work, can see clearly where the lines of judgment are 
drawn between the faithful and the unfaithful. And often 
with astonishment they mark the divisions which the 
Truth makes when some prominent church-member, whom 
they had always judged to be faithful and true, manifests 
no affinity for the Truth, but turns from it and hugs the 
error more tightly than ever; or, when some other one, 
touched by the power of the Truth, awakes to earnest 
self-sacrifice in its service. 

"Judge nothing before the time." How could we have 
judged before this time as to whose hearts were loyal 
and true? But now, in this day of the Lord's presence, 
when the magnet of Divine Truth makes manifest those 
who have and those who have not an affinity for it— those 
who refuse to recognize the voice of the "Good Shepherd," 
and will not follow his leading, and who flee not 
from the voice of strangers, but hearken to and follow 
them— it becomes our duty, as well as our privilege, to 
judge who is on the Lord's side and who is against him; 
for, says the Master, "He that is not with me is against 
me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." 
-Matt. 12:30. 

"JUDGE NOTHING UNTIL THE LORD COME" 

"Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come"; 
but then let your spiritual senses be exercised in observing 
and marking the heretofore hidden things which the 
Truth, in its effects, is bringing to light. See how it is 
bringing to light the hitherto covered deformities of the 
various creeds. Where is the intelligent Calvinist today 
who would not like to bury his creed sea deep, and forever 
hush this wrangle that has been exposing its deformity 
for a few years past? And where is the intelligent 
Arminian that is not trembling lest his turn may come 
next? 

Everything is being dragged to the light, whether men 
are willing or not; for every hidden thing must be revealed. 
And not only the hidden things of creeds and 
systems of error and iniquity, but also the hidden things 
of individual character; "for there is nothing covered 
that shall not be revealed, neither hid that shall not be 
known. Therefore, whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness 
shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have 
spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the 
housetops."— Luke 12:2,3. 

Ah! it is the day of reckoning with the Church, and 
"the Lord hath a controversy with his people." And this 
controversy, this reckoning, is not merely with the 
Church-nominal in its great sectarian branches; but in a 
special sense it is with those who have escaped from the 
bondage of error and sectarianism, and who, because 
faithful to their consciences and the truths brought to 



their attention, have been served by the Master with 
"present truth" as "meat in due season" (Luke 12:37), 
and who have been permitted to enter into some of the 
"deep things" of God's Plan. 

THE CHURCH'S JUDGMENT NOW--THE WORLD'S NOT 
YET HERE 

The world has not yet come into its judgment; its 
reckoning is yet future; but ours is now upon us. We, 
to whom the testimony of Divine Truth has been borne, 
before whose mental vision the whole Plan of God with 
all its specifications has been spread out and carefully 
explained, now stand on trial, yea, under the final tests 
of that trial, which is either to prove or disprove our 
worthiness to enter into the promised reward of the 
faithful. Many, as predicted (Psa. 91:7), are proving 
unworthy, and some still stand. 



*"The reapers are the messengers" who bear the Truth, the indirect 
influence of which binds the tares. See SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. III.. 
Chap. VI. 

R4798 : page 121 

And among those whom we fellowship and bid Godspeed 
as faithful brethren in Christ, it is our duty to 
judge as to whether they are still faithful when the magnet 
of Truth makes their judgment so manifest in this 
day of the Lord; for it is written (2 John 10,1 1), "If 
there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, 
receive him not into your house, neither bid him Godspeed; 
for he that biddeth him God-speed is partaker of 
his evil deeds." 

Here is a responsibility with reference to our endorsement 
of another which we cannot ignore and still be 
faithful; and except we judge of one's course by his 
fidelity or infidelity to the Truth, we shall be endorsing 
error quite as often as Truth. It is our privilege to know 
the Truth and to hold it firmly and to be faithful to it to 
the end, and if we so abide and walk in the light we will 
quickly know when one has turned away from the light 
into darkness, and will be able to render wholesome 
counsel and warning to such, and to help those who still 
retain enough of the spirit of meekness to accept the 
proffered assistance. 

But, if such a one still pursue the path of darkness 
and call it light, thus deceiving himself and others, we 
cannot further endorse him and be guiltless. To do so 
is to add our influence in some measure, at least, to the 
error and in opposition to the Truth, and thus we become 
partaker of his evil deeds. 

"IN THE LAST DAYS PERILOUS TIMES SHALL COME" 



The necessity for this careful discrimination and 
jealous guarding of the Truth in these last days is very 
manifest, both from the warnings of the Scriptures and 
from observation of their fulfilment. "In the last days," 
says the Apostle, "perilous times shall come." (2 Tim. 3:1.) 
Why? Because the Prince of darkness will make 
every possible effort to retain his power and dominion; 
and ignorance, error and superstition are his strongholds. 
He first used all his power to keep men in ignorance and 
to foster superstition. But now God's due time has 
come for knowledge to be increased (Dan. 12:4), and the 
Millennial dawn is breaking; and not only the Church but 
the world is now waking up and beginning to think. 

So the policy of Satan at present is to devise plausible 
counterfeits of the Truth, whereby to entrap and mislead 
those who have been making progress in the knowledge 
of the Divine Plan. As, in the beginning of our Lord's 
ministry at his first advent, Satan's efforts were concentrated 
upon the one object of causing him to stumble, 
thereby to nip the Divine Plan in the bud; and as during 
the Gospel Age the consecrated members of the Body of 
Christ have been specially opposed and beset by him, so 
now his efforts are concentrated specially upon the last 
members of that Body, "the Feet of him," who are running 
the race for the prize of the high calling. It is for 
this cause that so many new and plausible forms of error 
have been brought forward within this Harvest period. 

SATAN USING EVERY EFFORT TO STUMBLE THE FEET 
OF HIM THAT PUBLISHETH PEACE 

Satan is using every effort to thwart God's Plan and 
to stumble the Feet. And God even more than permits 
this: he encourages it by sending these strong delusions 
of Satan among his professed followers— at the same time 
assuring all who at heart are faithful to his Word and to 
their covenant of self-sacrifice that they need fear no 
evil, for he will be with them and uphold them though a 
thousand fall at their side. 

Ever since the Plan of God has been made manifest 
to the saints, the delusions of error have been rapidly 
multiplying. This was foretold by the Apostle who, referring 
to our Lord's second coming, said, "And then 
shall that wicked [the Man of Sin] be revealed, whom 
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and 
destroy with the bright-shining of his presence,* whose 
parousia [Christ's presence] is with+ [or accompanied 
by] the working of Satan with all power and signs and 
lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness 
in them that perish, because they received not the 
love of the Truth, that they might be saved. And for this 
cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they 
should believe a lie, that they might all be condemned 
who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. "++ 
-2 Thess. 2:8-12. 



One after another the deluded ones who have fallen 
into the various snares set for their feet have become 
active advocates of the several causes they have espoused 
since they departed from the Truth, and are advanced by 
the Adversary as teachers, angels or messengers of new 
light. They never seem to realize that they have gone 
into darkness, but imagine they have made great strides 
of progress in the light. This is because they have been 
overcome by the strong delusions of this evil day. They 
verily mistake the darkness for the light, the error for 
the Truth. But, though they be cast thus into the outer 
darkness of the world and of the nominal professor, 
thank God, we can now see that by and by the shining 
forth of the Sun of Righteousness in the Millennial morning 
shall open all the error-blinded eyes to the full and 
glorious Truth, though too late to assist any to win the 
great prize of joint-heirship in the Kingdom. 

THE STRONG DELUSIONS SHALL CAUSE THE UNWORTHY 
TO BELIEVE THE UNTRUTH 

However, none are ever permitted to be thus overcome 
who have not in some way been unfaithful to the 
Truth and hence unworthy of it. Upon all such God has 
said he would send the strong delusion, so that they shall 
believe a lie. The Truth being designed for those only 
who are worthy of it— the elect— all others are bound to 
lose it. But it is impossible to deceive the "very elect." 
God will keep them by his mighty power because of their 
faithfulness and loyalty to him. 

The Lord distinguishes between the nominally elect 
and the finally elect, and so should we. Not all who have 
accepted of the Redeemer's favor of justification from 
guilt, and have heard and accepted the high calling to 
joint-heirship with Christ in his Kingdom and glory, will 
attain that great prize. All such have entered the race 
as now the nominally elect, and all such are eligible to 
membership in the glorified Church as the finally elect; 
but in order to gain that prize they must fulfil the conditions 
specified when they entered the race— when they 
in Christ's name and merit made a covenant with God, 
to sacrifice themselves in his service. In no other way 
can they make their calling and election sure. 

"LET HIM THAT THINKETH HE STANDETH TAKE HEED 
LEST HE FALL" 

It is this nominally elect class that is being tried now; 
and God is now making manifest the secret counsels of 
the hearts of his people. He puts us all on guard, too, 
saying, "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest 
he fall"; and telling us to take heed that no man take our 
crown. 



*The words, "Even him," here supplied by the translators, and not 
in the original text, as indicated by the italics, tend to obscure the 
sense of this passage. 

+The Greek word "kata," rendered "after" in the common version, 
should here be rendered "with," as the same word is rendered in 
Mark 1:27; 1 Cor. 2:1; Eph. 6:6. 

++Greek adikia should here be rendered untruth or error because 
contrasted with truth. 

R4798 :page 122 

How great is the responsibility of our present position 
before God, the great Judge of all hearts ! He has shown 
us special favor in revealing to us the wonders of his 
Plan and in setting before us the grand prize of our high 
calling. Thus far we were counted worthy of those 
favors and eligible to the prize of joint-heirship with 
Christ. How worthy have we proved ourselves since receiving 
this knowledge? Have we received it with meekness 
and humility and with a gratitude which manifests 
itself in active service of the Truth— in proclaiming it to 
others and in defending it and standing by it nobly in 
the midst of all the reproaches hurled against it? Have 
we refused to compromise the Truth to any extent to 
avoid its otherwise inevitable reproach? 

If we are not thus jealous for the Truth we are not 
worthy of it, and one of the deceptions of this "evil 
day" will surely number us among its victims; for it is in 
this time of the Lord's presence that Satan is to work so 
mightily, with great power to deceive, with signs of success 
and with lying wonders of error. His various 
schemes will have great success, in comparison with which 
the success of the Truth will seem small; for with these, 
as with Gideon's band, it will be a time of sifting, and 
"who shall be able to stand?" 

But let those who stand girt about with Divine Truth 
fear nothing; the Lord is permitting these delusions that 
they may serve his own wise and benevolent purposes in 
the separating of the worthy from the unworthy, and for 
the manifestation of those who are at heart loyal to him 
and to his Truth. 



R4802 : page 122 

"CONSIDER HIM LEST YE BE WEARIED" 

"Consider him who endured such contradiction of sinners against 
himself lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds." 

TO "CONSIDER HIM" seems to be to take 
note of, to have in mind, to reflect upon and 
not to easily forget how our Lord endured 
various trials and oppositions of sinners 
against himself. In our own experiences 



we have, as the Lord's followers, endured 

some opposition of sin and sinners against 

ourselves; but we have not yet resisted 

unto blood. We have not yet passed 

through the trying experiences through 

which he passed. When we remember that while we are 

poor, imperfect creatures like our neighbors, he was 

"holy, harmless, undefiled," then it is good to reflect that 

he endured patiently the opposition of sinners. When 

trying experiences came to him, he did not consider them 

as being merely from the individual with whom they 

originated, but as being, on the other hand, under the 

supervision of the Father. If, therefore, the Father permitted 

such experiences to come to him, he was bound 

to prove his loyalty by patient endurance. As he said, 

"The cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not 

drink it? "--John 18:11. 

So it is with us, Spiritual Israel, "The Lord your God 
proveth you." (Deut. 13:3.) In proportion as we are 
able to take our Lord's viewpoint in our experiences in 
life, we may be calm. If the Father permits trying experiences 
for our testing, or for the testing or proving 
of others, in ways we may not understand, it is for us to 
rejoice to have his will done. The poet has beautifully 
expressed this thought when he says:— 
"My times are in thy hands, 
My God, I wish them there." 

If we faithfully endure to the end, the reward will be 
ours. If we prove our loyalty and keep our faith that 
God is supervising our affairs, and that no good thing 
will be withhold from those who are walking uprightly, 
we shall some day hear his "Well done, good and faithful 
servant." 

We know that our Lord endured physical opposition. 
But our English word "contradiction" properly translates 
the original, implying verbal contradiction of his words. 
As we consider our Lord's case, we see that the people 
opposed him, not physically, but in his words, his teachings. 
It was left for the high priest and Sanhedrin and 
soldiers to do him physical violence and put him to death; 
and he could have resisted them if he had so chosen. 

"WHEN HE WAS REVILED, HE REVILED NOT AGAIN" 

The Apostle, therefore, seems to refer to the contradiction 
of his words. This is implied by St. Peter, 
who says, "When he was reviled, he reviled not again." 
(I Pet. 2:23.) So when we consider the three and a half 
years of Christ's ministry, we find that his doctrines were 
disputed, and that he was slandered. The Jews said that 
he had a demon; that he performed his miracles by the 
Prince of demons; that he was a blasphemer. These 
contradictions and oppositions on their part might have 
called out from him some very just, truthful statements, 
respecting them. He might have given them as good as 
he got, and better. He might have told them that the 



Devil was working with them, etc. His perfect power of 
language would have given him ability to more than cope 
with them. When they thought to entrap him in his 
words, he entrapped them in their words. But he reviled 
not. He did not render evil for evil, nor railing for railing. 
This, the Apostle shows, is the proper course. 

But in the daily affairs of life, when people say all 
manner of evil against us, when they revile us, it is 
natural to the fallen flesh to think of something evil to 
say in return. Thus these things become tests upon us. 
If we yield to such a spirit, we are following the course 
of the enemy and not that of the Lord. 

"Consider him who endured such contradiction of 
sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in 
your minds" when attacked by the Adversary— whoever 
may be his agents and whatever may be their missiles. 
He cannot harm but will only increase our reputation in 
the Lords' sight, if we endure faithfully; and he can do 

R4803 : page 122 

no outward harm that God cannot overrule for the good 
of his cause— though that good may mean "siftings" of 
"chaff" and "tares" from the "wheat." 

Evil speaking, backbiting and slandering are strictly 
forbidden to God's people as wholly contrary to his spirit 
of love, even if the evil thing be true. As a preventive 
of anything in the nature of slander, the Scriptures very 
carefully mark out only one way of redress of grievances. 
-Matt. 18:15-17. 

PROFESSED CHRISTIANS OFTEN WORST 
SCANDALMONGERS 

Many, among even advanced Christians, seem to be 
utterly in ignorance of this Divine ruling, and hence professed 
Christians are often the most pronounced scandalmongers. 
Yet this is one of the few special, specific commandments 
given by our Lord; and considered in connection 
with the statement, "Ye are my friends, if ye do 
whatsoever I command you," the constant violation of 
this, our Lord's command, proves that many are not far 
advanced in friendship— discipleship. 

R4803 : page 123 

Let us look carefully at this rule, which if followed 
would prevent gossip, "evil speaking," "backbiting." See, 
as above cited, Matt. 18:15-17. Its first provision, for a 
conference between the principals alone, implies candor 
on the part of the accuser, who thinks that he has suffered. 
It also implies his thinking no evil of the accused. 
They meet as "brethren," each thinking his own course 
the right one, to discuss the matter; to see whether they 
can come to the same view. If they agree, all is well; 
the matter is settled; peace prevails; the threatened break 



has been averted, and no one is the wiser. In the great 
majority of cases, a frank, open discussion between the 
principals will bring about harmony. But both must be 
equally candid and governed by the Spirit of the Lord. 

Thus did our Lord guard his true disciples from the 
insidious sin of slander, which leads onward to other and 
grosser works of the flesh and the Devil, and stops growth 
in the Truth and its spirit of love. Let us also note that 
those who hear slanders and thus encourage slanderers in 
their course of wrongdoing, are partakers of their evil 
deeds; guilty partners in the violation of the Master's 
commands. God's true people should refuse to listen to 
slanders and should point the offender to the Lord's Word 
and the only method therein authorized. Are we wiser 
than God? Experience teaches that we cannot trust to 
our own judgments and are on safe ground only when 
following the voice of the Shepherd implicitly. 

WE SHOULD REFUSE TO HEAR GOSSIP AND SLANDER 

If any Brother or Sister brings to you an evil report 
of others, stop him at once, kindly but firmly. "Have no 
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but 
rather reprove them." (Eph. 5:11.) Refuse to have 
any share in this violation of the Master's commands, 
which does great mischief in the Church. If the Brother 
or Sister be only a "babe" in spiritual matters, call attention 
to the Lord's ruling on the subject. (Matt. 18:15; 
I Tim. 5:19.) If the conversation is not addressed 
to you but merely in your hearing, promptly show your 
disapproval by withdrawing. 

If, after having had his attention called to the Lord's 
command on this subject, the slanderer still persists in 
"evil speaking," "backbiting" and telling you his "evil-surmisings, 
reprove him more sharply, saying as you go, 
"I cannot, must not, hear you; for if I did, I would be 
as criminal in the matter as you are, violating the Lord's 
command. And even if I were to hear your story I 
could not believe it; for the Christian who does not 
respect the Lord's Word and follow his Plan for the 
redress of grievances, shows so little of the Lord's spirit 
that his word cannot be trusted. He who twists and 
dodges the Lord's words would not hesitate to twist and 
misrepresent the words and deeds of fellow-disciples." 
Then withdraw fellowship from such until his error has 
been confessed with promises of reform. If to any extent 
you listen to such conversation, or express "sympathy" 
with it or with the gossiper or slanderer, you are 
a partner in the sin and in all its consequences; and if a 
"root of bitterness" is thus developed, you are more than 
likely to be one of those "defiled" by it— Heb. 12:15. 

Be pure: maintain a conscience void of offense toward 
God and men. Begin with the heart; harbor no 
thoughts that in any sense of the word would be evil. To 
make sure of this, have Christ Jesus as your pattern, 
well and much before your mind. When evil is obtruded 



upon you, either from without or from within, lift up 
your heart in prayer to him for the grace promised in 
every time of need. Keep constantly before you the 
prayer, "Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations 
of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my 
Strength and my Redeemer."— Psa. 19:14. 

LET US CULTIVATE APPRECIATION OF THE PRINCIPLES 
OF DIVINE LAW 

While seeking to follow the various specific commands 
of Scripture, let us seek more and more to understand 
and come in sympathy with the principles which underlie 
the Divine Law. These will enable us to judge of the 
right and the wrong of such of our words, thoughts and 
acts as may not be particularly specified in the Lord's 
Word. Indeed, as we come to understand and sympathize 
with the principles of Divine Law, to that extent we are 
getting the spirit of the Divine Word. Note the testimony 
of the Psalmist on this point, "O how love I thy law! 
it is my meditation all the day. Thou, through thy commandments, 
hast made me wiser than mine enemies, for 
they are ever with me. I have more understanding than 
all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. 
I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy 
precepts. I have refrained my feet from every evil way, 
that I might keep thy Word. I have not departed from 
thy judgments, for thou hast taught me. How sweet are 
thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my 
mouth! Through thy precepts I get understanding; 
therefore, I hate every false way. Thy Word is a lamp 
unto my feet and a light unto my path."— Psa. 1 19:97-105. 

Shun a contentious and fault-finding disposition as 
contrary to the spirit, or disposition of Christ— contrary 
to love. A certain amount of combative courage is demanded 
in overcoming the world, the flesh and the Devil 
and their various snares. This fighting disposition may 
become a valuable aid to ourselves and to the Master's 
cause if rightly and wisely directed against sin, first in 
ourselves and secondly in others; if used for the Lord 
and his people and against Satan and all his powers of 
darkness and superstition. This, in the Scriptures, is 
called fighting the good fight, and we all should be gallant 
soldiers in this battle for Right and Truth, lovingly defending 
our Captain's honor and his people's liberties. 

THE POWERS OF EVIL WOULD MAKE COMBATIVENESS 
A CHIEF VIRTUE 

But such a good use of combativeness is not pleasing 
to the Prince of this world, who will seek to pervert 
what he cannot directly use. Consequently, he attempts 
with some to make combativeness a chief virtue. He encourages 
them to fight everything and everybody; the 
brethren, more than the powers of darkness; nominal 
churchmen, more than the errors and ignorance which 



blind them and make them such. Indeed, his desire is to 
get us to "fight against God." 

Let us be on our guard on this point. Let us, first of 
all, judge ourselves, lest we cast a stumbling-block before 
others; let us fight down in our own hearts the wrong 
spirit which seeks to make mountains out of trifles and 
disposes us to be captious and contentious over non-essentials. 
Greater is "He that ruleth his own spirit than 
he that taketh a city." (Prov. 16:32.) Let us guard 
ourselves that our defense of the Truth be, not from 
motives of self-glorification, but from love for the Truth, 
love for the Lord, for his people, the brethren. If love 
be the impelling spirit, or motive, it will show itself accordingly 
in a loving, gentle, patient, humble course toward 
all the fellow-servants. Let us be "gentle toward 
all." Let "the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God," 
which is quick and powerful, do all the cutting. 

Beware of all thoughts, feelings and conditions of 
heart directly or remotely connected with malice, envy, 

R4803 : page 124 

hatred, strife. Give these no place in your heart even 
for a moment; for they will surely do you great injury, 
aside from leading to the injury of others. Keep your 
heart, your will, your intentions and desires full of love 
toward God and all his creatures— the most fervent toward 
God, and proportionately toward all who have his 
spirit and walk in the way of his direction. 

DO NOT TRUST TO CONSCIENCE ALONE 

If conscience were a sufficient guide you would have 
no need of the Scriptures. The majority of people have 
as good as no conscience; for they are blind to the 
principles and laws of God given to guide conscience; 
and still worse off than these are those mentioned in 
I Tim. 4:2. Hence the imperative necessity for carefully 
heeding the Lord's Word, and walking circumspectly according 
to its light. 

We are not to faint in our minds nor become discouraged, 
feeling that so much has been said against us 
that we must give up the race. On the contrary, we are 
to feel assured like our Lord, that nothing can befall us 
except with the knowledge of the Father, who is working 
all things for our good. It was thus our Lord was prepared 
for his exaltation. So we, if we are rightly exercised 
by our various experiences and follow as closely as 
possible the commands laid down for our guidance, will 
find that even revilings, slanders, oppositions to righteousness, 
will work out blessings for us, as they did for our 
Lord. 

R4804 : page 124 

But how many become weary and are in danger of 



losing the prize because they fail to consider what the 
Lord faithfully endured of opposition! If such would 
consider that the Lord, who was perfect, suffered in 
every sense unjustly for righteousness' sake, and that 
their own conduct is imperfect, they would not be weary 
in well doing, but would learn to fight and to "endure 
hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ"; they would 
continue to "fight the good fight of faith." 

"We have not an High Priest which cannot be touched 
with a feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points 
tempted like as we [the Church] are, yet without sin."— 
Heb. 4:15. 



R4804 : page 124 

WHAT OUR LORD FEARED AND FROM WHAT 
HE WAS SAVED 

"Christ... was heard in that he feared."— Heb. 5:7. 

THAT which the Lord feared was not that 

the love or promises of God would fail. 

He knew that God was faithful who had 

promised; that God is a covenant-keeping 

God, and that all his conduct and dealings 

are founded upon the eternal principles of 

truth and righteousness, from which to 

vary in the least iota would be a moral 

impossibility. But the Lord also knew 

that the plan of human salvation was made 

dependent upon the obedience of the Anointed High 

Priest to every jot and tittle of the Law concerning him, 

as shown in the typical service of the Tabernacle. Not 

only must the sacrifice be made, but it must be offered 

exactly as prescribed. 

If the typical high priest, Aaron, had at any time 
failed to conform to the directions given for the offering 
(see Lev. 9:16); if he had forgotten or ignored any part 
of the directions; or if he had substituted some of his 
own ideas, he would not have been allowed to sprinkle 
the blood of such imperfect sacrifice upon the mercy-seat; 
his offering would not have been accepted; he would have 
died, and so could never have come out and blessed the 
people.— Lev. 16:2,3. 

Thus we see that when undertaking the great work of 
redemption our Lord bore in himself the issues of life 
and death, not only for the whole human race, but for 
himself as well. Figuratively speaking, he took his life 
into his own hands. No wonder, then, if under the 
weight of his responsibility, the Lord feared! The tension 
of the trials to which he was subjected was too great 
for even the perfect human nature, unaided by Divine 
grace. Therefore he frequently sought the place of 
prayer for grace to help in every time of need. 



Consider the great fight of afflictions through which 
he passed; the subtle and deceptive temptations in the 
wilderness (SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. 5, pp. 110-117); the 
contradiction of sinners against himself, and the base ingratitude 
of those he came to save; consider also his 
poverty, his loss of friends, his labors and weariness, his 
homelessness, his bitter and relentless persecutions and, 
finally, his betrayal and dying agony! Surely the tests of 
endurance and of obedience to the exact requirements of 
the Law of sacrifice, under these circumstances, were 
most crucial. What carefulness it wrought in the Lord; 
for he feared, lest the promise having been left him of 
entering into the rest that remaineth and the glory to 
follow the Day of Atonement, he should come short of 
the full requirements of his Office as Priest, to render 
acceptable service. So also, says the Apostle (Heb. 4:1), 
should we fear lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest, any of us should seem to come short 
of it. 

"THE CUP WHICH MY FATHER HATH POURED FOR ME 
SHALL I NOT DRINK IT?" 

When the Lord came to the last night of his earthly 
life, then the question came to his mind with increased 
force, "Have I thus far done everything in exact accordance 
with the will of God? And now, in full view 
of the agony which it will cost, am I able to drink the 
bitter cup to its very dregs? Can I endure, not only the 
physical agony, but also the ignominy and shame and 
cruel mockings? And can I do it so perfectly as to be 
entirely acceptable to God in my own righteousness? Can 
I endure to see my disciples scattered and dismayed and 
my lifework apparently destroyed, my name and the cause 
of God covered with infamy, and my enemies triumphant 
and boastful? Can I do this so as to hear the 'well 
done?'" 

Such was our Lord's last conflict. Doubtless the 
powers of darkness were busy in that awful hour, taking 
advantage of the circumstances and of his weakness and 
weariness to discourage his hope and to fill his mind with 
fears that, after all, he would fail, or had failed to do 
the work acceptably; and that a resurrection, therefore, 
was uncertain. No wonder that the perfect human heart 
sank before such considerations and that an agony of 
emotion brought great drops of bloody sweat! But did 
he yield to the discouragement and give up the struggle 
when the crucial test was thus upon him? No! he took 
those human fears to the Heavenly Father, "to him who 
was able to deliver him out of death," in order that his 

R4804 : page 125 

human will might be reinforced by Divine grace to go 
forward and complete his sacrifice acceptably to God; to 
freely submit to be led away as a lamb to the slaughter, 



and, as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so to open 
not his mouth in self-defense.— Isa. 53:7. 

His prayers to the Father were not in vain: "He was 
heard in that he feared." Though his words were few 
(because no words could express the emotions of his 
soul) his chastened spirit was all the while making intercession 
for him with groanings which could not be 
uttered. (Rom. 8:28.) Then God sent an angel to comfort 
and minister unto him; to assure him still of the 
Divine favor, and thus to give him fresh courage, strength 
of mind and steadiness of nerve to endure all that was 
before him, even unto death. 

With this assistance of Divine grace our dear Lord 
went forth from that moment with undaunted courage to 
finish the work which was given him to do. Calmly he 
could come now and say to his beloved, but weary and bewildered 
disciples, "Sleep on, now, and take your rest." 
The bitterness of the mental conflict was over, and the 
light of heaven shining into his soul had chased away the 
deep gloom that hung over him like a funeral pall, making 
him "exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." Yes, 
"he was heard in that he feared"; and the fear was all 
taken away; and, strong in the strength which God supplied, 
he felt that he was able to offer the acceptable 
sacrifice, to meet every jot and tittle of the requirement 
of the Law in doing so; and hence, that his salvation out 
of death, his resurrection, was assured. 

"LEARNED OBEDIENCE THROUGH THE THINGS WHICH 
HE SUFFERED" 

The fear on the Lord's part was not a sinful fear. 
It was a fear such as we, also, are exhorted to have— we 
who are striving to walk in his footsteps— lest we fail to 
realize the precious promises vouchsafed to us upon conditions 
that are positive and unalterable. (Heb. 4:1.) 
It was a fear begotten, not of doubt of the Father's 
ability and willingness to fulfil all his promises, but of a 
knowledge of the righteous principles which must in 
every case govern the Father's course of action; a fear 
of the inflexible Law which righteously affixed the reward 
of eternal life and glory to his fulfilling of his Covenant 
of sacrifice, or of eternal death should he fail. At the 
same time he began to realize that, though perfect as a 
human being, his heart and his flesh would fail unless 
reinforced by Divine grace. The Psalmist expressed this 
fear of the Lord and the source from which his help 
came, when he said, "My flesh and my heart faileth; but 
God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever." 
(Psa. 73:26.) It was a filial fear entirely compatible with 
his relationship to God as a recognized Son; for "though 
he were a Son, yet learned he obedience through the 
things which he suffered."— Heb. 5:8. 

We are glad that Jesus was not cold and stoical, but 
that he was full of warm, loving, tender feelings and 
sensibilities; and that we, consequently, can realize his 



ability to sympathize with the most tender, the most 
delicate, the most refined, the most sensitive, more than 
could any other human being. He must have felt keenly 
the conditions under which he had placed himself, in laying 
down his life on our behalf; for the more perfect 
the organism, the more sensitive and high-strung are the 
feelings; the greater the capacity for joy, the greater the 
capacity for sorrow. Being absolutely perfect, our Lord 
must have been immeasurably more susceptible to the 
influence of pain than are others. 

"OFFERED UP STRONG CRYINGS AND TEARS TO HIM 
WHO WAS ABLE TO SAVE HIM" 

Besides this, he knew that he had a perfect life, unforfeited, 
and realized that he was about to part with it. 
Others of the human family possess only a forfeited or 
condemned existence, and realize that they must part 
with this some time. It would, therefore, be a very different 
matter for our Lord to lay down his life from that 
of any of his followers laying down theirs. If we let 
one hundred per cent, represent perfect life, our Lord had 
the full one hundred per cent, to lay down, while we, 
being more than ninety-nine one-hundredths dead through 
trespasses and sins and condemnation could, at most, 
have had but one hundredth part to lay down. A cold, 
stoical indifference to the loss of life, based upon knowledge 
that it could last but a short time longer at best, 
would, therefore, be a very different thing from the clear 
knowledge which our Lord had of the experience which 
he had with the Father "before the world was"; and the 
realization that the life he was about to lay down was not 
forfeited through sin, but was his own voluntary sacrifice. 

There can be no doubt that this thought of the extinguishment 
of life was an important factor in our 
Lord's sorrow. The Apostle clearly intimates it in the 
words (Heb. 5:7), "Who in the days of his flesh... 
offered up prayers and supplication, with strong cryings 
and tears, unto him who was able to save him from [out 
of] death, and was heard in [respect to] that he feared" 
—extinction. This thought brought with it another, viz., 
Had he done the Father's will perfectly? Could he claim, 
and would he receive the reward promised him— a resurrection 
from the dead? 

Had he failed in any particular to come to the exact 
standard of perfection his death would have meant extinction; 
and although all men fear extinction, none could 
know the full depth and force of its meaning as could 
he who not only had the perfection of life, but had recollection 
of his previous glory with his Father before 
the world was. For him the very thought of extinction 
would bring anguish, terror of soul. This thought seems 
not to have come to our Lord with the same force previously. 
It was this, therefore, that bore down upon him 
now so heavily as an exceeding sorrow unto death. He 
saw himself about to suffer according to the Law as an 



evil-doer, and the question naturally arose, was he entirely 
blameless, and would the Heavenly Judge thoroughly 
acquit him whom so many were disposed to condemn? 

"COULD YE NOT WATCH WITH ME ONE HOUR?" 

After praying he went to his three disciples, but found 
them asleep. Gently he reproved them asking, "Could ye 
not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray, lest ye 
enter into temptation." Then our Lord went away and 
used the same words in prayer; and again he prayed a 
third time, similarly. The matter was weighing upon his 
heart. Could he rely upon it now, that having sought to 
do the Father's will, having finished his course, he had 
done it acceptably? Could he have full assurance of 
faith that God would save him out of death by a 
resurrection? 

In answer to his petition a heavenly messenger was 
sent to comfort him, to reassure him, to strengthen him. 
We are not informed what message the angel brought, 
but we can see that it was a message of peace; that he 
brought assurance, not only that the Lord's course had 
the Father's approval, but that he would be brought again 
from the dead by a resurrection. These were quite sufficient 
to give our Lord all the strength and courage necessary 
for the ordeal before him; and from that moment 

R4804 : page 126 

onward we find him the coolest and calmest of the notable 
figures brought to our attention. When approached by 
Judas and his band, he was the most calm and self-possessed 
of all; when before the chief-priest, Caiaphas, 
he was the same; when before Pilate, the same; when 
crucified, the same. He had found peace in the message 
that he was approved of the Father, and that all the 
gracious promises of glory, honor and immortality were 
his; and now he could pass through any ordeal, he could 
submit himself perfectly to his enemies. 



R4804 : page 126 

SIN NOT WITH YOUR TONGUE 

"I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; 
I will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before 
me."— Psa. 39:1. 

OUR general thoughts have much to do with 
our language, our general conversation. 
Whoever, therefore, possesses a proper 
control of his heart, will govern himself in 
every sense of the word. If our ways 
please the Lord, if our ways are ways of 



righteousness, then out of the abundance 

of the heart the mouth will speak to the 

edification of the hearer. The ways being 

right, the utterances will be right. People 

generally love themselves and avoid saying anything 

bitter, unkind, about themselves. But the man who hates 

his neighbors will have very little difficulty in saying 

something bitter or unkind of them. 

Though the tongue is one of the most useful members, 
yet it is necessary to put a bridle, a restraint, a controlling 
influence upon it. With the tongue we may honor our 
God or we may blaspheme him. When in the presence 
of the wicked, we need to be still more on guard than 
with the righteous; for with the former the tendencies 
and thoughts are toward evil. When with the wicked or 
in their presence we are in contact with a degrading influence. 
At such times, some of sympathetic disposition 
may find special difficulty in bridling their tongues; but 
it is better to do so than to speak of even good things 
to the wicked, as we would feel at liberty to do with the 
righteous. The Lord has suggested, "Cast not your pearls 
before swine,... lest they turn again and rend you." 

Besides the evilly inclined of the world there is another 
class Scripturally called the wicked; namely, people 
who have a knowledge of the Lord, but who take their 
stand in opposition to him. Judas was of this class. So 
there are about us those who are in an adverse attitude. 
None seem to be so cynical as those who have been partakers 
of the Holy Spirit, but who have turned their 
backs upon "the Way, the Truth and the Life." Such 

R4805 : page 126 

seem to be more wicked than others in that they are in 
a more reprehensible attitude. No matter how careful 
we are, these will distort our words and assert that we 
have said something that we have not said. 

The warning of the Scriptures is not against the 
tongue itself, but against the power we exercise against 
others by the use of our tongues. Probably every person 
of experience will fully agree with the statement that 
the tongue is potent in its influence beyond any other 
member of the body, for either good or evil. 

THE TONGUE OFTEN A POWER FOR EVIL AMONG THE 
LORD'S PEOPLE 

As the bit in the horse's mouth will control his 
strength; and as the small rudder of a vessel will direct 
its course; so the tongue, and the pen, its representative, 
may influence large numbers of people for good or ill. 
How important, therefore, is the tongue! And how much 
more frequently do we find it employed as an agency for 
evil than for good; to pull down rather than to build up 
the faith; to implant seeds of discord and discontent 
rather than those which will produce righteousness and 



peace! While this is specially true in the worldly, it is 

also true among God's people; and each should remember 

that to some extent he is a teacher, and day by day is 

either forwarding or hindering the cause of truth, righteousness 

and peace. 

In the unregenerate world the tongue is a "fire" causing 
no end of burning of wrath, envy, hatred, strife and 
everything that defiles the entire body, stimulating all the 
fallen passions and desires. No wonder the Apostle 
declares that, figuratively, the tongue is set on fire of 
gehenna— the Second Death. Its burning tends to bring, 
not only its owner, but others to destruction. 

As imperfect beings we may not always be perfect in 
word and deed. Despite our best endeavors we sometimes 
err in word as well as in deed; yet the perfect 
mastery of our words and our ways is to be sought by 
vigilant and faithful effort. But, nevertheless, for every 
idle word we must give an account in this our day of 
Judgment. 

WE SHOULD DAILY RENDER OUR ACCOUNTS 

If, in the daily scrutiny of our ways, which is the duty 
of every Christian, we discover that our words have in 
any way been dishonoring to the Lord, we should remember 
that, "If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous" (I John 2:1); and in 
the name of our Advocate we may approach the throne 
of grace. There we may explain to our Heavenly Father 
our realization of our error, our deep regret at our failure 
to honor his name and his cause by a holy walk and conversation, 
and humbly request that the sin be not laid to 
our charge; but that it may be blotted out by his gracious 
provision for our cleansing, through Christ, humbly 
acknowledging that in his precious blood is all our hope 
and trust. 

Thus we should render up our account for every idle 
word; and by our words of repentance, supplemented by 
the merit of Christ applied by faith, shall we be acquitted. 
Otherwise, the idle words dishonoring to the Lord, will 
stand against us and condemn us, and we shall be obliged 
to suffer the consequences. The first consequence will be 
self-injury, for every evil thought or word indulged 
hardens the character and inclines it the more toward 
unrighteousness. The second consequence is that by 
setting a bad example to others we stir up evil in them. 
"A soft answer turneth away wrath; but grievous words 
stir up anger." (Prov. 15:1.) Thus, as the result of unwise 
or unkind words, we may stir up about us difficulties 
which will become agents of retributive Justice to teach 
us the lesson of self-control and consideration for the 
feelings and opinions of others. 

It is often the case that the Lord (or the Devil) is 
blamed for sending trials, which are simply the natural 
results of our own mistakes. Those who fail to locate 
the root of the matter (in themselves) pray in vain for 



the Lord to remove miraculously what they themselves 

could obviate by obedience to the Word and vigorous self-discipline. 

"If we would judge [and correct] ourselves, 

we should not be judged; but when we are judged, we 

are chastened of the Lord [largely by the experiences 

through which our own faults put us], that we should 

not be condemned with the world."— I Cor. 11:31,32. 

R4805 : page 127 

THE TENDENCY OF FALLEN NATURE IS TO BLAME 
OTHERS RATHER THAN OURSELVES 

But even should it be admitted that the difficulties are 
not directly caused by God or by the Devil ("Every man 
is tempted [tried] when he is drawn away by his own 
lusts [desires] and enticed"), the natural tendency is to 
blame some one else, and to think that our lack of 
patience, our hasty word or act, was the fault of another. 
How many deceive and encourage themselves with the 
thought, "If everybody else had as reasonable and generous 
a nature as I have, our family or Church gathering 
or community would be a veritable heaven upon earth!" 
Beloved, let us examine ourselves, let us be very humble 
lest the thoughts of self-congratulation and self-satisfaction 
which we may consider in our hearts, even if we do 
not utter them aloud, bring our condemnation. 

"If ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? 
For sinners also love those that love them. And if ye 
do good to them which do good to you, what thank have 
ye [what merit is there in it]? (Luke 6:32,33.) It is 
only when we "endure grief, suffering wrongfully," that 
our suffering is acceptable to God as a sacrifice of sweet 
incense. "What glory is it if, when ye be buffeted for 
your faults, ye take it patiently? but if, when ye do well 
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable 
to God; for even hereunto were ye called." (I Pet. 2:19-21.) 
Beloved, let us see to it that our sufferings are 
for righteousness' sake only, and let us not charge God 
or our neighbors for tribulations resulting from the indulgence 
of our own inherited or cultivated faults. 

In view of the fact that we now stand before the bar 
of Judgment, which, if we are truly the Lord's people, 
we will endeavor more and more fully to realize, "What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation 
and godliness?" (2 Pet. 3:11.) Godlikeness certainly 
cannot include any harmful gossip, any unclean or 
unholy conversation, any disloyal or rebellious words. 
Let us remember daily to settle our accounts with the 
Lord, to make sure that no record of idle words not 
repented of, and, consequently, unforgiven, stands against 
us. "Let your conversation be as becometh the Gospel of 
Christ." 

HOLY THOUGHTS PRODUCE HOLY WORDS 



"Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are 
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be 
any virtue and if there be any praise, think on these 
things." (Phil. 1:27;4:8.) Thus out of the good treasure 
of the heart we shall speak the words of truth and 
soberness, and honor our Lord by a godly walk and conversation, 
subduing the tendencies of our fallen nature, 
and "having our conversation honest among the Gentiles; 
that whereas they speak against you as evil-doers, they 
may, by your good works which they shall behold, glorify 
God in the day of visitation."— I Pet. 2:12. 

If daily we render up our accounts to God and seek 
his grace for greater overcoming power with each succeeding 
day, we shall be acquitted in judgment and stand 
approved before God, through Christ, having the testimony 
of his Holy Spirit with our spirits that we are 
pleasing and acceptable to him. So, dear brethren, let 
us "take heed to our ways, that we sin not with our 
tongues." (Psa. 39:1.) There is nothing that is of so 
powerful an influence as the tongue. The influence of a 
good word, a good thought, may become world-wide; an 
evil thought, an evil word, may also extend its influence 
to the end of the world. 



page 127 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study V.— The Organization of the New Creation. 
JUNE 4 
APOSTOLIC INFALLIBILITY 

(49) While assured of the Apostles' inspiration and their 
guidance by the Holy Spirit, how can we explain Peter's denial 
of our Lord? P. 223, par. 4,5. 

(50) Did the Apostolic office bring with it perfection of 
every thought and action? P. 224, top, and par. 1. 

(51) Did Peter's "dissembling" on one occasion affect 
his usefulness as an Apostle? P. 224, par. 2. 

(52) What reply shall we make to the objection that the 
Apostles expected the Lord's second advent during their 
lifetime, and were therefore untrustworthy in their teachings? 
P. 225, par. 1,2. 

(53) What shall we say to the objection that Paul's teaching 
and practice with respect to circumcision did not agree? 

P. 226, par. 1,2. 

(54) How explain the Apostle Paul's course recorded in 
Acts 21:20-26? Pp. 227-229. 

JUNE 1 1 



THE APOSTLES NOT LORDS 

(55) Were the Apostles ordained to be lords or rulers, 

or in any manner the vicars or substitutes of Christ in their 
relation to the other members of the Body? P. 229, par. 3,4. 

(56) Were the Apostles ever regarded as lords by the 
early Church, or did they assume such dignity? P. 230, par. 1. 

(57) Were the actions and experiences of the Apostles 
such as would be expected of lords? P. 230, par. 2. 

(58) Did the Apostles counsel or encourage any other 
members of the Church to such aspirations? P. 231, par. 1,2. 

(59) What were the respective attitudes of the Apostles 
and the other members of the Church toward each other? 
P. 232, par. 1. 

(60) Why were the disciples at Berea especially commended 
by the Apostle Paul? P. 232, par. 2. 

(61) Was this method of proving the Gospel also approved 
by our Lord? P. 233, par. 1, first part. 

(62) What is the proof of Divine inspiration in the teaching 
of the Lord and the Apostles, the Law and the Prophets? 

P. 233, par. 1, last part, and par. 2. 

JUNE 18 
APOSTLES, PROPHETS, EVANGELISTS, TEACHERS 

(63) What is the general thought of Christendom with respect 
to the organization of the Church, and what is the 

character of the Divine arrangement in contrast with this? 
P. 234, par. 1. 

(64) In showing forth the Divine arrangement, should 

we consider ecclesiastical history? P. 234, par. 2, first sentence. 

(65) In examining the Bible account of the Church's organization, 
how shall we regard the Old Testament with its 

types? P. 234, par. 2, and P. 235. 

(66) In looking to the New Testament for directions respecting 
the organization and rules of the Church in her 

trial state, what must we keep constantly in mind? P. 235, par. 1. 

(67) What Scriptural illustration (1 Cor. 12) beautifully 
illustrates this entire subject? P. 236, par. 1. 

(68) What conclusion do we draw from this illustration 

as to the necessity for stringent rules in the Lord's organization 
of the Church? P. 236, par. 2. 

JUNE 25 

(69) Who is the Superintendent of affairs in the Church? 
P. 237, par. 1,2. 

(70) Should those who fill the more responsible positions 

in the Body be able to produce evidence of their Divine appointment? 
P. 237, par. 3. 

(71) Do we find the same variety of members in the 
Church now as were necessary in the early Church? P. 238, 
par. 1, first part. 

(72) When and how did the "gifts" of the Spirit cease? 
P. 238, par. 1, last part. 



(73) What did the Apostle mean when he said, "Covet 
earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellent 
way"? (1 Cor. 12:31). P. 238, par. 2. 

(74) Where do we find another Scriptural lesson concerning 
the oneness of the Church as one Body of many 

members, and the object of special service on the part of some 
members? P. 239, par. 1. 



page 130 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 129 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII MAY 1 No. 9 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Good Tidings Abroad (No. 2) 131 

Spiritual Growth 134 

Keeping the Body Under 136 



"I Keep My Body Under and Bring It 

Into Subjection" 136 

The Apostle Had No Thought of His 

Coming Short 136 

"A Man is Tempted When He is Led 

Away of His Own Desires 137 

A God Ready to Pardon 138 

Christendom's Idolatrous Debauch 138 

Hezekiah's Great Reform 139 

Those Who Will Do the Lord's Will 

in the Next Age Shall Not Die 139 

The World's Hatred 141 

"Good Tidings" in India 142 

Annual Request for Visits of the Traveling 

Brethren 143 

The Western Convention Tour 143 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



LYNCHBURG, VA., MAY 14 

Morning Rally at 10:30. Discourse for the interested at 
11; Lecture for the Public at 3 p.m. All services to be in 
the Auditorium, Main St., between 1 1th and 12th Sts. 

BALTIMORE, MD., MAY 21 

Morning Rally at 10:30. Discourse for the interested at 
11 in Lehman's Hall, 856 North Howard St. Afternoon 
service for the Public at 3 in the Lyric Theatre, Mount Royal 
and Maryland Aves. 

BOSTON, MASS., MAY 28, 29, 30 

Sunday, May 28, Morning Rally at 10 o'clock in Steinert 
Hall, 162 Boylston St. Public Lecture at 3 p.m., and evening 
service at 7:30, both in Boston Theatre, 539 Washington St. 
Monday sessions 9:30 a.m., 2:30 and 7:30 p.m. in Ford Hall, 
15 Ashburton Place. Brother Russell will be present on 
28th and 29th. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 in the 
Brooklyn Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m. 
in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. 
Felix St. Evening service in Brooklyn Tabernacle, 7 p.m. 

Those desiring water baptism or to present their children 
in consecration should notify in advance. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for June follow: (1) 151; (2) 273; 
(3) 165; (4) 41; (5) 260; (6) Vow; (7) 145; (8) 12; 
(9) 47; (10) 4; (11) 307; (12) 114; (13) 313; (14) 
182; (15) 93; (16) 97; (17) 119; (18) 293; (19) 7; 
(20) 60; (21) 27; (22) 291; (23) 49; (24) 279; (25) 
333; (26) 1; (27) 19; (28) 222; (29) 29; (30) 9. 



R4806 :page 131 

THE GOOD TIDINGS ABROAD 

No. 2. 

FROM BERLIN we journeyed northward to 

Copenhagen. Brother Luttichau and a 

deputation of Bible Students met us at the 

station. Soon we were in the Society's 

Danish headquarters, and in a little while 

were addressing an assembly of earnest 

people of God, whose beaming faces indicated 

that they understood and appreciated 

our message. Our morning address 

was to the interested. Amongst other 

things we endeavored to make clear the subject of the 

Covenants. The Abrahamic Covenant is the comprehensive 

one, which guaranteed a seed through Isaac and 

Rebecca, and that a blessing would come as a result to 

all mankind— and also an antitypical Seed which would 

have the first place in the blessing of the world, the two 

Seeds being referred to in the promise, "Thy Seed shall 

be as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the seashore." 

This Covenant guarantees the blessing of the 

world, and it guarantees that that blessing shall come 

through the natural seed of Abraham. At the same 

time it guarantees the spiritual Seed— The Christ (Messiah), 

Head and Body, fully qualified and empowered to 

give the needed blessing through the earthly seed. 

We pointed out that Christ and the Church constitute 
the spiritual Seed— "If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's 
Seed, and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 
We pointed out that this spiritual Seed is not 
developed under the Law Covenant, because it was not 
made with us, but with the natural seed— with Israel, 
Moses being its mediator. We pointed out that the New 
Covenant is not the one under which we are developed, 
because it also is to be made with natural Israel, and is 
to be merely an enlargement of the Mosaic Law Covenant. 
We cited in proof of this that the New Covenant 
is to be made with Israel as per the Divine promise. (Jer. 31:31.) 
We pointed out that that New Covenant will 
bring blessings of Restitution to Israel (and to all mankind 
through Israel), taking away the stony heart of 
selfishness and sin and restoring a heart of flesh, of tenderness, 
sympathy, righteousness and Divine likeness, as 
was Adam's when he was created in the image and likeness 
of God. 

We exhorted the dear friends to faithfulness to their 
covenant of sacrifice. We pointed out the privilege of 
service now granted to the Church, and urged the laying 
aside of every earthly weight and hindrance and pressing 
toward the Mark for the Prize of our High, Heavenly 



Calling. 

The afternoon service was for the public; the topic 
was "The Judgment of the Great White Throne." We 
were surprised at so large an audience for an afternoon 
service on a week day. Approximately eight hundred 
crowded the hall, some of them standing during the 
entire service— over two hours. Here Brother Luttichau 
served us as interpreter, as Brother Koetitz had done in 
Germany. We had most excellent attention. It was a 
pleasure to watch the earnest countenances and to note 
how the Truth seemed to be absorbed with eagerness. 
Our Copenhagen visit was certainly much enjoyed. Some 
of the friends accompanied us to the station as we proceeded 
to Stockholm. The Danish friends more than 
ever impressed us with their warmth of heart and loving 
devotion to the Truth. 

ONE DAY AT STOCKHOLM 

Our night journey brought us in the morning to 
Stockholm. Brother Lundborg, the Society's representative 
in Sweden, boarded the train before we reached 
Stockholm. As we passed through the station we were 
greeted most cordially by about a hundred of the dear 
Swedish friends, with whom we shook hands. Unable 
to speak their language, or they to speak ours, except 
through the interpreter, we nevertheless exchanged very 
cordial greetings, and the expression of the eye told us, 
as truly as could the mouth, that the "fellowship of kindred 
minds, is like to that above." 

Here our address to the friends was along the same 
lines as at Copenhagen. We emphasized the fact that 
the Church (The Christ) comes into relationship with 
God's Plan, not under the Law Covenant of Moses, 
which still continues with the Jewish people, nor under 
Israel's New Law Covenant, which has not yet supplanted 
the Old Law Covenant, and whose Mediator will 
be the greater Prophet, Priest and King, the spiritual 
Messiah, Head and Body. We pointed out that this Gospel 
Age is for the special purpose of developing the 
great Mediator— the great Messiah through whom the 
New Covenant of Restitution will be inaugurated with 
fleshly Israel for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. We emphasized the fact that all those who 
suffer with Christ are to reign with him, and only those 
who now become dead with him to earthly hopes and 
interests will live with him as members of the Bride on 
the spirit plane of glory. We exhorted the dear friends 

R4806 : page 132 

to an earnest appreciation of this wonderful privilege, 
this special salvation granted to the Church in advance 
of the earthly salvation which God has promised to the 
world during the "Times of Restitution of all things, 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 



world began."— Acts 3:19-23. 

At the evening service the hall was jammed; about a 
thousand were present, and probably as many more 
were unable to gain admittance. We greatly regretted 
that a sufficiently large hall or auditorium could not be 
obtained on a week night except for a larger sum than 
the friends and the Society felt justified in spending. 
About a hundred stood in the aisles for two hours while 
an overflow meeting was held in another hall in the same 
building. To these we sent the promise that we would 
address them a few words later. Fulfilling our agreement, 
we addressed the second audience of about three 
hundred for over half an hour, after 10 p.m. Surely such 
deep interest and close attention indicates that earnest 
Christians amongst the Swedes are awakening to the 
fact that they have enjoyed only a part of the "good 
tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people." 

ONE DAY AT OREBRO 

We took an early morning train for Orebro and 
arrived in the Society's Swedish headquarters at about 
11 o'clock. The afternoon meeting was held in a little 
hall generally used by the friends on Sundays. This 
time it was taxed to its capacity, many standing during 
the service or exchanging seats with each other. Here 
we addressed the friends along the same lines, believing 
that a clear understanding of the Covenants signifies a 
clear understanding of the Divine Plan, and the very 
best preparation for a life of consecration in harmony 
with that Plan. 

We emphasized the fact that The Christ is the Vine— 
that Jesus is the Root, and his faithful members branches 
in him. We reminded the friends that at the present 
time our membership in the Vine is tentative; that only 
those who bring forth the fruitage of the Vine will be 
allowed to remain in it. We quoted the Master's words, 
Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, my Father, 
the Husbandman, taketh away, and every branch which 
beareth fruit, he pruneth, that it may bring forth more 
fruit. Thus the trials and difficulties of the narrow way 
of self-sacrifice are seen to be the methods by which 
the Heavenly Father fits and prepares his holy ones, his 
consecrated Church, for the completion of the divine 
nature in the First Resurrection. Thus he fits and prepares 
them as members of the great Prophet, Priest, 
King, Mediator for the glorious work to which he has 
called them in the Anointed One. From this standpoint 
alone can the trials and difficulties and sacrifices and 
the drinking of the Lord's cup of suffering be appreciated. 
As he was, so are we in this world. 

Here, as at other places, our discourse to the interested 
was followed by a question meeting. The questions 
indicated a very intelligent grasp of the Divine 
Plan and the interested faces showed that even the 
deepest features of consecration were appreciated, and 



that nearly all of those present were fully submitted to 
the Lord and anxious to know and to do his will— even 
unto death. 

The public meeting was held in a large hall, which 
was crowded to the very limit. Notwithstanding the 
fact that a minister of the city had made an attack upon 
us through the public press, slandering us, and saying 
various evil things against us falsely, because of our 
faithfulness to the cause of Christ, and probably because 
of envy, hundreds of people were unable to gain 
admittance, and many in attendance stood for the entire 
two hours, and more, of our discourse. We have the 
satisfaction of believing that many of those who were 
present understood and appreciated our message respecting 
the Two Salvations, one for the Church, on the 
heavenly plane, and another yet to come for the world, 
on the earthly plane, by a Judgment and Restitution. 

We pointed out the judgment or trial of the Church 
and the things necessary for her testing and proving 
as to her worthiness of the divine nature in association 
with her Redeemer. We also pointed out the very 
different judgment of the world under the Messianic 
Kingdom, when all mankind will be separated as a shepherd 
divideth his sheep from the goats, as described in 
Matthew 25:32. We pointed out that the sheep at the 
end of the Millennial Age will get the earthly Kingdom, 
Paradise restored, and that the goats will go into destruction 

R4807 : page 132 

in the Second Death, symbolized by fire, and that this 
will be everlasting punishment, from which they will 
not be recovered by any redemption or resurrection. We 
feel sure that a good impression was left at Orebro, and 
that some will make still further investigations. In all 
cases these meetings are to be followed by other meetings, 
in which other features of Present Truth will be 
set before those who have an ear to hear and an appetite 
for spiritual things. 

ONE DAY AT CHRISTIANIA 

Another night's ride brought us to Christiania, the 
capital of Norway, where the Society is represented by 
Brother Lindkvist. This dear Brother, who served as 
our interpreter in Norwegian, came to Stockholm to 
meet us, as did also two brethren from Finland, who 
accompanied us. Their activities in the service of the 
Truth were mentioned in THE WATCH TOWER not long 
since. The Christiania class of Bible Students, although 
small, seems very earnest. With them were representatives 
from various parts of Norway, some having come 
as many as six hundred miles. 

Our meeting with the interested ones was a privilege 
and a pleasure. With them also we discussed God's 
Covenants. We laid special emphasis upon the fact that 



God's call is not to the different churches of Christendom, 
but to the one Church of Christ. We quoted the text, 
"Gather my saints together unto me [saith the Lord]; 
those who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." 
We called special attention to the fact that the covenant 
of Christ is a covenant of sacrifice. We saw that Jesus, 
the great Captain and Forerunner of our salvation, entered 
into such a covenant with the Father— that he 
sacrificed his earthly life, all earthly hopes and interests, 
that he might become the great Prophet, Priest, King, 
Mediator, between God and man, and that as a reward 
he was highly exalted to the divine nature, necessary 
for him before he could accomplish the great work of 
blessing the world, as the spiritual Seed of Abraham. 

We called special attention also to the fact that the 
Church's covenant, like that of her Lord, is a covenant 
of sacrifice. We are to walk in the Redeemer's footsteps. 
We are to take up the cross and follow him. We 
are to suffer with him if we would reign with him. We 
are to join with him in his covenant of sacrifice. This 
is the Apostle's exhortation, "I beseech you, brethren, by 
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies living 
sacrifices, holy, acceptable unto God and your reasonable 
service."— Rom. 12:1. 

We pointed out that thus Isaac died "in a figure"; we 
read the Apostle's words, "Ye, brethren, as Isaac was, 

R4807 : page 133 

are the children of promise," "heirs of the promise"— 
"in thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
We sought to specially impress the great truth that only 
those who thus suffer with Christ, sacrificing earthly interests, 
will gain the great prize of the high calling. The 
dear friends gave closest attention, our little meeting 
room being crowded to the doors and beyond, with the 
aisles full and some sitting upon the platform at our feet. 
We were assured of the earnest desire of many to gain 
the great spiritual prize— obtainable through the First 
Resurrection— to be kings and priests unto God and unto 
Christ and reign with him a thousand years.— Rev. 20:4. 

The leading Christiania newspaper, on the afternoon 
of our coming, contained a vile attack, surely instigated 
by the Adversary, but coming, alas! from the pen of one 
whom, we understand, had made profession of being a 
minister of Christ. Slander and false words have been 
the weapons of the enemies of the Truth from the beginning, 
and the Master has warned us that such experiences 
were his and must be ours if faithful. We remember, 
alas, that the Master and the Apostles were persecuted by 
the professed ministers of God— so were all the reformers. 
And do we not read, Whosoever will live 
godly in this present time shall suffer persecution, and 
again, "So persecuted they the prophets (teachers) which 
were before you." We were not, therefore, surprised, 
nor did we feel angry. Rather we felt sorry for those 



so captivated by error and used by the Adversary. 

But if Satan's motive was to hinder the people from 
coming to hear the Good Tidings he again failed. The 
house was crowded, about a thousand being present, 
about two hundred of them standing while hundreds were 
turned away. Our topic was, "The sinner a hundred years 
old, cut off, and yet but a child." We pointed out the 
difference between the salvation of the Church and that 
of the world. We read what the Scriptures say respecting 
Messiah's glorious Kingdom and the blessed opportunities 
it will afford to all mankind, to be lifted from sin 
and death conditions and be brought to a knowledge of 
the Truth and to a full, fair opportunity for deciding 
either for righteousness and eternal life, its reward, 
or for unrighteousness and eternal death, its punishment, 
and that this blessed opportunity of rescue from the death 
penalty, the result of Adam's sin, has been secured for 
every member of Adam's race through our Redeemer's 
merit, through him who loved us and bought us with his 
precious blood. 

The next morning we bade farewell to the friends of 
Christiania and vicinity as they sang to us on the station 
platform— "God be with you till we meet again." This 
was indeed a feature in connection with many of the 
partings. 

GOTHENBURG-HALMSTAD-HELSINGBORG-HAMBURG 

Our London appointment for Sunday, April 2d, required 
that we make the closest possible connections on 
the return journey. We traveled via the West Shore 
Line from Christiania to Copenhagen. The friends en 
route had been notified in advance of the train we took 
and the places it would make stops, so they were on the 
lookout for us. At one station a party of nine met us 
and journeyed with us for about an hour. We had 
pleasure in breaking to them the bread of life, and in 
reading their joy of heart in their shining faces. 

Brother Lundborg accompanied us and served as 
interpreter. He advised that they had not much of this 
world's goods, else they would have attended one of the 
conventions which we addressed, and which continued 
after our departure. We had a happy time together in 
considering the gracious things of our Heavenly Father's 
Plan. At the next station we were met by still others 
who had come a distance. One of the dear friends, 
through the interpreter, said, "I wonder if I will ever 
have another day as happy as this." Truly there is a 
power of the Gospel of the Love of God that is unknown 
to those who are exercised solely by the fear of eternal 
torment. With the true Gospel comes the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding, the joy of the Lord, 
which the world can neither give nor take away. 

"BE THOU FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH AND I WILL GIVE 
THEE A CROWN OF LIFE" 



At Halmstad we found about twenty of the friends 
waiting for us on the platform. Our stay was short, but 
in those five minutes we congratulated the dear friends 
upon the blessing of the Truth which had reached their 
ears and hearts, and extended assurances of our Christian 
love for them and for all the dear household of 
faith. We gave to these, as to others, our parting message, 
the Master's words, "Be thou faithful unto death, 
and I will give thee a crown of life." From these dear 
friends also we received the assurance of their joy in 
the Lord and their appreciation of the Truth, of their 
desire to be amongst the overcomers who will inherit the 
Kingdom, according to the Master's promises. 

Helsingborg was reached about 9 p.m. Shifting of 
the cars there permitted an exchange of Christian greetings, 
and a little address of about fifteen minutes, in 
which we endeavored to impress some of the prominent 
features of the Divine Plan, and especially the privilege 
of the Church in connection with the covenant of sacrifice 
made by our Head, thus opening the way, upon the same 
terms of sacrifice, for his faithful followers. 

About 10:30 we reached Copenhagen, where about 
twenty of the class met and greeted us at the station and 
accompanied us to the south-bound station. As we had 
already addressed these dear friends in connection with 
the Copenhagen meeting we entered into no doctrinal 
particulars. We exchanged with them Christian love 
and good wishes for the remainder of the journey of 
life and for a share in the Kingdom. 

The night ride of 1 1 hours brought us to Hamburg, 
Germany. Here about twenty-five met us in the station 
with heartiest greetings. They had provided a dinner in 
honor of our coming. We partook of it with great 
pleasure, fellowshiping with the entire company through 
Brother Koetitz as interpreter, and also through others 
who spoke English. After dinner we repaired to the 
usual meeting room of the class, where we received a 
more formal expression of welcome, following with an 
address of about an hour, which specially referred to 
the Covenants. We tried to make as clear as possible 
the distinction between the Old Law Covenant, established 
by Moses, the Mediator, by means of the sacrifice 
of bulls and goats, and its antitype, the New Law Covenant, 
to be established upon better sacrifices and by the 

R4808 : page 133 

better Mediator, the antitypical Moses— Christ and the 
Church, his Body.-Heb. 9:23. 

We were pleased that the train connections gave us 
in all nearly three hours of fellowship with the friends 
at Hamburg. They gave evidence of earnestness, zeal, 
and informed us that their numbers had doubled within 
the past year. We specially rejoiced that their love and 
zeal had also kept pace. 



We are writing this on the train speeding toward London, 
which, God willing, we will reach tomorrow morning, 
April 2d, in season for meeting with the London 
friends, and for the public service at Albert Hall at 
night. 



R4808 : page 134 

SPIRITUAL GROWTH 

"If ye do these things, ye shall never fall."— 2 Peter 1:10. 

THERE is a philosophy in the growth and development 

of Christian character, just as 

truly as in the growth and development of 

vegetation; and the more thoroughly we 

acquaint ourselves with the natural processes 

and conditions of development and 

growth in either case, the better we shall 

understand how to cultivate and to secure 

the desirable end— maturity and luxuriant 

fruitfulness. The farmer who puts into 

practice only what he has learned by accident, in a haphazard 

way, and who is goaded to effort only by sheer 

necessity, must not expect the fruitful fields, the abundant 

harvests and the well-earned approbation of the enterprising, 

thrifty farmer who has made a study of the business 

and has brought knowledge, carefully gleaned, together 

with enterprise and energy, to his assistance in 

the work. 

Take, for example, a fruit tree. If one, knowing 
nothing about the necessity for cultivation, simply plants 
the tree and lets it alone, its strength, instead of producing 
fruit, will generally go toward making wood and 
leaves; worms and decay may attack its roots, insects 
may sting and blight its scanty fruitage; and if it continues 
to stand, it will be only a useless, fruitless cumberer 
of the ground, an advertisement of the farmer's negligence 
and worthy only of having the axe laid to its 
root. Had it been pruned and trimmed and kept free 
from insects, etc., under the blessing of God's air and 
rain and sunshine, it would have been a fruitful, creditable 
tree; for the laws of nature are true and faithful 
in all their operations. 

And none the less rigid are the operations of moral 
law in the growth and development of moral character. 
Under proper conditions and with proper, diligent cultivation, 
the character will grow and develop according to 
fixed laws, and will become beautiful and fruitful in 
blessings to self and others; or, lacking the necessary 
cultivation, even under favorable natural conditions, it 
will be deformed, worthless and fruitless. 

When we presented our bodies as living sacrifices to 
God, holy and acceptable through the merit of our Redeemer, 



we there received the spirit of adoption to the 

spirit plane, as spiritual sons of God; and from that time 

the faculties and dispositions of our mortal bodies were 

reckoned as our new being, now under the direction and 

control of the Spirit of God. The faithfulness with 

which we cultivate this reckoned new nature, by persistently 

weeding out old habits of thought and action, 

supplanting them with new virtues, and training them 

to activity in the Divine service, is to prove our worthiness 

or unworthiness of the actual new nature to be received 

at the resurrection, to which perfect spirit condition 

our present reckoned condition stands related as 

embryotic; for the character and disposition of the embryo 

New Creature will be the disposition of the perfected 

New Creature, when born in the resurrection. 

The Apostle affirms (Rom. 8:11) that if we really 
have the Spirit of God in us— unless we quench it or put 
it away from us— it will quicken our mortal bodies, make 
them alive toward God, active in growing into his likeness 
and fruitful in Christian graces and activities. Again 
he adds, "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is 
none of his," and "As many as are led by the Spirit of 
God, they are the sons of God."— Rom. 8:9,14. 

It is our business, therefore, to grow; to cultivate in 
ourselves those dispositions which are worthy of us as 
spiritual sons of God, called to be "heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ." 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER IS A 
GRADUAL, DAILY LIFE-WORK 

The Apostle Peter tells us how to proceed in the matter 
of cultivating Christian character, intimating that we 
cannot do it all in a day, nor in a few days, but that it 
must be a gradual, daily life-work, a process of addition 
—adding virtue to virtue and grace to grace, day by 
day and hour by hour. He says, "Giving all diligence, 
add to your faith virtue [fortitude]; and to virtue, knowledge; 
and to knowledge, temperance [self-control]; and 
to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and 
to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, 
charity [love]." Then he adds, "If ye do these 
things ye shall never fall."— 2 Pet. 1:5-7,10. 

This is a very strong assurance— that if we do these 
things we are sure to stand approved of God. We do 
well, therefore, to consider them with special care. Here 
are eight elements which must go toward making up the 
Christian character, the one to be added to the other and 
assimilated by the spiritual germ of the new nature, until 
the embryo New Creature is formed; and then it must 
continue to grow and develop. Look at them again. 
They are: 

1. Faith. 5. Patience. 

2. Virtue [fortitude]. 6. Godliness. 

3. Knowledge. 7. Brotherly kindness. 

4. Temperance [self-control]. 8. Charity [love]. 



"A THUS, SAITH THE LORD," SHOULD BE THE END OF 
ALL CONTROVERSY 

Now for a little self-examination. Let each ask himself: 
(1) Have I the faith to which the Apostle here refers; 
not faith in every thing or every person, but faith 
in God— in his Plan of redemption through the vicarious, 
or substitutionary sacrifice of Christ, and in all his rich 
promises built upon that sure foundation? Do I trust 
him implicitly? Is a "Thus saith the Lord" the end of 
all controversy, the solution of all doubts and the restful 
assurance in every perplexity? 

(2) Am I endeavoring to lead a virtuous life? This, 
to the child of God, consecrated to be a living sacrifice, 
implies much more than merely abstaining from evil. It 
implies living truthfully, that is, true to his covenant, 
which to wilfully violate would be equivalent to swearing 
falsely. It is fortitude, strength of character in 
righteousness. It implies the cultivation of the strictest 
integrity in our dealings, both with God and with our 
fellowmen, scrupulous honesty, justice and truth being 
the only standards. 

The Psalmist clearly defines it thus, saying, "He that 
walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh 
the truth in his heart. He that backbiteth not with 
his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbor; in whose eyes 
a vile person is condemned; but he honoreth them that 
fear the Lord. He that sweareth to his own hurt and 
changeth not [who will not violate a contract found to 
be unfavorable to himself]. He that putteth not out his 
money to usury [taking unjust advantage of the necessities 
of others], nor taketh reward against the innocent. 
He that doeth these things shall never be moved." 
(Psa. 15:2-5.) Such a one is a virtuous man, a man of 
fortified or strong character. How we need to invoke 
Divine assistance here! and how critically to judge 
ourselves! 

(3) Am I endeavoring day by day to gain a more 
thorough and complete knowledge of God, of the Plan 
revealed in his Word, and of the special features now in 
operation, that I may co-operate with him in its execution; 
and of his will concerning me in the particular relationships 

R4808 : page 135 

and conditions in which I now stand— irrespective 

of my own will and disposition in any matter? 

Am I striving to gain this knowledge of God and of his 

righteous will concerning us, as revealed through his 

Word, by the holy Spirit? Neglect of this Divinely appointed 

means of knowledge is equivalent to setting up 

our own imperfect standard of righteousness and ignoring 

the Divine standard. It is, therefore, important 

that we give all diligence to the study of the Divine 

Oracle, that we may be fortified in faith and works 



accordingly. 

(4) Am I temperate, moderate, exercising self-control 

in all things— in eating, in drinking, in home arrangements, 
in conduct, in thoughts, in words, in deeds? Do 
I realize that self-control is one of the most important 
elements of good character? "He that ruleth his spirit 
is better than he that taketh a city," is the counsel of 
the Wise Man; and many a victorious general has yet to 
learn to conquer and control himself. Self-control has 

R4809 : page 135 

to do with all our sentiments, thoughts, tastes, appetites, 
labors, pleasures, sorrows and hopes. Its cultivation, 
therefore, means a high order of character-development. 
Self-control, accompanied by faith, fortitude, knowledge 
from on High, implies increased zeal and activity 
in Divine things, and increased moderation in earthly 
things. In judgment, in conduct, in the regulation of 
temporal affairs, etc., "Let your moderation [temperance, 
self-control] be known unto all men." (Phil. 4:5.) 
Let them see by our thoughtful (not rash and hasty), 
careful and considerate demeanor, in every affair of life, 
that we honor our profession. 

(5) Am I patient under trial and discipline, keeping 

my feelings always under the control of enlightened reason, 
letting patience have its perfect work in cultivating 
the character, however severely the plow and the 
harrow may break up the sub-soil of the heart, meekly 
submitting to the discipline in every case? and am I 
submitting cheerfully under the mighty hand of God, 
in his work of preparing me for a place in his 
Kingdom soon to be established? The Greek word from 
which patience is here translated means cheerful 
endurance. 

(6) Am I carefully observing and endeavoring to 
pattern my character and course of action after the Divine 
model? If a parent, or in any position of authority, 

am I using that authority as God uses his— not for selfish 
purposes, to make a boast of it, or in any way to oppress 
or trample upon the God-given individual rights of those 
under such authority, but for the blessing and advantage 
of those under it, even to the extent of self-denial, 
with patience, dignity and grace, and not with boastful 
imperiousness, which is the attitude of tyrants? 

If a son, or one under authority to any extent, do I 
consider the example of loving obedience furnished us 
in the example of our dear Lord? His delight was 
to do the Father's will at any cost to himself. As 
a man, under the kingdoms, authorities, of this world, 
and as a youth, under the authority of earthly parents, 
he was loyal and faithful (Matt. 22:21; Luke 2:51); yet 
all of this earthly authority was exercised by his personal 
inferiors, even though they were his legal superiors. 
How beautifully we shall be able to grace and fill whatever 
station we occupy in life, if we carefully study and 



copy godliness (God-likeness), whether we be princes 
or peasants, masters or servants! 

(7) Does brotherly-kindness characterize all my actions? 
Does it cause me to make due allowance for 

the inherited weaknesses and circumstantial misfortunes 
of others? Does brotherly-kindness deal patiently and 
helpfully so far as wisdom, with a view to the correction 
of those faults, may dictate; and even at the expense 
of self-interest, if necessary and prudent? 

If, as I look myself squarely in the face, I recognize 
deformity of character, do I thankfully accept a brother's 
proffered aid and meekly bear reproof, determining that 
by the grace of God I will overcome such dispositions, 
and prove myself a help rather than a hindrance to 
others, if it should even cost my life to do it; and that 
I will no longer foster my old dispositions, but will 
plunge into activity in the service of God with those 
who should have my co-operation in service, instead of 
being a burden to them? 

(8) Have I charity (love unfeigned) for the unrighteous 
and unlovely, as well as for the good and 
beautiful— a love which is ever ready to manifest itself 
in wise and helpful activity for saint and sinner; a love 
which pities, helps, comforts, cheers and blesses all within 
its reach; which longs for the grand opportunities and 

power and glory of the incoming Age, chiefly for its privileges 

of scattering universal blessing; and which, in harmony 

with that sentiment, utilizes every present opportunity 

wisely and in harmony with the Divine Plan for the accomplishment 

of the same end— thus manifesting and 

cultivating the disposition which must be found in every 

member of that glorious company which will constitute 

the King's Cabinet in the incoming Age? If this disposition 

is not begun, cultivated and developed here, we 

shall not be considered worthy of that office there. 

Just as in a well-kept orchard pruning, trimming and 
cultivation are necessary to accomplish the desired end 
of fruitfulness, so must we be watchful and take necessary 
precautions to prevent blight and decay of character, 
and to guard against the intrusion of evil powers 
and influences calculated to sap the life of the New 
Creature. By resisting the Devil he will flee from us; 
and by patient continuance in well-doing an increasing 
measure of development will result. "If these things be 
in you and abound," says the Apostle Peter (that is, if 
you have them in some measure and keep on cultivating 
them, so that they abound more and more and rule in 
you), "they make you that ye shall be neither barren 
[idle] nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ." The Truth is for such: "Light is sown for 
the righteous," and they are sure to get it. They 
shall not walk in darkness. If any man will do the will 
of God, he shall know of the doctrine. (John 7:17.) 
"But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot 
see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from 
his old sins." 



LET US GIVE ALL DILIGENCE IN THESE MATTERS 

"Wherefore, brethren, give diligence to make your calling 
and election sure; for if ye do these things [if you 
diligently cultivate this disposition] ye shall never fall." 
Being justified fully, by faith in the sacrifice of Christ 
for your redemption and sanctification (setting apart 
from the world and devotion to the service of God) by 
the Truth, your final selection to that position of glory, 
honor and immortality, to which you are called, shall be 
sure. For "so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ." 

"Wherefore," again says our beloved Brother Peter, 
"I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance 
of these things. Yea, I think it meet so long as 
I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in 
remembrance. ...Moreover, I will endeavor that you 
may be able after my decease to have these things always 

R4809 : page 136 

in remembrance." This Peter did; and the Church 
to this day may profit by his brotherly counsel. 

While the Apostle Peter, addressing the consecrated, 
thus clearly and explicitly points out the way in which 
we may make our calling and election sure to the chief 
favor of God, the Apostle Paul, addressing the same 
class, shows that wilful and continual neglect to develop 
and cultivate the Christian character, involves the loss, 
not only of the chief favor of the High Calling, but, 
eventually, of all favor. He wrote, "If ye [ye who have 
solemnly covenanted to sacrifice your very life in the 
service of God, for the eradication of evil] live after the 
flesh [with selfish effort, merely to gratify self] ye shall 
die." (Rom. 8:13.) God has no use or place for wilful 
covenant-breakers and covenant-despisers, after they have 
been brought to a knowledge of the Truth and of his 
will, and have covenanted to do it faithfully. 

With all our striving and watchfulness, however, we 
shall not be able, in our present condition, to reach our 
ideal. Perfection is something which can only be approximated 
in the present life. But the measure of our effort to 
attain it will prove the measure of our faithfulness and 
earnest desire to do so. And that effort will not be unfruitful. 
If no fruit appears, we may be sure that little or 
no effort is made at cultivation, pruning, etc. The fruit 
will appear, not only in the development of the Christian 
graces of character, but also in increasing activities. 
We must not wait for our immortal bodies, promised us 
in our resurrection, before our activity in God's service 
begins. If we possess the spirit [the will, the disposition] 
of that new nature, our mortal bodies will be active in 
the service of God's Truth now. Our feet will be swift 
to run his errands, our hands prompt to do his bidding, our 



tongues ready to bear testimony to the Truth, our minds 
active in devising ways and means to do so more and 
more abundantly and effectively. Thus we shall be living 
epistles, known and read of all about us— an honor to 
him who called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 



R4809 : page 136 

KEEPING THE BODY UNDER 

"I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight 
I, not as one that beateth the air."— I Cor. 9:26. 

THE Apostle Paul had definite knowledge as 

to what constitutes the prize. He was not 

uncertain about it; it was not a question 

with him as to its being one thing or another. 

St. Paul knew that the "high calling 

in Christ Jesus" is that we may be 

heirs with him, if we suffer with him— that 

we shall be with him in glory. Neither 

was the Apostle uncertain as to the terms 

and conditions of the race. He knew that 

they were even unto death; and that if he should seek 

to save his life he would lose it. Neither was he uncertain 

as to his own determination. He knew positively 

that he had entered the course. He was not of those 

who merely say, "I hope to do so some time." He had 

made with the Lord his covenant of sacrifice unto death. 

Nor was the Apostle uncertain as to his opportunity 
to gain the prize. He knew that it remained with him 
to will and to do in harmony with God's good pleasure. 
He knew that nothing impossible was required of him in 
this race; that the terms and conditions of the race include 
"grace to help in every time of need"; and that 

R4810 :page 136 

this grace and help would come from the Lord. Hence, 

the Apostle's expression that, for the runners in this race-course, 

there was no uncertainty, from first to last. 

Thus it may be with all under the guiding eye of the 
Great Redeemer. We may each make our calling and 
election sure: "If ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 
for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ."-2 Pet. 1:10,11. 

"I KEEP MY BODY UNDER AND BRING IT INTO 
SUBJECTION" 

The Apostle tells us that he kept his body under, lest, 
having preached the good tidings to others, he himself, 
should be a castaway. "I keep my body under, and bring 



it into subjection, ...lest I myself should be a castaway," 
he declares. (I Cor. 9:27.) One translation has this, "I 
brow-beat my body"; that is to say, I use coercive measures 
upon my body. 

The body originally belonged to the natural man, the 
natural will. When the old will gave place to the new 
will, the latter became the owner of the body. The new 
will cannot properly be served by the old body, because 
the new mind is perfect and the body imperfect. When 
the new mind, the mind of God, the mind of Christ, therefore, 
takes into possession the mortal body, it has more 
or less difficulty. The mind is not suited to the body, 
nor the body to the mind. It is the work, therefore, of 
the new will to show its obedience to the Lord, its full 
loyalty to the Divine will, even though the body should 
be, in some respects, treated shamefully, its claim, its 
supposed necessities, etc., being ignored. 

Not only are we all thus to mortify and brow-beat 
the body, but, additionally, we are to bring it into subjection. 
We are to make it serve the New Creature. The 
Apostle says, "But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus 
from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ shall 
also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit." (Rom. 8:11.) 
The holy Spirit, which comes to us more and 
more as we feed upon the Lord, assists us to conform our 
lives to his will, and also quickens or makes alive our 
mortal bodies to the service of the Truth. 

There are not two creatures, but one; we cannot be 
two creatures at once. It is not until the old creature 
submits and we are transformed, so far as the will is concerned, 
that we become New Creatures, so that, henceforth, 
we really are New Creatures. But the New Creature 
has not its new body as yet. In our text the Apostle 
evidently refers to the New Creature, the New Man. 
There is an outward man, which the world may think is 
the individual, but in proportion as the outward man is 
brought into subjection and service, the New Creature is 
growing stronger, until eventually, with the death of the 
human body, God will give the New Creature a new body, 
in the resurrection. Then the new Creature will be satisfied, 
when it shall be found in his likeness. 

There is a tendency for the body, the flesh, to arise 
from its condition of reckoned deadness. Hence the 
New Creature needs to be continually on guard in the 
good fight of faith. These battlings of the new mind 
against the flesh are a "good fight," in the sense that they 
are fightings against sins and weaknesses that belong to 
the fallen nature. The entire course of the New Creature 
is the course of faith. It would be impossible for one to 
keep up this battle against the flesh and its propensities 
and desires, unless he exercise faith in the promises and 
in the Lord as his Helper. 

THE APOSTLE HAD NO THOUGHT OF HIS COMING SHORT 

There is another passage in which St. Paul says that 



we should "fear lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of 

R4810 :page 137 

it." (Heb. 4:1.) He had no thought of coming short of 
it himself, but he urged those to whom he was writing 
to make their "calling and election sure." 

It will be a great help to the overcoming of the weaknesses 
of the fallen nature to have rightly made a full consecration 
of the will, a full enlistment of every power and 
talent of mind and body to the service of the Lord. He 
who takes this proper view of his consecration to the 
Lord and of his enlistment in the Lord's army, realizes 
that he has nothing more to give to the Lord. Hence, 
whatever struggle of the will he may have had, is all 
ended when he has finally decided to give himself to the 
Lord. How important it is, therefore, to realize that the 
service is until death, and that there is no room even to 
consider any suggestion to withdraw and cease to fight 
the good fight of faith! 

We are to remember that it is not the flesh, the old 
creature, which has entered the School of Christ, and is 
under instruction and preparation for the Kingdom, for 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 
(I Cor. 15:50.) Our acceptance of the Divine call to the 
spirit nature means, not only the renunciation of the 
earthly nature in every sense of the word, but also our 
begetting as New Creatures, "sons of God." The New 
Creature, the new mind, the new will, is in the School 
of Christ, to be perfected, to be brought into full accord 
with the Divine will, to become a copy or likeness of 
the Lord. We shall never succeed in bringing our flesh 
into absolute harmony with the Divine Law, because of 
its imperfections, inherited and otherwise. Hence, the 
necessity that it be covered with the robe of Christ's 
righteousness. He who looks for perfection of his flesh, 
and who rests his faith therein, must of necessity have 
a poor hope of ever attaining to the likeness of Christ— 
of ever becoming one of the predestinated class— of becoming 
"the image of his Son."— Rom. 8:29. 

"WE DO THOSE THINGS WHICH WE OUGHT NOT AND 
LEAVE UNDONE WHAT WE OUGHT TO DO" 

In joining the Lord in faith and consecration we are 
proclaiming ourselves, not as graduates and heirs, but as 
students, disciples, who desire to be prepared to inherit 
"the things which God has prepared for them that love 
him." (I Cor. 2:9.) If this thought be kept in mind 
as the Divine teaching on the subject, it will tend to 
prevent our discouragement with ourselves when we find 
that, unavoidably, we do those things which we ought 
not to do, and leave undone those things which we ought 
to do; for in our flesh dwells no perfection.— 
Rom. 7:15,18,19,25. 



It is unnecessary for us to point out that the new 
mind, in proportion as it develops in likeness to the mind 
of Christ, will relax no efforts to keep the body under, 
with the motions of sin— to keep the will of the flesh 
dead. Surely no spirit-begotten son of God could allow 
sin to reign in his mortal body. Should sin to any degree 
control him, it will not be willingly, and hence could 
be but momentarily— until the new mind, the New Creature, 
seeing the uprising of the flesh, would conquer it, 
obtaining the promised grace and help in every time of 
need, from the heavenly storehouse of grace— Christ. 

This thought, rightly entertained, will help true disciples 
to appreciate their own position, and not to be utterly 
cast down if overtaken in a fault of the flesh, so 
long as they realize that their hearts are not in sympathy 
with the sin and unrighteousness, but, on the contrary, 
in full sympathy with the principles and instructions 
of our Teacher, and longing to be cleansed and acceptable 
in his sight. Moreover, this thought will also 
help all such to exercise fervency of love amongst themselves, 
toward the brethren who similarly are disciples, 
pupils in this School— New Creatures, not according to 
the flesh, but according to the spirit of their mind. If, 
therefore, each should see blemishes in the flesh of the 
brethren, disapproved and striven against, he should remember 
that the evil which he sees is his brother's enemy, 
and not the brother himself, the New Creature— if so be 
that he gives us the assurance that his heart, his will, is 
in harmony with the Lord and his law of Love; and that 
he is daily seeking to fight a successful warfare against 
the weaknesses of the flesh. 

"A MAN IS TEMPTED WHEN HE IS LED AWAY OF HIS OWN 
DESIRES" 

When studying this subject we must keep two facts 
in mind: (1), The Scriptures ascribe no sin to the New 
Creature, and (2), no perfection in righteousness to our 
fallen flesh. The New Creature (whose flesh is reckoned 
dead), which is represented by the new mind, and which 
is begotten of God, CANNOT SIN; for in its very essence, as 
the seed or germ implanted by the Truth— "the spirit of 
the Truth"— it is opposed to sin. This New Creature is so 
fully in accord with righteousness, so fully imbued with 
the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of holiness, that it delights 
in holiness and not in sin; and this must be the 
case so long as this begotten or Holy-Spirit-condition 
continues. "He that is begotten of God sinneth not 
[willingly— neither approves of sin nor takes pleasure 
in it]; because his seed remaineth in him" [the holy 
seed of the Truth, the spirit of Truth with which he was 
begotten]; "and that Wicked One toucheth him not."— 
I John 3:9; 5:18. 

We are not to suppose that every trial or difficulty 
which besets us is of the Devil; but rather to remember 
the Apostle's words, "A man is tempted when he is led 



away of his own desires and enticed." (James 1:13,14.) 
Such temptations, then, are of the flesh, and the result 
of our being members of the fallen race, whose weaknesses 
and imperfections have been aggravated and intensified 
for now six thousand years. So, then, we are to 
recognize as among our chief foes our own inherent 
weaknesses and predisposition to things selfish, depraved, 
sinful. 

The whole world, thus depraved and under the control 
of the spirit of selfishness, are largely, though unconsciously, 
the tools of Satan, "who worketh in the hearts 
of the children of disobedience." (Eph. 2:2.) To the 
children of God the world has become an enemy and a 

R4811 :page 137 

tempter by reason of the fact that we [the Church] have 
been "begotten again" to new hopes, new ambitions, new 
aspirations, new desires, which are along radically different 
lines from anything the world knows or has sympathy 
with. 

"THE FLESH DESIRES CONTRARY TO THE SPIRIT, AND 
THE SPIRIT CONTRARY TO THE FLESH" 

Our begetting is of the Holy Spirit, and its tendencies 
are heavenly and spiritual, in harmony with righteousness 
and love. Yet it is only our hearts that are thus 
changed— our flesh is much more in harmony with the 
world than with the new order of things established in 
our hearts and wills by grace and truth, through Christ. 
Consequently, when the world, through the words or 
writings or general spirit of any of its children, comes 
into contact with the Lord's people, immediately they— 
the Lord's people— find that, although their hearts are 
loyal to the Lord and loyal to all the gracious things 
which he has promised them, and to the spirit of righteousness, 
love and truth, yet nevertheless, their flesh 
has an affinity for and an attraction toward the world, 
its views, its arrangements, its pleasures, etc. 

R4811 :page 138 

For this reason the Christian is called upon to reckon 
himself dead, not only to sin, but to his own natural desires, 
appetites, inclinations, and also to the world, which 
is in harmony with sin and has perverted tastes and appetites. 
As the Apostle intimates, there is a constant battle 
between the New Creature, the new will, and the old 
creature, the fleshly and depraved disposition. He says, 
"The flesh desires contrary to the spirit, and the spirit 
contrary to the flesh." (Gal. 5:17.) And even though 
the advanced Christian has reached the place where he is 
enabled to reckon his flesh and will completely dead and 
buried, nevertheless, he has need continually to re-examine 
himself lest the flesh should become alive again. 



This was the Apostle's method. He says, "I keep my 
body under [dead, buried] and bring it into subjection 
[to the new mind]; lest having preached to others I myself 
should be a castaway." (I Cor. 9:27.) This keeping 
of the body under, this watching it lest it should become 
alive again, is a constant necessity to those who 
would be overcomers; for it is the victory of the new 
mind, the new will, over the old will, the will of the 
flesh, that constitutes us victors, by developing in us 
strong, holy character— character like unto that of our 
glorious Lord and Redeemer. 



R4811 :page 138 

A GOD READY TO PARDON 

-JUNE 4.-HOSEA 14.- 

"For thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious 
and merciful, slow to anger."— Neh. 9:17. 

TODAY'S study is an exhortation by the 

Prophet Hosea to Israel, at that time distinct 

from Judah; but it is applicable to 

our own nation as well as to every nation. 

Israel had become debauched through 

idolatry. Intermarriage with the royalty 

of heathen nations had introduced the 

idolatries of heathen religions and the sensualities 

which constituted their attractive 

features to the people. With the sensuality 

came a lack of moral sense— a general numbness of 

conscience respecting impurities. The record indicates 

that Hosea's own wife was an adulteress, a debauchee, 

who finally left her husband and her false offspring. 

Later the Prophet took her back under his own roof, but 

not as his wife. He was compassionate toward her and 

her offspring. 

No doubt the Prophet's own experiences had much to 
do with awakening him to a realization of the deplorable 
state of his own people. When the spirit of the Lord 
came upon him in prophecy, he could the better from his 
own experiences enter into sympathy with them. He 
had been pitiful and of tender compassion, and his message 
told of the still greater Divine pity and sympathy. 

"RETURN UNTO THE LORD" 

The Prophet, in our lesson, urges his nation to realize 
their fallen condition, their helplessness, and to 
avail themselves of God's clemency. They must not look 
to Asshur (Assyria) for help, nor must they trust in 
horses imported from Egypt; nor must they any longer 
rely upon idols, the work of their own hands. On the 



contrary, they must turn to the Lord, who is merciful 
even unto the fatherless. The Israelites were fatherless in 
the sense that they had denied the Heavenly Father; the 
Creator, and had become children of the Adversary; even 
as Jesus said to some, "Ye are of your father the Devil, 
for his works ye do." 

In their repentance, in their return to God, they were 
not only to abandon false hopes and false worship and 
iniquity, but they were to take with them words, and say 
unto the Lord, "Take away our iniquity and receive us 
graciously, that we may render unto thee the fruit of 
our lips— our praise." 

Then follows a prophecy which has not yet been fulfilled, 
but will, we believe, soon be realized. It tells of 
the turning away of God's anger, of his blessing upon 
Israel. It will have fulfilment in the beginning of Messiah's 
reign. 

"RECEIVE US GRACIOUSLY" 

Be it noted that the people of Israel to this day have 
not accepted the Lord's terms as stated by the Prophet. 
They have not asked to be received by grace— graciously. 
They are still hoping for Divine favor through the keeping 
of the Law Covenant, which neither they nor others 
of fallen humanity can keep in its letter and spirit. 
This is the great lesson to be learned by all people, kindreds, 
nations— that we are all fallen, imperfect, unable 
to meet the Divine requirements— that we all need Divine 
grace, mercy, forgiveness of iniquity and help out of our 
imperfections. 

How God can be just and yet clear us was not made 
known in Hosea's day, but is now clearly set forth as the 
very essence of the "good tidings" of God's love. God 
himself has provided in Jesus this, the Ransom sacrifice, 
necessary to the satisfaction of Divine Justice, so that 
God can be both just and merciful, although these terms 
are antagonistic. 

"THE WISE SHALL UNDERSTAND" 

The last verse of the chapter declares, "Who is wise 
and he shall understand these things, prudent and he 
shall know them; for the ways of the Lord are right, and 
the just shall walk in them, but transgressors shall fall 
therein." 

In order to have a clear understanding of God's merciful 
provision it is necessary, first, that the transgressor 
shall come to a realization of his own needs— that he 
shall crave a recognition by the Creator and a share in 
his mercy and loving provisions. Such abandoning of 
sin to the extent of ability will be assisted of the Lord in 
connection with the exercise of faith in him, which will 
bring rest and peace of soul and a realization that Divine 
mercy will make good all unintentional blemishes and 
cause all things to work together for good to him. But 



there is no place on the Highway of Holiness— the Highway 
of Divine mercy and love and forgiveness and peace 
—for transgressors, for those who knowingly and willingly 
go contrary to the Divine will. 

CHRISTENDOM'S IDOLATROUS DEBAUCH 

We are not to lose the force of this lesson by applying 
it wholly to the nation of Israel. There is also a nominal 
spiritual Israel, styled "Christendom," professing to be espoused 
to the Lord. Christendom is, in the Scriptures, 
charged with adultery, in that she lives with the 
world. She is charged also with idolatry— with worshiping 
houses and lands, banks, stocks and bonds, name and 
fame. Indeed the serious charge against "Christendom" 
is that she has lost her God. Only the comparatively few, 
a mere handful, know God as their Father and are known 
of him as his children. Their confidence is in the work 
of their own hands, and in lodges, unions, trusts, insurance, 
church membership, etc. "God is not in all their 
thoughts." 

R4811 :page 139 

The condition of "Christendom" today is one of trust 
in armies and navies, soldiers and guns, aeroplanes and 
dynamite, great wealth and prosperity. Under the picture 
of Laodicea the nominal church of today is described as 
saying, "I am rich and increased in goods and have need 
of nothing." The Lord answers, "Thou knowest not that 
thou art poor and wretched and miserable and blind and 
naked. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, 
and raiment, that thou mayest be clothed and that the 
shame of thy nakedness do not appear."— Rev. 3:17,18. 

THE FATHERLESS FIND MERCY 

Such as are children of the Adversary— such as love 
iniquity and hate righteousness— have nothing to expect 
from the Almighty in the way of favor— "All the wicked 
will he destroy." But all such as renounce sin and desire 
to return to the Lord are fatherless in that they 
have neither Satan nor God as their father, but to such 
God proffers mercy, forgiveness, through the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice. Thus turning from sin they will be in 
proper condition to be the recipients of Divine favor and 
adoption as children of God. "Thou art a God ready to 
pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger." 

While God's anger against sin has been manifested 
for six thousand years in the reign of sin and calamity 
and death, nevertheless the Scriptures clearly foretell of 
the especial time of trouble or Divine wrath that will 
come upon Christendom in the close of this Gospel Age 
—at the ushering in of Messiah's Kingdom. The present 
is the time of special opportunity for those who would 
escape the severity of that trouble as well as for those 



who, becoming saints, would make their "calling and their 
election sure" to a share in the "Kingdom of God's dear 
Son." 



R4812:page 139 

HEZEKIAH'S GREAT REFORM 

--JUNE 11. -II CHRON. 30.- 

"Man looketh on the outward appearance, but 
the Lord looketh on the heart."— 1 Samuel 16:7. 

KING HEZEKIAH of Judah has a wonderful 

record as a man of God, a reformer, a 

patriot, yet he was the son of a bad father, 

who in turn was the son of a good father, 

who in turn was the son of a bad father. 

The alternation between good and bad for 

four generations illustrates the fact that, 

although heredity has much to do with 

every member of our race, nevertheless, 

there are counter-balances in nature. We 

are all members of Adam's family, and as such we are 

all sharers in the general weakness, mental, moral and 

physical, which for six thousand years has descended 

upon us. St. Paul refers to this, saying, "By one man's 

disobedience sin entered into the world, and death as 

the result of sin; and thus death passed upon all men, because 

all are sinners."— Romans 5:12. 

The downward or sinful tendency inbred in our very 
constitution is so strong that none is able fully to overcome 
it. The best that any of us can do is to set our 
wills in opposition to our inherited weaknesses and to 
fight courageously against them. The Apostle assures 
us that if it were possible for humanity to fully gain 
such a victory over its fallen self as to bring itself back 
to perfection, then doubtless God would have provided 
that way of salvation. But that way being impossible, 
God provided another method, another way, for our return 
to him— through the merit of Christ's death, "the 
Just for the unjust," and through Messiah's assistance. 
This assistance, in the present time, is confined to those 
who voluntarily seek it. They receive the blessing of 
peace and joy in the present life and later glory, honor 
and immortality with Messiah in his Kingdom. 

THOSE WHO WILL DO THE LORD'S WILL IN THE NEXT 
AGE SHALL NOT DIE 

However, many are so weakened, so "lost" through 
the fall, that they are, figuratively, blind and deaf to their 
own needs, to God's love and mercy in Christ, and to the 
Savior's offered assistance. These get little or none of 



the Redeemer's aid in the present time, yet they are not 
left out of the Divine provision. With the completion 
of the election of the saints will come the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom "under the whole heavens." By its 
power sin will be conquered and the blind and deaf prisoners 
of sin will be released, including the prisoners that 
have gone down into the prison-house of death— sheol, 
hades. 

Then gracious opportunities for earthly blessings and 
everlasting life will be afforded to all. Then it shall no 
longer be a proverb, "The fathers have eaten a sour 
grape and the children's teeth are set on edge." (Jer. 31:29,30.) 
Then only those who eat the sour grape of 
sin will die the Second Death; and all the willing and 
obedient shall be lifted up to perfection and eternal life. 

A lesson that all should learn is in respect to the 
power of the will and the necessity for having a positive 
or strong will rightly directed— a will to do right. King 
Hezekiah had a strong will, or heart. The secret of his 
success lay in the fact that he was not double-minded, but 
with his whole heart sought to do right— to do the Lord's 
will. 

True, it is better that one should be partly right-willed 
rather than wholly wrong-willed; but let us settle at once 
that such a person will, at most, be only a partial success 
in life. Our little all is surely none too much to give 
to our God, to our Redeemer, to the cause of righteousness. 
A mistake made by many well-meaning people 
is the keeping back of a part of their heart for themselves. 
If we give the Lord nine-tenths of our heart and 
our will and reserve one-tenth, in the furthest recesses, 
it will but weaken and blemish our character, our lives 
our success in Divine service. We will find ourselves 
making paths for selfishness and sin, from the unconsecrated, 
farthest corners, all over the consecrated nine-tenths. 
Properly, the Lord could not accept such a consecration 
under his call, "My son, give me thine heart." 

HEZEKIAH THE REFORMER 

Shortly after his ascension to the throne, King Hezekiah 
took steps for the reorganization of the worship of 
Jehovah God. His father had introduced idolatrous worship 
—erecting altars and groves to the worship of Baal. 
God's temple was strewn with rubbish. Under the direction 
of the King, the Levites began a cleansing work. It 
required eight days to carry out the rubbish from the 
court, etc. Then the priests, who alone were authorized 
to enter into the Holy, or temple proper, were directed to 
cleanse the temple itself. 

But as a preliminary work, before the cleansing of the 
court or the temple began, the King directed that the 
priests and the Levites sanctify themselves afresh to the 
Lord and his service. How appropriate! How in harmony 
with the words of the Prophet Isaiah, who lived at 
that time and who was the King's counselor— "Be ye 



clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord's house!"— 
Isa. 52:11. 

R4812:page 140 

It is an important thought that no one is properly 
ready to render service to God in any form or work until 
he himself has come to a sanctified condition of heart 
in relationship to the Lord. 

Applying this feature to reforms of our day, we concede 
the propriety of ministers of Christ taking a prominent 
part in respect to all religious reforms. In proportion 
as such have influence with the people, good may 
be accomplished. But let us not forget the instruction 
of St. Peter upon this subject. Comparing the priesthood 
of Israel with the institutions of the Christian 
church, St. Peter gives us the thought that the priests of 
olden times do not find their antitypes in the clergy of 
today, but in God's saintly or sanctified people, whether 
in or out of the public ministry. And the antitypical 
Levites of today are in general the household of faith. 
Thus St. Peter says to all of the consecrated Church of 
Christ, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a 
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of 
him who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light." 

The great King commands his consecrated people to 
purify the temple of God, which is the Church, "from 
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness 
in the reverence of the Lord." (2 Cor. 7:1.) In proportion 
as this is done, a blessed influence will go forth from 
the temple of God, the true Church, far reaching upon 
all those who love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

HEZEKIAH'S GREAT PASSOVER 

The King, although only twenty-five years old at this 
time, had a broad mind— the result of his whole-hearted 
consecration of himself to the Lord and the Lord's guidance 
—possibly through the Prophet Isaiah. Having gotten 
the temple into readiness, the King issued a general 
appeal to the people to return to the worship of God, 
to come up to Jerusalem to keep the Passover. Not only 
did this message go throughout the jurisdiction of his 
own kingdom of Judah, but it was extended to the ten 
tribes of the kingdom north, the split-off portion of the 
same people. Messengers were sent informing all that 
King Hezekiah had cleansed the temple and had appointed 
magnificent arrangements for the celebration of 
the Passover, and invited all who loved God and desired 
to worship him to come and celebrate the feast. 

Throughout the kingdom of Judah the message was 
well received, but in the northern kingdom, where idolatry 
had a stronger hold, the invitation was derided by 
many, pride and politics uniting in slighting the invitation 
and sneering at it and in denouncing the king as an 



up-to-date hypocrite, etc. 

The Passover feast, nevertheless, was a pronounced 
success, and so greatly enjoyed by the people that it was 
prolonged for a second week— the King giving bountifully 
from his flocks and herds, the people appreciating 
and availing themselves of his bounty. 

The rejoicing amongst the people was general, many 
of their brethren from the northern kingdom participating. 
We read, "So there was great joy in Jerusalem, 
for since the time of Solomon, the son of David, King 
of Israel, there was not the like in Jerusalem." 

The whole world today is bent on pleasure. It is 
sought in various directions, in hunting, fishing, theater-going 
money-making, in home, family, etc.— legitimately 
and illegitimately; but of the many who seek pleasure and 
joy, but very few find it; even the little found usually 
leaves a bitter taste in the mouth. The real finding of 
pleasure is in finding the Lord and coming into proper 
heart harmony with him. There is no other peace or joy 
or love so delicious, so soul-satisfying as that which comes 
from fellowship with the Creator through the Lord Jesus 
Christ; and this joy, as the Master said, he alone can 
give, and none can take it away from us. To maintain 
this joy we must continue to abide in his love— eating the 
Passover in an antitypical sense— rejoicing that we have 
been passed over by God's mercy and favor— that we 
have passed from death unto life— from sin to righteousness 
—from the world into "the Church which is the 
Body of Christ." 

THE SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND 

Our study records that amongst those who came to 
the Passover from the northern tribes, some ate the 
Passover without having performed the purifyings stipulated 
by the Law. King Hezekiah might without impropriety 
have made a great ado over this fact. He might 
have berated the visiting brethren on their ignorance, 
their stupidity, their saturation with idolatry to the neglect 
of their God's commandments. He might have 
ordered them to be driven from the Holy City. But he 

R4813 :page 140 

did more wisely. He prayed for them, asking Divine 
mercy for their error. Similarly, in the Church of Christ, 
we at times find some who but imperfectly comprehend 
the sanctification of life necessary to a proper participation 
in the Lord's "feast of fat things." Let us 
be wise in our dealing with such; let us not denounce 
them as hypocrites nor hold up their shortcomings. Let 
us pray for them and assist them in the more excellent 
way. Let us remember the words of our text, "Man 
looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh 
on the heart." Let us be less punctilious respecting 
forms and ceremonies, and more lovingly sympathetic 



with the expressions of heart of all those who seek to 
draw nigh unto the Lord. 

THE DIVINE BLESSING 

The conclusion of the feast was a Divine blessing 
upon all the people, through the Priests and Levites. So 
there goes out a Divine blessing from the Lord's sanctified 
people— from all the consecrated of the household of 
faith— to the people in general— to their neighbors, their 
friends and visitors from afar. Let such be our influence 
amongst men. In this connection let us remember the 
power of the tongue, of which the Apostle said, "Therewith 
praise we God, and therewith curse (or injure) we 
men." Let our tongues and all our powers be used in 
blessing the people as well as in praising our God. 

The King wisely began his reformation at the temple 
and gave the priests and Levites the first share therein. 
It was later that the idols of the city of Jerusalem were 
gathered and hurled into the valley of Kedron, and it 
was after the fervor of the Passover occasion that the 
zeal of the people in general rose high, and they went 
forth all over the land, destroying the idols, the groves 
of Baal, and every symbol of disloyalty to God. 

And so today: Everywhere the light of our day is 
showing more and more of the meanness, selfishness, 
corruption— some of it centuries old, and some of it bred 
of special privilege and opportunity in our day. The 
call for reform is heard on every hand, although sometimes 
but feeble. The proper place for reform is, as in 
Hezekiah's day, with the sanctification of the priests and 
the Levites themselves. 

Let us not forget this; and after having seen to our 
own heart purification in harmony with God, let us proceed 
to the cleansing of the Sanctuary. Idols and traditions 
of men in the form of venerable creeds of the past 
are defiling the Temple of God. These must be gotten rid 

R4813 :page 141 

of. The vessels of the Lord's house must be cleansed of 
all defilements— their human traditions, heathen philosophies 
and superstitions. We must no longer worship a 
book and a cross, but must reverence the teachings of 
the Book and the significance of the cross. 

If the Church of Christ could but faithfully perform 
her responsibility, under the direction of the King, it 
would mean a great revival of religion. It would mean 
the sanctifying of the people. It would mean the casting 
out of the idols of mammon— selfishness, filthy lucre 
and worldly fame, and a general bowing down of men to 
the Giver of every good and perfect gift. 



R4813 :page 141 



THE WORLD'S HATRED 

"Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you"; 
"Ye know that it hated me before it hated you." 
-1 John 3:13; John 15:18. 

HERE the great Teacher seems to show that 

the kind of hatred that would come to us 

would be the same that came to himself. 

Looking at his experiences we see that he 

was hated chiefly by the most prominent, 

the most influential amongst the people. 

The Scribes specially hated him; but the 

Pharisees, the Chief Priests and the Sadducees 

also hated him. In time their hatred 

extended to the common people. The lower 

classes are always led by the superior classes; the lesser 

Pharisees by the greater Pharisees; the lesser Sadducees 

by the greater Sadducees, etc. Probably the common 

people could not give an intelligent reason why they hated 

the Lord. Accepting the presentations of their leaders, 

they assumed that he was a fraud and an impostor, and 

hated him as such. In proportion as they esteemed their 

leaders, they were inclined to disesteem whomsoever these 

disesteemed. 

So it is today. We can see that there are motives 
behind the hatred manifested toward the Lord's people. 
No prominent person poses as being wicked. Hence, 
there is a general disposition on the part of all to justify 
themselves (politically and religiously), as moved by 
noble sentiments, as either the supporters or originators 
of high standards. But we see the hypocrisy which is 
made manifest by the lies and the procedure of those who 
hate the Lord's people without a cause. When, therefore, 
the Truth comes to any of those who have error and 
pride mingled with worldly religion, it becomes a rebuke 
to them. As the Apostles went from one place to another 
it was said of them, "These that have turned the world 
upside down have come hither also."— Acts 17:6. 

The thoughts of Jesus are so deep and touch so upon 
the heart that everything not fully in accord with them 
appears worthless in comparison. Hence, many of those 
who have been teachers of religion find themselves impelled, 
through hate and envy, to try to crush, to blacken, 
to defame that which is true. But these teachers are 
being tested; they are being proved. To the Lord, at 
least, their hypocrisy is manifested, whether others be 
deceived by it or not. It is, therefore, today as it was in 
our Lord's day— "The darkness hateth the light." 

"WHOEVER WILL LIVE GODLY IN CHRIST JESUS SHALL 
SUFFER PERSECUTION" 

As our Lord explained, the darkness of sin and error 
is in direct antagonism to the light of Truth, and consequently 



when his people lift up the light— "Let their light 

so shine as to glorify their Father which is in heaven," 

who has called them "out of darkness into his marvelous 

light"— the effect upon the darkened world is to awaken 

opposition, antagonism, and thus to disturb and make uncomfortable 

those in sympathy with darkness. Consequently, 

those who love darkness, those who love evil, 

those who love sin in its varied forms, hate the light, 

neither come to the light; but either publicly or secretly 

oppose the children of the light, the enlightened ones, the 

light-bearers. And even those who have gotten out of 

the extreme darkness of moral pollution into a kind of 

twilight of civilized reformation and moral reform, cannot 

endure the clear, searching light of the true Gospel. 

They much prefer a measure of darkness.— John 3:20. 

In consequence of this conflict between light and darkness, 
our Lord suffered at the hands of those who professed 
to be children of the light, children of God; and 
who had, at least, a little light. Our Lord was not maltreated 
by either the Roman Governor or the Roman 
soldiers, of their own volition; for they were so totally 
blind as not to appreciate the light which he displayed. 
His persecutors were those who had some light, but who 
hated the brilliancy of the great Light shining upon them. 

Similarly, all down through this Gospel Age, those 
who have been burning and shining lights in the world 
have been hated and persecuted chiefly (almost exclusively) 
by those who had some light, but whose light 
was darkness in comparison with the great light of the 
holy Spirit shining in and through the Lord's fully consecrated 
ones. Thus was fulfilled our Lord's testimony, 
"If they hated me they will also hate you"; "Whosoever 
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." 
(John 15:18; I John 3:13; 2 Tim. 3:12.) The Lord's 
followers in the present time are called upon to suffer 
persecution for righteousness' sake, not because it is 
either reasonable or proper, but because the Lord, wishing 
to test, prove, and polish his people, is willing to 
permit the evil, opposing influences to prosper and to 
persecute and oppose his "members," and thus to serve 
his cause in the preparation of his Elect for a future 
work of service. Thus the persecutors of the Body, as 
did the persecutors of the Head, are co-operating to fulfil 
the Divine Plan in a manner they little suspect. 

"MARVEL NOT IF THE WORLD HATE YOU" 

When the Lord's followers take a firm stand for 
Truth and righteousness, as did their Leader, the results 
are the same. Satan is their implacable opponent; he 
will see to it that they suffer, that there will be opposition, 
not only by himself, but by the world, which is 
largely under the influence of his spirit in various ways. 
Having taken this stand, the Lord's people must not 
marvel if the world hate them and say all manner of evil 
against them falsely, for Christ's sake. The more 



prominent they may be, as in our Lord's case, the more 
virulent will be the attacks against them; the more interested 
will be the great Adversary in overcoming them. 

This thought that Satan opposes us, and that we are 
contending not merely with flesh and blood, but with 
principalities and powers and wicked spirits in high positions 
of power (Eph. 6:12), would be appalling to us did 
we not, on the other hand, realize that by this same positiveness 
of decision for Truth and righteousness we acquire 
great help and assistance by other unseen powers. 
From the moment of our positive resistance of temptation 
and positive standing up for the Lord and his cause, we 
become stronger in the Lord and in the power of his 

R4814:page 142 

might. Let us remember that "greater is he that is for 

us than all that can be against us."— Matt. 5:11; Eph. 6:12; 

I John 4:4. 

The chief opposition to our Lord came from the 
religious leaders and professors. The union of the 
worldly and the semi-religious is sometimes complete, as 
in the union of Church and State in foreign lands; in 
other instances, it is incomplete, as in this country, where 
the Church and State are not fully united. Nevertheless, 
the politician desires the support of the professors and 
supporters of religion. These, in turn, plume themselves 
on their political influence and seek to use this influence 
for their own advantage, or, as they would say, for the 
"good of the cause." So, where there is no direct union 
between Church and State, there is an affiliation, an indirect 
union. The politician wishes to have the support 
of the moral and religious leaders of the community and 
others. Thus drawn together, the princes of this world, 
both religious and secular, uphold one another. Their 
interests are one. Hence, the Lord and all those who are 
his "members" and followers would be unsympathetically 
viewed, hated, persecuted; for the presentations of the 
Truth make manifest various errors and hypocrisies in 
contrast with Divine standards. 



R4814:page 142 

"GOOD TIDINGS" IN INDIA 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Yours dated February 1 1 reached me too late last 
week, so I was not able to send a reply then. I am very 
glad to hear from you; the contents of your letter give 
me much strength. 

In Travancore the Truth is spreading rapidly; the 
Lord is opening the way. Everywhere people are flocking 
to hear the Gospel Truth! The majority of the poor 
people are unable to grasp the details, but a large number 



among them, who are the leaders of the community and 
can read and write their vernacular language (Malayalam) 
are able to understand the Plan of the Lord; and 
I am glad to tell you, dear Brother, that they are appreciating 
the Truth, and gladly preach it to others. 

In my last letter I wrote the details of the work in 
Travancore. Before I left India, or rather Travancore, 
fourteen years ago, I spoke Malayalam and Tamil 
fluently. (These two are the languages spoken in Travancore.) 
But when I came back I was not able to talk 
either Malayalam or Tamil. But now I can talk both 
fluently; they have come back without much trouble. So 
the language difficulty in connection with the work in 
Travancore is no more. 

Until a few weeks back the work was not systematized. 
From experience, the Lord has shown me that the work 
among that people must be carried on in a thoroughly organized 
form, and that no hope of material help should 
be given to them in any way. This is quite new to them, 
as all the missionary societies start their "Christian" 
work on the basis of "rice" Christianity. It took some 
time and much hardship to convince the leading men of 
the wisdom of the method we have adopted. The Lord 
has opened their eyes to see the beauty of Christianity 
and the principles upon which the Lord and the Apostles 
carried on the work. I am glad to say that they understand 
a great deal now of the Secret of the Lord. Their 
lives, their enthusiasm and zeal explain it. 

Just think, these poor people going about and visiting 
the people at their houses and teaching them the Truth, 
and also making arrangements to hold meetings in several 
places! We have in all now sixteen congregations 
holding meetings regularly in fifty different places 
hereabout. Thirteen of the brethren are working 
regularly among these people. The fact that they have 
been doing this work for the last two months (some of 
them for five or six months) without receiving any financial 
help, shows the interest and the devotion they have 
for the Lord's work. We have fourteen temporary shelters 
for the purpose of holding meetings. In each of these 
places from 100 to 350 people attend the meetings regularly 
—not simply attend the meetings, but they have 
learned much during these days; and even those who 
were once baptized in the London Mission Church 
want to be immersed again since they understand 
the real import of baptism as set forth in the Scriptures. 

As large numbers of the people are illiterate, we have 
to teach the Truth orally. But as there are quite a good 
many who are able to read and write, it is best to have 
some tracts printed, setting forth the main points of 
Present Truth. 

As we have thoroughly consecrated men with us now, 
as far as I can judge, we would have no difficulty in entrusting 
the work of teaching to such. Many people 
have come to me to start work among them, but I have 
not yet seen my way clear to begin the work and carry 



it on effectively. 

You will be greatly surprised, dear Brother, when I 
say that among all the "Christian" people in these parts, 
the Present Truth is the subject of discussion. Some are 
for, and others against it, even in the sectarian pulpits. 
Last week there was a conference of the London Mission 
people, where the main discussion was about the 
Lord's work of our Society in these parts. So there is 
much interest either directly or indirectly. 

The elders and deacons hold two class meetings each 
week; about thirty are attending and studying the Lord's 
Word to preach to others. Some walk from twelve to 
fifteen miles to attend these meetings. We hold these 
from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. I find that this class study work 
is very helpful. They all have their note-books with them 
and take notes when I discuss each subject from the volumes 
and the booklets. It is wonderful how these poor 
ones go to the Reverends and tell them about the Truth, 
giving Bible references for every statement they make. 

It is best to have some booklets printed for the use 
of these Pilgrims, Elders, etc., as well as for those who 
are able to understand the Truth somewhat. It will cost 
too much to have the volumes translated either into Malayalam 
or Tamil. We shall have to circulate the literature 
free, as the people are unable to pay. I would suggest 
that extracts of certain chapters of all the six volumes 
be printed. We must have also some tracts in 
Malayalam and Tamil. We can distribute these tracts 
among the denominational church people whom we cannot 
reach otherwise. These are the reasons why I put 
$500 for printing purposes for this year. The tracts could 
be used in all South India, among fifteen or twenty millions 
of people. 

I am sorry to say that some of the teachers have to 
work in the fields at least a few days each week to 
earn their bread; the rest of the time they spend in 
preaching the Gospel and holding meetings. Last Sunday 
morning 450 people attended the service in one place, 
and in the evening 850. 

Your brother and servant of the Lord. S. P. D. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your welcome letter of March 21 is before me. I am 

R4814:page 143 

glad to have it. If you can get into right line with our 
ideas of the work we will be glad, and believe that a great 
blessing may result. We are praying for you and the 
work in India, and believe from the tenor of your last 
letter that you now understand our program better than 
at first, and will follow it. 

Our plan is not to trust to oral instruction of teachers, 
but to co-operate specially with those who are able 



to read English, and who will take the printed matter 
with them in their preaching and translate to those who 
are unable to read. We do not mean by this that none may 
be accepted as teachers who cannot read English, but 
that those able to read English should be given preference. 

You are quite right, dear Brother, in understanding 
us not to wish to purchase either teachers or hearers with 
rice. The Gospel must be hungered and thirsted for 
with a spirited appetite. As for the teachers being 
obliged to labor a part of their time, we think it the very 
best way, except for a very few whose entire time as 
overseers might be necessary, like your own and that of 
the pilgrims. We favor this very same course in every 
land. For the teachers to be so separated from the people 
that it would be thought a shame for them to make 
tents or do other work for an honest living, is neither 
good for themselves nor does it have the proper influence 
upon the people with whom they should be in close touch 
as "brethren." 

We feel that the money sent you thus far has not 
been unwisely expended, and you may count on upwards 
of two thousand rupees for printing during the ensuing 
year, also an allowance not to exceed five rupees per 

R4815 :page 143 

week for the teachers who are giving all their time, and 
something less for those giving part of their time. 

Please make monthly reports, which need not be 
lengthy, but which should contain distinct statements of 
amounts expended for literature and the quantity it purchased, 
also number of teachers and pilgrims, and briefly 
the work being done. 

We are sending herewith L.20. 

Very truly your brother and servant in the Lord. 



page 143 

ANNUAL REQUEST FOR VISITS OF TRAVELING BRETHREN 

THE Lord's blessing continues richly with this 

branch of the service. During the period 

from May, 1910, to May, 1911, there has 

been a large increase in the number of 

public meetings held, and a corresponding 

increase also in the attendance. Larger 

auditoriums, better means of announcement, 

and a thorough house-to-house distribution 

of Everybody's have been the 

means through which the Lord has been 

pleased to specially bless this branch of the harvest work. 

This wide-open door seems, by the Lord's grace, to 
open still more widely for the year— May, 1911, to May, 
1912. If you desire to arrange for large public meetings, 



but feel that the expense would burden you, mention that 
fact; the Society may wish to assist financially. 

Do not get the thought, however, that these visits are 
merely for the public; they are also intended to encourage 
Bible Students everywhere; it matters not whether the 
class be large or small. No charge is made for these 
services. The Society pays all the necessary traveling 
expenses, etc., and takes up no collections. The cost is 
borne by the general fund to which many of you are, or 
have been, contributors. Requests for these visits must 
be renewed every year in May. It is our desire to serve 
all who make request. We will use our best endeavor to 
this end. 

All desirous of visits by the traveling brethren during 
the year from May, 191 1, to May, 1912, are invited to 
send in postal-card replies to the following questions: 

(a) Are regular meetings being held? 

(b) How many are usually in attendance? 

(c) Where do you meet? What time? 

(d) Have the members of your class chosen leaders 

in accord with STUDIES, Vol. VI, chapters V and VI? If 
so, give name and full address of each. 

(e) Give full names and full addresses of the two 

[2] to whom notice re traveling brethren should be sent, 
and notify us as to any change or removal. 

(f) If your town is not on a railroad give the name 
of railroad station at which to stop. 

(g) How many miles from station is meeting place, 
and which direction from station? 

(h) Would the Brother be met at station? 
(i) Give writer's full name and address, 
(k) Give Secretary's full name and address. 



R4815 :page 143 

THE WESTWARD CONVENTION TOUR 

THE WATCH TOWER of May 1 is ready for 
the press as we arrive home from our 
European campaign. We are quite well and 
send greetings to all of our dear readers, 
promising further details later respecting 
our European experiences. 

We take this opportunity to express our 
regret that so considerable an announcement 
of our Western Tour during June and 
July was inserted in these columns during 
our absence. We are finding no fault, however; those 
responsible for the insertion used their best judgment and 
supposed they had the Editor's mind on the subject. We 
would have preferred the bare announcement of the stopping-places 
and dates, rather than what might to some appear 
an advertisement and a solicitation for a large party. 

We appreciate very much the interest in this Tour displayed 



by some of the friends, particularly by Brother Dr. 

Jones, the prime mover in the excursion feature. We wish, 

however, to have it distinctly understood that neither 

the Bible and Tract Society, nor the Editor has anything 

whatever to do with the arrangements for the excursion 

party. Brother Jones inquired months ago 

whether or not the Editor would object to company on this 

Convention Tour. He was assured that we would greatly 

enjoy the fellowship of friends accompanying, although 

we would not expect to be with them much, because necessities 

require that our work through a stenographer shall 

continue at every available opportunity during the two 

months of our absence from Brooklyn. We specified this, 

so that whoever would be of Brother Jones' company 

would know in advance not to expect very much of the 

Editor's time in conversation, etc. 

We are stating matters thus very plainly, in order 
that none may join Brother Jones' excursion under any 
misapprehension, nor with the supposition that the Society 
has urged them to do so; nor should we be considered as 
a party in any sense of the word to any appeals for aid 
in connection with the excursion. We urge each one contemplating 
the matter to consider the subject on its own 
merits and to decide in respect to these matters according 
as his own conscience shall dictate to him the Lord's will. 



page 146 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 



SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII MAY 15 No. 10 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

The Good Tidings Abroad-No. 3 147 

The Tabernacle and the Gown 149 

Strength and Peace 150 

The Ransom and Its Application to All 

Mankind 151 

The Fall of Samaria 152 

Overthrow of Israel a Judgment of 
the Lord 153 

Israel's Promised Restitution 153 

Your Reasonable Service 154 

Bible Study Class-Extension 155 

Loosing the Four Winds of Heaven 156 

"The Church of the First-Borns" 157 

"All Things to All Men" 158 

"Suffer Little Children to Come" 158 

Thus May He Bless and Keep Thee (Poem) 158 

The Memorial Celebrants 159 

The Colporteur Work Prospering 159 

Western Itinerary Services 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 



the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, NY., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



FIVE-DAYS BIBLE STUDENTS CONVENTION 

Oakland, San Rafael and San Francisco brethren extend a 
most cordial invitation to all outside friends to attend the 
5-day joint-local Convention in San Francisco— June 22, 23, 
24, 25 and Oakland June 26. Brother Russell will speak 
twice in San Francisco— June 25— and in Oakland June 26. 
Pilgrim service will be arranged for all days. Opportunity 
for water baptism will be arranged in Oakland June 26. 

Arrangements will be made for visiting friends. Rooms 
may be engaged in advance at 50 cents, 75 cents, $1 and up 
per day. Send full data and money as soon as possible to 
"Sec'y Hotel Committee, I.B.S.A.," 2018 Green street, San 
Francisco. Data should show sex, color, those that wish to 
room together or are willing to share room and bed to save 
expense, also rate desired, exact dates, etc., and hour and 
route of expected arrival, if known. Free sleeping accommodations 



will be furnished by local brethren to those that can 
come, but cannot afford room rent; these should also advise 
promptly in advance. Visitors' mail may be sent in care of 
above address. 

Meetings and headquarters for four days in San Francisco 
will be at Lyric Hall, 513 Larkin street, with public lectures 
afternoon and evening of Sunday, June 25, at Dreamland 
Rink. 

Meetings and headquarters in Oakland, June 26, will be at 
corner of Jones street and Telegraph avenue. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10.30 in the 
Brooklyn Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m. 
in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. 
Felix St. Evening service in Brooklyn Tabernacle, 7 p.m. 

Those desiring water baptism or to present their children 
in consecration should notify in advance. 



R4815 :page 147 

THE GOOD TIDINGS ABROAD--NO 3 

TWO of our Sunday evenings in London were 

announced as Christian mass meetings at 

Royal Albert Hall; the first evening we discussed, 

"Which is the True Gospel?" the 

second, "Which is the True Church?" We 

had good attention on both occasions, and 

large audiences. No doubt the audiences 

would have been still larger had the subjects 

and announcements not limited the invitation 

to Christians. While we did not 

shun to declare the whole counsel of God on these subjects, 

we did, as usual, endeavor to present the Truth as 

sympathetically and inoffensively as possible. We trust 

that some seed was sown and found lodgment in earnest 

hearts. Other services on the same days were held in 

the London Tabernacle. They were not specially advertised, 

but the attendance was good. The edifice is rated 

as accommodating twelve hundred, and on some occasions 

the place was crowded. 

At one of the public sessions our election to the pastorate 
of the congregation of the London Tabernacle was 
duly and publicly acknowledged and accepted; but of 
this, reports have already reached you through the public 
press. We promised to give Great Britain (and London 
particularly) as large a share of our time as possible, 
but reminded the dear friends of the breadths and 
interests of the Truth, and that much as we appreciate 
the openings and progress of the Harvest Message in 
Great Britain, the work in America must not be forgotten 
nor neglected. 



EDINBURGH--GLASGOW--BELFAST--DUBLIN 

These four cities were visited in the order named, 
and two meetings were held in each, one specially for 
the interested, the other particularly for the public. We 
are glad to report that the Truth has been making good 
progress in all of these cities and countries. Not only in 
numbers, but also, we believe, in spiritual development 
the Lord has richly blessed them all. 

At Belfast the public audience numbered nearly two 
thousand. We had excellent attention for about two 
hours, and about one-half of the audience remained to a 
question opportunity, which served to set forth the Truth 
in stronger contrast with error. Although not all 
questioners were polite, we endeavored to give a soft 
answer, but a clear one; we trust with good results. 

It will be remembered that on two previous occasions 
at Dublin, the Y.M.C.A. secretary was present as an 
objector and questioner— the last time accompanied by a 
prominent theologian and college professor. The same 
secretary was present this time with another minister as 
a mouthpiece and assistant. 

Questions were unkindly put, but we trust kindly and 
thoroughly answered. The majority of the large audience 
perceived the unfairness of the attack and the Scriptural 
strength of the replies. Approval was frequently 
manifested by applause, and in conclusion an elderly 
gentleman of about sixty-five years moved and carried a 
resolution of thanks to Pastor Russell for the pleasure 
and profit of the evening. 

BRISTOL-LONDON AND THE CONTINENT 

Monday of the following week was spent at Bristol. 
The Truth had spread some here also, and the dear 
friends seemed cheered by our talk to them in the afternoon 
respecting the covenant of sacrifice which the 
Church shares with her Lord, and the difference between 
this and the Law Covenant made with Israel at Mt. Sinai, 
and the New Law Covenant shortly to be inaugurated 
with Israel also, and through which ultimately all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed. The number present, 
about eighty, included some from nearby places. The 
evening meeting for the public had a splendid audience, 
especially for a week night— nearly twelve hundred. Our 
topic was "The Great White Throne of Judgment." We 
had excellent attention. The audience included evidently 
many of the most intelligent people of the city. 

Tuesday evening (April 11) we spent at London. We 
had a season of very special blessing and refreshment in 
commemorating the Memorial of our dear Redeemer's 
death on its anniversary, with the London congregation. 
The number present at the Tabernacle was about three 
hundred and thirty, of whom about three hundred and 
seventeen partook of the Memorial. About one hundred 



and fifty friends who reside in the outskirts of the city, 
and were unable to be present on account of business duties, 
distance, etc., kept separate celebrations; thus the 
London Church in its different meetings, and the Brooklyn 
congregation in its different meetings, represented 
practically the same number. 

The next day we traveled to Barmen, Germany, where, 
on Thursday, we had three very interesting sessions. The 
interest of the German friends continues to grow, and 
the numbers also— even though, as already stated, we are 
disappointed in the total numbers of interested ones in 
the Truth in Germany— considering the large population 
and the considerable effort and money expenditure made. 
The returns seem less than in Great Britain and Sweden. 

R4815 :page 148 

Friday and Saturday were devoted to meetings with 
the friends in the northern part of France, whom we had 
never before met. Our first stop was at Charleroi. We 
had dinner with the friends, addressed about twenty of 
them for about an hour, and then resumed our journey, 
arriving at Denain in time for supper and a two hours' 
talk to more than a hundred of the dear friends there. 
Next morning, accompanied by eight, we proceeded to 
Lens. There our congregation numbered about seventy 
interested. We had a splendid season of refreshment; 
then a question meeting, following which we proceeded 
on our journey toward London, which, by train and boat, 

R4816 :page 148 

we reached at 7 a.m. Sunday, ready for the services which 
have already been reported. 

NOTTINGHAM-SHEFFIELD-BRADFORD-MIDDLESBOROUGH 

The days of the next week were spent in addressing 
the dear friends in the four places above mentioned. The 
narrative of one is practically the story of all— keen interest 
amongst the friends and a general appreciation of 
the Truth. This was our first visit to Nottingham, and 
a very enjoyable one. The number of interested is not 
large, but they are very earnest. We addressed them in 
the afternoon along the lines of consecration and faithful 
obedience, both to the letter of the Divine law, the 
Golden Rule, and to the spirit of sacrifice. They had a 
large hall for the evening with a capacity of twenty-five 
hundred. It was comfortably filled, though not crowded. 
The audience was intelligent and attentive, and we trust 
that some good was accomplished and the Lord's name to 
some extent glorified. 

We addressed a Sheffield audience for the first time. 
We were agreeably surprised to find so large a company 
of friends— about eighty. Like the others they had 
worked hard with the volunteer matter, and the public 



service was well received, as was also the address to the 
interested. 

Bradford was our next stop. There also the Truth 
has been progressing, and there likewise, as indeed in 
every place, the friends had worked very hard to make 
the meeting well known— at the same time putting into 
the hands of the public two or three sermons to read. We 
were reminded that nearly all the cities of Great Britain 
had a very large distribution of PEOPLES PULPIT— forty 
thousand to sixty thousand in each place, or about one 
PEOPLES PULPIT to every six of the population. Surely 
all the friends got a blessing through this service, and 
eternity only will tell how much good seed of Truth was 
implanted, and how much error and superstition were at 
least partially broken down. 

The meeting with the Bradford friends was interesting, 
and the one for the public both interesting and exciting. 
A few objectors were anxious to put questions and to 
entrap us in our words, and to make the Good Tidings 
appear false. But God was with us, and we believe that 
their efforts did not succeed in accomplishing much injury. 
We trust that they were overruled by Divine 
providence for good to some at least. The audience numbered 
about fifteen hundred. 

Next came Middlesborough— another place we had 
never previously visited. About one hundred and twenty 
were present at the afternoon session for the interested, 
and about fifteen hundred at the public address in the 
evening. 

Considerable interest had been aroused at this point 
by reason of some local preachers of the Methodist 
church having received the Truth. We had excellent attention 
during the discourse, and a very lively time at its 
conclusion, when questions were asked and answered. 
These question opportunities, to some extent, confuse the 
beautiful outlines of the Divine Plan of the Ages in the 
minds of the hearers, but possibly there are compensations 
also. When criticisms and objections are answered 
readily, freely, Scripturally, a confidence in the entire 
Plan is, we trust, engendered, fully off-setting the disturbing 
influence. From Middlesborough we proceeded 
to London for the next Sunday— already reported. 

CARDIFF-LIVERPOOL-BIRMINGHAM-LONDON 

The next week we disposed of as foregoing. Our 
first appointment was Cardiff, Wales— the first time we 
had delivered an address in Wales. Cardiff has largely an 
English population. The proportion of Welsh faces, 
both at the public address and the address to the friends, 
was comparatively small. The hall was crowded beyond 
its capacity, two thousand, and hundreds failed to gain 
entrance. Many ministers were present. 

The so-called "Plymouth Brethren" helped to advertise 
the meeting by getting out a little leaflet which set 
forth ten points in which it was claimed that quotations 



from "The Plan of the Ages" contradicted the Bible. We 
set the audience at rest by promising to read and to answer 
those questions (which most of them had in their 
hands) at the close of the address. Our topic required 
nearly two hours, and then we had an interesting after-hour, 
in which we answered the ten questions and some 
other objections which were orally put to us. The friends 
of Cardiff rejoiced greatly with the results of their 
mutual efforts to glorify the Lord and his Word, and to 
assist the household of faith. 

The Liverpool meetings were enjoyed by the friends, 
and we trust were profitable to all in attendance. The 
friends of the Truth in the afternoon numbered about 
one hundred and fifty, and the crowd in the evening was 
estimated at fifteen hundred. How much good was done, 
only the Lord, of course, knows. The friends of the 
Truth were greatly encouraged, anyway. 

Birmingham was our next stop and a very enjoyable 
one. We noted a considerable increase, both in numbers 
and in interest, as compared with our previous meetings 
in this city. We had Priory Hall for the meeting 
of the friends, and an attendance of about one hundred 
and twenty-five. At night we had the Town Hall with 
an attendance of about two thousand. The chariot of the 
Truth is rolling on grandly in Birmingham, so far as 
outward indications guide our judgment. 

Friday night we had a farewell meeting at the London 
Tabernacle. First we met with the Elders and Deacons 
—about thirty-eight of us in an ante-room. We discussed 
the interests of the work and helpful methods of 
service. Then we joined the congregation in the Tabernacle 
proper. About four hundred were present. 

We outlined a little the work we hoped the congregation 
would feel encouraged to engage in with still greater 
vigor and zeal than ever before. We noted the great 
possibilities of the largest city in the world, and the 
responsibilities of the Truth upon all the dear friends 
there. We exhorted them to remember the great prize 
of our high calling— and the great privilege of serving 
the Lord's cause, even at the expense of weariness and 
self-denial in the present time. We noted the great reward 
sure to come to all the faithful— the Lord's love and 
favor, and glory, honor, and immortality; and the privilege 
of engaging still more fully in his service on the 
other side of the veil, as associates with our Redeemer, 
members of the great Prophet, Priest, King and Mediator, 
who shall bless the world of mankind and bring 
them Restitution privileges and finally restore the 

R4816 :page 149 

worthy and obedient to full fellowship with God and 
to eternal life. The service ended with a goodby handshake 
with the Elders and the congregation, the Elders 
standing with us as the congregation filed past. 
Next day we took train for our boat at Liverpool, 



homeward bound. About sixty of the dear Liverpool 
friends greeted us on the wharf, and sang to us, as the 
boat receded from the shore, "Blest be the tie that binds," 
and "God be with you till we meet again." 

BROOKLYN TABERNACLE AND BETHEL 

Our homeward journey on the Cunard steamer "Lusitania" 
was a pleasant one, and we were able to keep our 
stenographer busy. The only item out of the ordinary 
was a conversation with the widely-known Evangelist, 
Rev. Wilbur Chapman, and his assistant, Mr. Norton. 
They were returning from a campaign in Wales. We 
were agreeably surprised to find both gentlemen evidently 
interested in the doctrine of the second coming of the 
Lord, and both of them professed full consecration to 
walk in the Master's footsteps, even unto death. We 
were glad of this. Our wish for them, as for all of God's 
true people, is a still greater study of God's Word, wholly 
without sectarian spectacles, with a consuming desire to 
know and to do God's will. 

As our vessel docked we saw on the pier about a 
dozen of the brethren— chiefly the Elders of the Church. 
We received a very hearty welcome and at noon we had 
the pleasure of meeting the entire family at Bethel, and 
on the next Sunday the entire New York Ecclesia. 



R4816 :page 149 

THE TABERNACLE AND THE GOWN 

LONDON TABERNACLE has a large gallery, 

seating nearly as many as the first 

floor— in all nearly 1,200. To suit this the 

pulpit is a high one, boxed in, so that only 

the head and shoulders of the speaker are 

in view. A plain black robe or gown, provided 

by the kindness of some of the 

friends, was worn by the Pastor (Brother 

Russell) in the pulpit, but not at other 

times. This raised from a few the query, 

Is Brother Russell becoming a Babylonian— preaching in 

a church edifice and wearing a robe? 

It was thought well to explain, for the benefit of all, 
that the use of Church buildings was never condemned 
in the Bible, nor in the DAWN-STUDIES. St. Paul preached 
in a Synagogue whenever he had opportunity; so did the 
other Apostles, and so did Jesus. We do not favor the 
general striving for church edifices because of the expense, 
because the friends of the Truth are generally 
poor, and because what money we all can devote to the 
service of the Lord can be used more wisely as a rule- 
to accomplish a wider spread of the glad tidings of great 

joy. 



R4817 :page 149 

We still view the matter thus. But at London, as in 
New York City (Brooklyn), it is our judgment that the 
cause is best served by having a plain Tabernacle for 
general worship and also for the Society's warehouse 
and office of publication. We have sought to do the Master's 
will, and believe we have done it in both cases. 

As New York City is the American center, so is London 
the British center, or, indeed, the European center. 
It is to the advantage of the entire work everywhere 
that Brooklyn Tabernacle and London Tabernacle, even 
as names alone, should lend their dignity to the cause we 
love to serve. Both buildings are heavily mortgaged. 
The Society has other uses for its income, and is making 
no endeavor nor appeals for money to clear these off. 

As for the gown of plain black: It is simplicity itself, 
and very much more like what the Savior and the Apostles 
wore than is a frock-coat. And as for wearing an 
ordinary, every -day business suit of blue or gray or tan 
in the pulpit— surely it is a bit irreverent, unless as 
emergency might make it necessary. 

Respect for the Lord and for his Truth seems to call 
for respect even in the dress of the one who, for the 
hour, represents the Lord as his mouthpiece, "ambassador," 
or "able minister of the New Covenant," calling 
for the joint-sacrifices necessary to be found before the 
New Covenant can go into effect. We should not be 
understood as laying down a law respecting meats or 
drinks or wearing of apparel. We are merely suggesting 
that a fancy vest, colored tie and business suit do 
not appeal to us as specially to be commended. Rather, 
we would commend to the preaching brethren, so far as 
possible and convenient, a preference for black and 
white apparel— whatever the cut. 

Prejudice is a weed which may flourish in comparatively 
well-kept heart-gardens. But it should always be 
plucked up as soon as discovered, or it will do damage- 
no one can tell how much— to the owner of the garden 
and to his neighbors. 

THE GOLDEN RULE 

The Golden Rule seems not to be fully understood nor 
appreciated by some of God's children who have gone 
beyond the Law which it represents and are seeking to 
sacrifice. The Golden Rule means— be just toward fellowmen, 
giving them the same liberty which you desire and 
claim as your right. Do not attempt to fetter them in 
ways you would not wish them to fetter you. All saints 
should remember that this is simply justice, not sacrifice. 
It is God's command— the very foundation of his throne, 
of his Government. Perhaps no other lesson is more 
needed to be learned by the Church than this. It is violated 
continually in the home and in the Church. Justice, 



before generosity; the Golden Rule, before sacrifice, 
is surely God's order, and all who would be obedient 
to him and well pleasing will surely take heed to watch 
themselves in this respect. 

FALSE DOCTRINE IS BABYLON'S FAULT 

As for the churches nominal being Babylon because 
they meet in fine or poor buildings, with or without 
steeples, this is foolishness, well to be gotten rid of, and 
which none of us ever should have had. Similarly the 
dress of the minister has nothing to do with Babylonishness 
—although we do confess to prejudice against the 
changing of gowns during service and the wearing of 
colored gowns, etc., in Catholic and High Church ceremonials, 
as contrary to the simplicity of Christ. 

Babylon's fault is her false doctrines— the mingled 
wine in her cup— the "Golden Cup" of the Divine Word 
—wherewith she and the world are so intoxicated that 
they cannot understand the Truth, but persecute it. 

To come out of Babylon, therefore, does not mean 
nevermore to worship God in a specially constructed building; 
nor does it mean to do nothing that Babylon does and 
to wear nothing which Babylon approves. This application 
would mean that we might neither sing nor pray nor 
use an organ, etc., because others use these, whom we 
believe have departed from the faith. 

It is difficult, of course, for us to keep our poor heads 
well balanced by the spirit of a sound mind; but the 

R4817 :page 150 

Golden Rule will surely assist. One dear friend claimed 
that he was afraid that others would be "stumbled" by 
these matters— especially that those who have gone out 
from us would use it as a club. Our answer is that those 
who have gone out need not be considered for one moment; 
they will twist and turn everything, for evil anyway. 
If we stopped to heed and please them we would do 
nothing that would please and serve God. 

On the contrary, we believe that the general sentiment 
of thinking and pious people is turning from the 
rough-and-ready preaching, once so approved, to something 
more refined and reverential. There are still good 
people who consider it a sin to wear a collar or a necktie 
even at Divine service, but they are becoming fewer. 

But the Golden Rule leaves these children of God free 
to dress as they please, without others busybodying in 
their affairs. Let experience teach them. Let them learn 
in the School of Christ that the advantages and liberties 
of the Kingdom of God (the Church) consist not in 
meats and drinks and clothing, but in righteousness and 
true holiness, represented by the Wedding Garment, 
"without spot or wrinkle or any such thing." 



R4817 :page 150 

STRENGTH AND PEACE 

"The Lord will give strength unto his people; the 
Lord will bless his people with peace."— Psa. 29:11 

AS WE look back over the years that have 

passed since first we learned to "know the 

joyful sound" of the true Gospel and consecrated 

ourselves fully to the Lord, we 

view with sorrow the imperfections of even 

our best efforts; and as looking forward 

we see the difficulties that seem to obstruct 

our onward course, we shall greatly need 

to reinforce our waning courage with the 

special promises of Divine grace to help in 

every time of need. Among others, we have the blessed 

assurance that "The Lord will give strength unto his 

people"; "Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will 

deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me."— Psa. 50:15. 

As soldiers under our great Captain, we have enlisted 
in no uncertain struggle, unless our own faint-heartedness 
or unfaithfulness should make it so. We are fully 
supplied with the whole armor of God, which will amply 
protect us against the fiery darts of the Adversary, if 
only we accept it and carefully buckle it on. We have 
with us the constant presence of our Captain, so long as 
we are closely following his leading. Above the din of 
battle his inspiring voice may be heard saying, "Fear not, 
little flock; for it is the Father's good pleasure to give 
you the Kingdom"; "Be of good cheer; I have overcome!" 
(Luke 12:32; John 16:33.) If we are weak and 
incline to faint-heartedness, we have only to remember 
the blessed promise, "The Lord will give strength unto 
his people"; and by our faithfulness we shall glorify God, 
who will deliver us from all our foes, both seen and 
unseen. 

Like all others, the Lord's people need fortitude and 
patience, else they might soon become discouraged in the 
conflict with the world, the flesh, and the Adversary. 
They need strength; they need encouragement. In the 
text under consideration, the word strength means, in 
large measure, courage. The Lord will give courage to 
his people. He encourages us in a variety of ways; he 
encourages us through each other, as we build one another 
up in the most holy faith. 

MILK FOR BABES-STRONG MEAT FOR THOSE MORE 
DEVELOPED 

We, nevertheless, look to the individual, innate strength 
and to its importance. "Be of good courage, and he will 
strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord." 
(Psa. 31:24.) We are assured that we shall be strengthened 



in the "inner man" through the Spirit of the Lord. 

None have this particular kind of strength, that of the 

"inner man," except those who have become New Creatures 

in Christ, to whom "old things have passed away, 

and all things have become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) With 

this particular Spirit-begotten class all of the Lord's dealings 

are intended to develop character. 

"Desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may 
grow thereby," and become strong. (I Pet. 2:2.) This 
milk of the Word the Lord gives at first to his children, 
that the new nature may grow thereby and become able 
to digest stronger food and thus develop in character-likeness 
to our Lord. To all his own he has provided 
nourishment— milk for babes, strong meat for those more 
developed. (Heb. 5:12-14.) And any who would be 
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might (courageous) 
will avail himself of the Divine provision. 

Our faith, however, is the basis of both our strength 
and our peace. No matter how fiercely the storms of life 
may assail us, we must never let go of our anchor and 

R4818 :page 150 

allow ourselves to drift; but always remember that "The 

foundation of God standeth sure"; that "His truth is our 

shield and buckler"; that "What he has promised he is 

able also to perform," notwithstanding our human imperfections 

and frailties; that, covering these, we have the 

imputed righteousness of Christ, our Surety and Advocate; 

that "The Father himself loveth us," and that "He 

knoweth our frame and remembereth that we are dust," 

and so has compassion for the sons of his love and is 

very pitiful and of tender mercy. (2 Tim. 2:19; Psa. 91:4; 

Rom. 4:21; John 16:27; Psa. 103:14.) Indeed, 

"What more could he say than to us he hath said" to 

assure our faith and to steady and strengthen our hearts 

to patient endurance in the midst of the trials and conflicts 

in the narrow way of sacrifice? 

With abounding compassion and tenderness our Lord, 
on the last night of his earthly life, bestowed upon his 
beloved disciples his parting blessing, his legacy of peace. 
It was the richest legacy he had to bequeath, and was of 
priceless value. It was the promise of that tranquility of 
soul, that rest and ease of mind which he himself 
possessed— the peace of God. It was the same peace 
which the Father has always enjoyed, even in the midst 
of all the commotion which the permission of evil has 
brought about; but it was not derived from the same 
source. In Jehovah, this peace is self-centered, because 
he realizes in himself omnipotence and Infinite wisdom; 
while the peace of Christ was centered, not in himself, 
but in God, through faith in his wisdom, power and 
grace. So also, if we would have the peace of God, the 
peace of Christ ("my peace"), it must, like his, be 
centered in God, by faith. 

The peace promised is not the short-lived peace of the 



world, which is sometimes enjoyed for a little season; 
but "my peace," the peace of God which Christ himself 
by faith enjoyed, who, "Though he was rich, yet for our 
sakes became poor" (2 Cor. 8:9); who lost friend after 
friend, and in his last hour was forsaken by all of the 
few that remained— the peace that endured through loss, 
persecution, scorn and contempt, and even amidst the 
agonies of the cross. This peace is something which none 

R4818 :page 151 

of the vicissitudes of this life can destroy and which no 
enemy can wrest from us. 

"MARVEL NOT IF THE WORLD HATE YOU" 

"There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked." 
(Isa. 48:22.) "The wicked are like the troubled sea, 
continually casting up mire and dirt." Their hearts are 
not in accord with peace and righteousness, but are filled 
with selfishness. The wicked are self-seeking and grasping; 
filled with anger if they cannot always get what they 
want; with malice if they see some one enjoying what 
they cannot have. All of these things indicate a lack of 
peace. 

To the extent that any of the Lord's people have any 
of these evil propensities they cannot have the "peace of 
God, which passeth all understanding"— which passeth all 
description. It is a rest of heart by faith. In this peace 
lies a satisfaction for all the various qualities of the mind; 
in proportion as the mind develops the ambition of pleasing 
the Lord, of communicating to others the knowledge 
of the Truth and the blessed opportunity of salvation, 
it becomes our ambition to do good, instead of evil. So 
ambition, being turned into a right line, the peace of God, 
which none can comprehend save those who possess it, 
comes to the mind and heart. 

It is not an outward peace, however, for the Lord's 
people, individually and collectively, have most distressing 
experiences. The Church has always been persecuted, 
as Jesus forewarned us: "Marvel not, my brethren, if the 
world hate you"; "If ye were of the world, the world 
would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you."— I John 3:13; John 15:19. 

"IN THE WORLD YE SHALL HAVE TRIBULATION" 

The peace promised is not such as the world can always 
recognize and appreciate, for the possessor of it, 
like the Lord and the Apostles and Prophets, may have 
a stormy pathway. They did not have peace outwardly. 
They were beset, harassed on every hand; they were 
persecuted and obliged to flee from place to place; some 
of the saints of old were stoned to death; some were 
sawn asunder. Yet the peace of God, abounding in their 



hearts, enabled them to endure all these trials joyfully. 

Indeed, that it must be so with all the faithful until all 

the purposes of God in the permission of evil are accomplished, 

we are distinctly forewarned, but with the assurance 

that through all the storms of life this peace 

shall abide— "In the world ye shall have tribulation," but 

"in me ye shall have peace."— John 16:33. 

This promise, that God will give peace to his people, 
seems to apply only to a peace of heart. Our Lord and 
the Apostles possessed it to such an extent that they enjoyed 
themselves much more than did their enemies. 
While Paul and Silas were in prison they sang praises to 
God, instead of berating the governments and threatening 
what would be done to them; instead of butting their 
heads against the bars and saying, "God does not care 
for us; we will go about our own business, hereafter." 
So with us. In proportion as we see matters from the 
Divine viewpoint and appreciate the precious promises 
and let them inspire our hearts, we shall rejoice in those 
promises, and our hearts will be blessed. Even if we 
have trials and difficulties that we are not able to surmount, 
if these are working out for us the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit, we may rejoice and give thanks for 
these evidences of God's love. 

"MY PEACE I GIVE UNTO YOU" 

We see that the peace of God is compatible with great 
commotion and with sorrow and pain of various kinds; 
for it is not dependent upon outward circumstances, but 
upon a proper balancing of the mind and the condition of 
a perfect heart. Such peace— the peace of God— was 
enjoyed by our Lord Jesus in the midst of all the turmoil 
and confusion of his eventful earthly life. And this 
brings us to the consideration of our Lord's last legacy 
to his disciples, when he was about to leave the world, as 
expressed in his own words: "Peace I leave with you, 
my peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth [in 
stinted measure or in perishable quality], give I unto you. 
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." 
-John 14:27. 

The promise in our text— "The Lord will bless his 
people with peace"— evidently belongs to this Age, when 
all creation groans and travails in pain. (Rom. 8:22.) 
When the Millennial Age shall have been ushered in, 
there will be prevailing conditions of peace and thus he 
will give peace to all people. 

Let us, then, have for our watchword, "LOYALTY" 
to God and to the principles of righteousness; and let 
each of us write upon his heart the gracious promise— 
"The Lord will give strength unto his people." Let us be 
faithfully "his people," and let us earnestly desire and 
faithfully use the strength promised. "Faithful is he that 
calleth you, who also will do it"; "He is faithful that 
promised."-IThess. 5:24; Heb. 10:23. 

So then, if you lack the strength or the peace 



promised, the fault is yours, not God's. Either you have 
not the interests of his service closely enough at heart, 
or else you do not make use of the strength he provides. 
"The Lord will give strength unto his people (his trusting, 
faithful servants, those who are using to his praise 
the talents consecrated to their Master, however many or 
few those talents may be); the Lord will bless his people 
with peace." 



R4818 :page 151 

THE RANSOM AND ITS APPLICATION TO ALL MANKIND 

THE word "Ransom" is used in respect to the 
purchase-price of humanity and also in 
connection with the deliverance of mankind 
after having been purchased by that 
price. As an illustration of the two uses 
of the word, we give two texts of Scripture: 

(1) "Who gave himself a Ransom 

for all, to be testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:6.) 

(2) "I will Ransom them from the 
power of the grave." (Hos. 13:14.) In 

these texts we see the two uses of the word "Ransom." 
The word Ransom in the Scriptures is often used in a 
similar manner to the word "redeem." The two words, 
indeed, have the thought of purchase connected with 
them. To redeem is to buy back; to ransom, as used in 
I Tim. 2:6, is to buy back, by giving a price to correspond. 

The Bible sometimes speaks of the death of our Lord 
Jesus Christ as the giving of the price. The Scripture says 
that our Lord Jesus gave himself to be a Ransom-price. 
(Matt. 20:28; Mark 10:45.) He gave himself at Jordan; 
he completed the giving of himself at Calvary. In 
his death he laid down the ransom-price, the price necessary 
for redeeming Adam and all of his race from the 
sentence of death. 

But there is a difference to be observed between the 
laying down of the Ransom-price and the application of 
that Ransom-price. The price was in our Lord Jesus 
himself, but he must lay it down sacrificially before the 

R4819 :page 152 

benefits of it could be given to others. The Scriptures 

show us that, after he had laid down that price, God empowered 

him to make use of it, permitting him to enter 

into the Most Holy, even heaven itself, to do so. He 

makes use of that price, as outlined in the Scriptures, in 

a two-fold offering to God:— 

First, he appropriated of that life which he had laid 
down— the merits of that Ransom-price— to those who 
would constitute his Body, the Church. He himself had 
no sins to cleanse, but those who, according to God's arrangement, 



were to be the members of his Body, had sins; 

and for these he applies his blood as a redemption price 

or merit on their behalf, securing for them, not only release 

from condemnation, but also the opportunity of becoming 

sharers with him in the Ransom work. He has 

not applied the merit of that sacrifice as yet to Adam 

or his children, but merely to those who, in the type, were 

represented by the under-priests, and to the Levites, the 

brethren and servants of the priestly family. 

Secondarily, Christ will make use of his sacrifice on 
behalf of all the people. As was shown in the type, the 
sprinkling of the blood on the mercy-seat at the close of 
the Day of Atonement, which was the second sprinkling, 
was for all the people. The antitype of this act will 
constitute a full offset to the Adamic condemnation. Another 
Scripture, however, shows us that while all the 
people are to come under the direct control of the great 
Messiah, they are not to be turned over perfect, but as 
they are found— in a dying condition, the wrath of God, 
because of imperfection, still being upon them. Then, 
under the New Covenant, of which our Lord is made the 
responsible Mediator, the Great Messiah will take charge 
of "all the people," even while they are still subject 
to the weaknesses resulting from the sentence of death. 
Under this New Covenant, as many of them as will become 
obedient to the laws of Messiah's Kingdom, will 
come into relationship to the Life-Giver, in harmony 
with the text which says, "He that hath the Son hath 
life, and he that hath not the Son shall not see life." 
(I John 5:12; John 3:36.) All of Adam's posterity will 
have an opportunity to accept Jesus, either as his brethren 
at the present time, or as his children in the next 
Age. 

Coming back, then, to the words Ransom and Ransomed: 
They are used in respect to our Lord, to indicate, 
not that he completed the Ransom work when he died, 
but that he there provided the Ransom-price. During his 
Mediatorial reign the whole work of Christ will be that 
of delivering those for whom he gave the Ransom-price. 
In this last use of the word, it would be right to say that 
the Church shares with Christ in this Ransom work of 
delivering the world. This is the thought everywhere 
set before us in the Scriptures. But it would be wrong 
to say that the Church participates in the Ransom-price. 
The Ransom-price was the perfect Man, Jesus, who gave 
himself to be a Ransom-price for all. In that sacrifice 
there is a sufficiency of merit for all of Adam's posterity. 
The Church, therefore, has no participation in the work 
of giving the Ransom-price, though it is to participate 
in the work of Ransoming or recovering those for whom 
the Ransom-price is to be applied. 

The sentence of death, passed upon Father Adam, was 
transmitted in a natural way to all of his children. At 
the end of this Gospel Age, the Great High Priest will 
have finished his atoning work. Then, by applying the 
Ransom-price on behalf of the world, he will become invested 



with all the rights and titles to humanity and to 
the earth. The full price having been paid over in behalf 
of mankind and their home, and having been accepted by 
the Almighty, the "world and the fulness thereof" will 
all be turned over to Christ, who will then be King of 
kings and Lord of lords. Justice will then have no further 
claim upon mankind, all of whom will have been 
turned over to Christ. But he will not recognize those 
who are in a rebellious attitude toward God's 
arrangements. 

Such, however, will be held in restraint and will 
still be under Divine Justice, for the Great Mediator will 
be a representative of Divine Justice, as well as of Divine 
Mercy. During his reign it will be his duty and privilege 
to teach mankind a great lesson. In one of the prophecies 
we read, "Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain 
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and 
he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his 
paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the 
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3; Mic. 4:2.) 
And it shall come to pass that the nation that will 
not go up to Jerusalem will have no blessing.— 
Zech. 14:17-19. 

In other words, while the Millennial Kingdom will be 
fully established, its blessings will be operative only 
toward those who will seek to keep the Divine Law. But 
as the nations perceive that there is no blessing apart 
from the keeping of the Divine Law, they will doubtless 
be influenced to do so. In due time, the light of the 
knowledge of the Lord will fill the whole earth, and ignorance 
and superstition will be supplanted by Divine enlightenment. 
The Scriptures assure us that this New Covenant 
will be made with Israel, and with all mankind, who 
will become Israelites; for God will also give the heathen 
to Messiah, who will be Ruler of all the earth, not merely 
of those who accept his Government. "Ask of me and 
I will give thee the heathen for an inheritance." He will 
rule with the iron rod, to the intent that all mankind may 
learn the Divine Law and have the Divine blessing.— 
Psa. 2:6-12. 



R4819 :page 152 

THE FALL OF SAMARIA 

-JUNE 18.— II KINGS 17:1-18.- 

"He that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly 
be destroyed, and that without remedy."— Proverbs 29:1. 

HOSHEA, King of Israel, the central personage 
of this study, is paid the rather doubtful 
compliment of being less evil in the 
Lord's sight than some of his predecessors. 



Gradually the Assyrian kingdom had extended 

its control to Israel, and Hoshea 

maintained his throne by paying tribute. 

This continued for several years until the 

King of Israel thought himself sufficiently 

in league with the Egyptians on the south 

to refuse further tribute money. In consequence, the 

Assyrian army advanced and laid siege to the capital 

city, Samaria. It seems astounding, indeed, to learn 

that the city withstood the siege for three years. The 

end came in the ninth year of Hoshea, and signified the 

end of the ten-tribe kingdom, the people being transported 

by their captors several hundred miles to another portion 

of the Assyrian empire. 

The decline of Israel as a nation, from the time of 
Solomon, had been a gradual one. The most religiously 
inclined had been attracted to the southern division called 
Judah. The latter, with the smaller tribe of Benjamin, 
not only had the Holy City and the temple, but gradually 
gained all the holy people of Israel, attracted by the worship 

R4819 :page 153 

of Jehovah and repelled from their own tribal homes 
by the prevalent idolatry. 

The ten tribes must have wasted away considerably 
before this final removal of Hoshea and the remnant left 
in Samaria— in all less than twenty -eight thousand, 
whereas the nation had previously numbered millions. 

The fact is that in previous wars captives were taken, 
who, having lost their religion, were Israelites in name 
only; and having no Father in God, nor interest in the 
Abrahamic promise, nor in the land of Israel, were just 
as much at home and just as much in fellowship with 
surrounding conditions and as well suited in religion 
in their new homes as they had been in the old. In a 
word, only twenty -eight thousand remained in the northern 
kingdom who even took pride in the name of Israel; 
and they, as we have seen, were in great part idolaters 
and out of relationship with God. When thinking of the 
ten tribes of Israel "scattered abroad," we should remember 
how few there were of them when the ten-tribe kingdom 
finally died. Whoever of them maintained his 
religious faith in God and observed circumcision in his 
family, thus maintained his membership as an Israelite. 
Others ceased entirely to be Israelites. 

THE OVERTHROW OF ISRAEL A JUDGMENT OF THE 
LORD 

Later on, when the two-tribe kingdom of Judah was 
also carried captive into Babylonia, the division lines 
were lost and the name Jews became dominant and 
synonymous with Israelites. Thus in our Lord's day he 
declared that his mission was to "the lost sheep of the 
House of Israel." So also the Apostle James later wrote 



respecting "the twelve tribes scattered abroad." Some of 

all the tribes were to be found loyal to God, in the surrounding 

nations and in the land of Israel. Those in 

foreign lands, we remember, came up to Jerusalem yearly 

to keep the feast of the Passover, and again to keep the 

Atonement Day celebration. These were not in any 

sense of the word lost, but merely scattered, as the Jews 

of today are scattered, in all parts of the world. 

The overthrow of Israel, recounted in this study, we 
are directly told, was a judgment from the Lord. "Therefore 

R4820 : page 153 

the Lord was very angry with Israel and removed 
them out of his sight; there were none left but the tribe 
of Judah only.— 2 Kings 17:18. 

Sin tends to national destruction in a very natural 
way— by sapping the vitals of the people of the nation. 
But in Israel's case there was something more than this. 
God entered into a special Covenant with that nation by 
which he bound himself and they bound themselves. 
Israel agreed to be God's people, to serve and obey him 
faithfully; and God agreed that, if they would do so, he 
would specially favor them and look out for their interests, 
their flocks, their herds, their health, their prosperity; 
all were to be blessed so long as they were loyal 
and true. On the contrary, God specially pledged himself 
that if they as a people proved unfaithful to the 
Covenant, he would specially chastise them, punish them, 
deliver them to their enemies, etc. Thus Israel's prosperity 
or defeat indicated surely the Lord's favor or disfavor, 
in a manner not applicable to other nations. 

Our lesson recounts the Lord's testimony against his 
people in which he points out wherein they had failed in 
their part of the Covenant. They had done things which 
they should not have done and had left undone things 
which they should have done. Nevertheless, the Lord 
testifies unto Israel and unto Judah through the prophets 
sent to them, "Turn ye from your evil way and keep my 
commandments and my statutes, according to the Law 
which I commanded your fathers and which I sent to you 
by my servants, the Prophets." God did his part, and 
more. Then we read, "Notwithstanding, they would not 
hear, but hardened their necks like the neck of their 
fathers, who believed not in the Lord their God." "A 
stiff neck" is used symbolically to represent a self-willed 
and rebellious attitude of heart. 

DESTROYED WITHOUT REMEDY 

Our text, taken from Proverbs, tells what will be the 
final outcome of any conflict between God and the sinner. 
If reproofs are not rightly received, if they do not have 
a corrective influence, they will have the opposite effect 
—the sinner will be the more obstinate and self-willed 
and opposed to God. The result of such a contest with 



the Almighty must mean their overthrow, their destruction 
—a destruction from which there is no recovery— no 
remedy. Whoever shall be remanded to the Second 
Death, there will be no hope for him. 

But, thank God, this irremediable destruction of the 
Second Death will come only upon wilful evil-doers of 
the class mentioned in this text— often reproved and yet 
stiff-necked. Some of the Church might be classed 
in this category because of previous enlightenment, etc., 
enjoyed, but surely the world in general has not had 
such reproofs and such an intelligent understanding of 
the Lord as would make them properly amenable to the 
Second Death. And God purposes that every member of 
Adam's race must have this one full, complete privilege 
and opportunity for eternal life before he can be sentenced 
to the Second Death. 

The philosophy of this is plain: Adamic death, which 
comes to all men as a result of Adam's sin and his condemnation 
as a sinner, is to be entirely wiped out, and 
Adam and all of his race are to be fully released from 
it. The right to set men free from that sentence was 
secured by the great Redeemer, Jesus, who offered up 
himself a corresponding price for all, to be testified in 
due time. This great fact has been testified to a comparatively 
small number during this Gospel Age— to 
such only as have an ear to hear and the seeing eye of 
faith. These only are set free from Adamic death now 
—and that not actually, but by faith, in order to permit 
them to become sanctified followers of Jesus. 

An important fact, heretofore very generally overlooked, 
is that God's provision through the death of Jesus 
embraces every member of Adam's family as well as himself, 
and is the guarantee, to each and every member, 
of another chance or opportunity for harmony with God, 
aside from the one which Adam had and lost. Those of 
us who, as the Spirit-begotten Church, enjoy this favor 
in the present time, must not expect any further favor 
along this line in the future, for Christ dieth no more; 
and only one share in his redemptive work is provided 
for every member of the race. But so many as do not 
now hear and see and understand the grace of God, must 
be brought to a knowledge of this great truth. This includes 
the heathen as well as many residing in civilized 
lands, the eyes and ears of whose hearts have not seen 
nor heard the true message of Divine grace in Christ 
Jesus, and who, therefore, could not refuse him nor be 
refused by him thus far. 

ISRAEL'S PROMISED RESTITUTION 

When in the future all these people are brought to a 
knowledge of the Truth, the grace of God will be 
to them "a savor of life unto life, or of death unto 
death," as it is now to the Church. 

The Israelites suffered the penalty for their failure 
as a nation; they were destroyed, but not without remedy. 



R4820 : page 154 

Indeed, the Bible tells us that in the end of this Age, as 
soon as the election of the Church shall have been completed 
and the First Resurrection accomplished, God's 
favor will return to Israel, the twelve tribes, and their 
regathering will be the first blessing to humanity under 
Messiah's glorious reign. The Lord's special promise is 
that he will gather them from the North Country, and 
from all the lands whithersoever he has scattered them, 
and that he will bring them into their own land. 

St. Paul brings this matter to our attention very explicitly 
in his letter to the Romans. (1 1:25-32.) The 
logic of his argument should be carefully noted, including 
the fact that Natural Israel will receive mercy at the 
hands of Spiritual Israel— in the Kingdom.— Vs. 32. 

The nation of Israel transgressed Divine commands, 
and was therefore worthy of punishment— but this did 
not signify that that nation would become alienated from 
the Divine mercy which God had already intended and 
had already promised through Abraham. The time for 
the beginning of that mercy did not arrive until seven centuries 
after the narrative of this lesson— not until Jesus 
came to die, the Just for the unjust, to bring us back to 
God as a race— to open up "a new and living way." Thus 
we read, "Christ brought life and immortality to light 
through the Gospel." 

Neither Israel, in the days of Hoshea nor at any other 
time, nor any other nation, knew anything about the life 
and immortality which God purposed to proffer to mankind 
through the Redeemer in due time. As the Apostle again 
says, "This great salvation began to be spoken by our 
Lord and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him." 
-Heb. 2:3. 

It is well for us to keep in memory that God's punishment 
for sin is death; that this punishment came upon 
Father Adam and his entire family because of sin; and 
that thus far all mankind have died because of Adam's 
sin. It is well for us to remember that it is because we 
were all thus dead in trespasses and in sins through 
Adam's disobedience that God provided the Savior and 
his redemptive work. It is well for us to remember that 
this work must be efficacious for every member of our 
race; and that only by having enjoyed his share in the 
Redeemer's sacrificial merit could anybody be consigned 
to the Second Death; and then it will be only on account 
of wilful, deliberate, intentional wrong doing. It 
is well for us to remember that the Second Death is the 
extreme penalty of the Divine Law, and not eternal torment, 
as many of us were mistaught to believe. "The 
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord."— Rom. 6:23. 



R4820 : page 154 

YOUR REASONABLE SERVICE 

--JUNE 25.- 

"What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and to 
love mercy and to walk humbly with thy God?"— Micah 6:8. 

WHO could find fault with these requirements? 

Who could say that in setting such a standard 

for his creatures the Almighty required 

too much? On the other hand, how could 

we imagine a just and loving Heavenly 

Father requiring less than is here stipulated. 

God's law, variously stated, always amounts 

to the same thing. The statement of it, 

as given to the Jews at Mt. Sinai, embodied 

in the Decalogue, corresponds with 

this statement, as does also the presentation of it set 

forth by the great Teacher, saying, "Thou shalt love the 

Lord thy God with all thy mind, soul and strength; and 

thy neighbor as thyself." 

Many of us, after confessing with St. Paul that the 
Divine Law is holy and just and good, have been surprised 
to find that that which our minds heartily approve, 
we are unable to obey— to the full. For thirty-five hundred 
years the Jews have sought to keep that Divine Law, 
under the promise of eternal life for so doing, but none 

R4821 : page 154 

of them have been able to gain the prize. When as a 
nation they realize their inability, and not sooner, they 
will be ready to receive at God's hands, as a free gift 
through the Redeemer, the forgiveness of their violations 
of the Divine Law. And then, under their New Covenant 
(Jer. 31:31; Heb. 8:8-13), they will have Messiah's 
assistance in regaining that perfection of mind 
and body and a "new heart," which will enable them to 
obey in every particular the Divine Law, which all our 
minds recognize as just and true, but which, because of 
heredity, we are unable to perfectly obey in the flesh. 

That blessing, which is soon to come to natural Israel, 
under Messiah's Kingdom and the New Covenant, 
will be extended through them, as the natural seed of 
Abraham, to every nation, kindred and tongue, in harmony 
with the Divine promise made to Abraham. 

A different, although a corresponding favor, is now, in 
advance, bestowed upon a small class gathered from Jews 
and Gentiles, and Scripturally known as the "Church of 
the First-Borns, whose names are written in Heaven." 
These, in advance, realize their inability to keep the 
Divine Law, and by faith lay hold upon the Redeemer's 
merit and consecrate their all to God through him. In 
the Redeemer they are accepted of the Father; their heart 



endeavors for righteousness are recognized, and the 
flesh and its imperfections are renounced and counted 
as dead and are offset by the merit of the Redeemer. 
These are Scripturally classed as members of 
the Great Prophet, Priest, King and Mediator between 
God and men. The thought of our text will be completed 
when all the faithful, as members of the Messiah, 
"the little flock," shall be made joint-heirs with him, as 
"the Bride, the Lamb's Wife." 

ANALYZING OUR SUBJECT 

We may demonstrate to ourselves the truthfulness of 
the foregoing: What is it to do justly? It means much more 
than not to overcharge our neighbor for the goods he 
may purchase of us. It means much more than not to 
defraud him in the making of change. To deal justly 
means justice between servant and master, mistress and 
maid, buyer and seller— that we should do to others as 
we would that they should do to us; it means the strict 
following of the Golden Rule enjoined by the Great 
Teacher. 

Applying this principle of justice to our words, it 
means that we should not speak evil of either friend or 
foe; that we should not even insinuate evil. It means 
that we should not tell unnecessarily what we know to 
be the truth, if it would harm our neighbor, disparage 
him and discredit him in the eyes of others. It means 
that we should love our neighbor and his interests as we 
love our own, and should defend his interests and guard 
them as carefully as we would our own. 

Justice, in order to thus operate in our words and 
deeds, must operate in our hearts— in our minds. "As 

R4821 : page 155 

a man thinketh, so is he." If he thinks unkindly, ungenerously, 

unjustly, he will find it impossible always to 

avoid unkind, unjust, unloving words or actions. "Out 

of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." It 

follows, then, that to do justly signifies absolute righteousness 

in thought, in word, in conduct. Of this none 

of us is capable. The nearest approach to this is 

the perfect or just intention of the heart, covenanted by 

all those who become followers of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

The intentions and good endeavors of these are accepted 

of the Father. As for the world, it will require long years 

of assistance and uplifting out of weaknesses and imperfections 

of the flesh to bring them to where their 

thoughts, words and deeds will be absolutely just and in 

full accordance with the Golden Rule. Their attainment 

of this will mean their getting rid of all the imperfections 

of the flesh and, by full restitution, returning to 

the image and likeness of God lost in Adam. 

TO LOVE MERCY 



All recognize mercy as a very proper, a very desirable 
quality. All realize their need of Divine mercy. All 
should know that the Divine purpose is that only those 
who show mercy to others will themselves receive mercy 
at the Lord's hands. Many, however, while admitting all 
this and while seeking to practice mercy, do not love it. 
Rather, they love vengeance, and are merely constrained 
to mercy by the laws of the land, public sentiment and the 
Word of God. Time and again this has been shown in 
the case of lynchings. Mobs have gathered for the infliction 
of punishment, glad of an opportunity for setting 
aside mercy and letting loose justice, as they might express 
it. And in those mobs have been many guilty of 
perhaps as great crimes as the one who was mobbed. 
"O, consistency, thou art ajewel!" 

WALK HUMBLY WITH THY GOD 

By a strange perversity of our fallen nature, those 
most able and willing to follow the first two requirements 
are apt to be the most delinquent in this third requirement. 
In a word, the just and merciful are very apt to 
find themselves possessed of a spirit of pride, a feeling of 
superiority to their fellows, a hindrance to their having a 
humble walk with God. Those most humble toward the 
Almighty are frequently those who have had great sins 
and great weaknesses, which have helped to humble them. 
Thus the great Apostle, St. Paul, was allowed to retain a 
measure of visual weakness as a reminder of the time 
when he was a persecutor of Christ— of the "Church 
which is his Body"— as a reminder of how the grace of 
God apprehended him on the way to Damascus, and that 
without the Divine interposition he might have continued 
hopelessly blind. 

The Apostle refers to his weakness of eyes as a thorn 
in the flesh, a messenger of Satan permitted to buffet 
him. The Lord declined to remove the affliction, doubtless 
because it would keep the Apostle humble enough to 
attend properly to the great work God had for him to 
do without being puffed up to his own injury. The 
Divine message was, "My grace is sufficient for thee; my 
strength is made perfect in weakness." Realizing the 
import of this the Apostle cried out, "Rather, therefore, 
will I glory in mine infirmities that the power of Christ 
may rest upon me." 

And so may all God's people, while realizing their inability 
to live up to these Divine requirements, rejoice in 
the Divine provision on their behalf that God's grace is 
sufficient for them, where their weakness is recognized 
and confessed and abhorred, and his mercy appreciated, 
sought and accepted. 



R4821 : page 155 



BIBLE STUDY CLASS-EXTENSION 

AS WE have recognized the growth of grace 

and knowledge amongst the Brethren in 

the various Bible Study Classes we have 

thought and prayed over the matter of their 

usefulness as laborers in the Vineyard. At 

first the Society encouraged and assisted 

several of the Brethren in outside work. 

However, as others made application for 

similar recognition we soon saw that the 

Society would be in danger of getting into 

trouble, either by endorsing and assisting some not 

worthy, or in failing to assist some who were worthy. 

And anyway, the attempt of the Society has always been 

to follow the Apostolic injunction, "Without partiality 

and without hypocrisy."— James 3:17. 

We therefore withdrew all special co-operation 
outside the regular Pilgrim force, whose names appear 
on the last page of THE WATCH TOWER or are 
specially announced. We cannot shirk responsibility 
for these, and, without wishing to cultivate a captious 
or critical or fault-finding spirit, we now say that 
we earnestly request that the dear members of the 
Society everywhere shall report anything in the conduct 
or teachings of the Pilgrims which to them may 
appear contrary to the instructions of the Word— at variance 
with the "faith once delivered to the saints." Do 
not discuss such matters slanderously, but report them 
kindly and lovingly to the Head Office at Brooklyn— 
"Pilgrim Department." It does not follow that we will 
agree with you and censure the Pilgrim. But as the Pilgrims 
represent the Society it is proper that we should 
know the influence of their lives and any peculiarity of 
their teachings. This would not be in the nature of 
slander unless the narrator attempted to color the facts 
and to make out a case of condemnation. 

THE NEW EXTENSION PLAN 

About six months ago a plan developed by which we 
believe the Society will be able to co-operate with hundreds 
of dear Brethren in the exercise of their talents in 
the spread of the Truth. This plan, so far as we can 
see, is as free from objection of every kind as any human 
plan could be. It will make the different classes responsible 
for the Extension Work, and the Society will thus 
be working through and in conjunction with the classes. 
It is not a plan by which one class will undertake to 
shepherd another or several classes indefinitely. It is 
our thought that we expect Divine Providence gradually 
to raise up in each class Elder Brothers who would be 
thoroughly competent to care for the local interests, and 
before long be able also to engage in the Extension Work. 
The plan we suggest relates only to Extension, as follows: 



(1) Any class is invited to join in this Extension 
movement provided it has amongst its regularly chosen 

R4822 : page 155 

Elders a sufficient amount of talent available for outside 
work, without jeopardizing the welfare and prosperity of 
the class. 

(2) If a class have a superfluity of ability amongst 

its Elders, more than is necessary for its own proper prosperity, 

it should consider its own surrounding territory 

in which there are no classes, and should select several 

fields for active service. The class should designate 

which of its Elders it believes to be well qualified for the 

giving of three Chart Talks, and which of its Elders 

R4822 : page 156 

would be qualified to give three Talks afterward on the 

Day of Judgment, Ransom and Restitution, and the Manner 

of the Lord's Coming. The Society is prepared to 

supply Charts for such use, and also a little pamphlet 

for such speakers, giving outlines for three Chart Discourses 

—the same to be filled out by the speaker. The three 

succeeding Talks could be given very much along the 

lines of the presentation in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 

or those Chapters might be read after thorough study and 

practice, if that prove the most advantageous method. 

At the conclusion of each discourse the following one 
should be announced and the hearers and their friends 
cordially invited. At the closing of the third Chart Talk, 
the speaker should announce the name and topic of the 
Brother who would speak on the following Sunday, making 
such interesting and voluntary comments as the situation 
would permit. At the close of the second speaker's 
three meetings it would be well to inquire how many of 
the audience felt sufficient interest in Bible Study along 
dispensational lines to come together regularly as a class 
of Bible Students. The speaker should explain the Berean 
Study Classes and should counsel as respects the most 
suitable time and place for such classes, and should promise 
that, if desired, the class sending him would send 
some one of their number to assist them until they should 
get started in these Berean Studies and be able to make 
progress by themselves, etc. 

(3) The getting up of these Extension Classes would 
involve labor and expense. Sometimes court-houses, 
sometimes the school-room, sometimes the Church lecture-room, 
sometimes an unused chapel, sometimes a picture 

theatre, sometimes a conservatory of music— as the 
case may be— is obtainable. Quite frequently those in 
charge— learning that the meetings are for Bible Study, 
and that no admission fee is charged, and that no collection 
is lifted— are willing to give the premises free, or 
with a nominal charge for the janitor's service or light 
or heat, etc. Sometimes a small price must be paid. But 



in any event it should be thoroughly understood that from 
three to six meetings are purposed and are to be advertised 
for successive Sundays. And payment should be 
made in advance and a receipt secured, so that there 
might be no misunderstanding before the advertising 
matter would be prepared for circulation. 

(4) In connection with all such meetings the Society 

is glad to co-operate. It will furnish free copies of Everybody's 
Paper, on the back of which will be an announcement 
of the Chart Talks for each of the first three Sundays. 
Everything will be complete except the name of the 
meeting-place and the dates. These could be printed in 
by a local printer at a very small cost, or could be 
stamped on with a rubber stamp. The circulation of these 
papers will mean the distribution of many sermons, which 
may do good work, aside from those who will be drawn to 
the public gathering. We will supply these in proportion 
of one to every six of the English-speaking population of 
any town, district or city, upon application. The population 
figures include children, and one in six would generally 
represent the number of families. 

The expenses for the meetings the classes are usually 
able to bear, and the traveling expenses for close-by towns 
is small. However, the Society will be pleased to co-operate 
with any classes not prepared to bear the full 
expenses of these meetings, provided the report sent in 
seems to justify the expenditure. In making such a report 
the class, through its Secretary, should give us particulars 
and say what proportion of expense the class is 
prepared to bear and how much money it would be necessary 
for the Society to contribute, in order to carry out 
the programme. 

(5) The Society does not wish to deal with the speakers 
directly, but prefers that they should be responsible 

to the Ecclesia which sends them forth, even as Paul and 
Barnabas were sent forth, first by the Church at Corinth, 
and made their reports directly thereto. The Society prefers 
to have reports monthly, on the printed blank which 
we supply, through the duly elected Secretary of the Class. 

(6) All correspondence (except such as is strictly personal 
and could be attended to only by Brother Russell) 

should be addressed International Bible Students Association, 

care of Extension Dep't. All correspondence on 

this subject should be addressed in America to the Brooklyn 

Tabernacle; in Great Britain to the London Tabernacle; 

in Australia to Melbourne, and in the Scandinavian 

and German countries to their respective offices. 

(7) What we have said foregoing in respect to English 
meetings may be applied equally in respect to services 
in other languages in proportion as opportunities permit. 

THIS WORK ALREADY COMMENCED 

We have already made a trial along the above lines. 
Some seem not to have gotten our thought fully on some 
points. Nevertheless the good work has already commenced. 



We have already reports from 145 classes. And 

already 512 meetings have been held, with 16,392 in attendance, 

as shown by reports up to April 1 . Let the good 

work go on wisely, moderately, lovingly, zealously! The 

harvest is great; the laborers are few in comparison to 

the great field to be reaped. 

Let us emphasize again in respect to all communications 
on every subject— that the Society, and not individuals, 
should be addressed, and, if convenient, the Department 
should be indicated on the envelope. Letters otherwise 
addressed will be more or less likely to fail of prompt 
attention; individuals may be sick or absent, but the Departments 
remain, and always give prompt attention. 



R4822 : page 156 

LOOSING THE FOUR WINDS OF HEAVEN 

OUR recent visit to Europe revealed no more 
unrest amongst the people than our previous 
one. Indeed, we were surprised to find 
so many evidences of prosperity everywhere 
and so few manifestations of violent 
discontent. Some residents confirmed this 
view, while others thought that there is a 
deep undercurrent of discontent not manifest 
on the surface. Our readers know that 
for some years we have been expecting 
this Age to close with an awful time of trouble, and we 
expect it to break out with suddenness and force not long 
after October, 1914, which, so far as we can understand 
the Scriptures, is the date at which the Times of the Gentiles 
—the lease of earth's dominions to the Gentiles— will 
expire; the time, therefore, when Messiah's Kingdom will 
be due to begin its exercise of power, which the Scriptures 
declare will dash the nations in pieces as a 
potter's vessel. By that time we think the Scriptures 
indicate that the Church will be complete and will have 
passed beyond the second veil into the "most holy" and to 
perfection of spirit nature by a share in the First Resurrection. 
Nevertheless, how this is all to come about, as 
we have heretofore declared, is not plain to us— how it 
will be that all of the Church class will die before that 
date, changed in the moment of their dying, "in the 
twinkling of an eye." 
But while considering these perplexities, and considering 

R4822 : page 157 

also the fact that we have no fault to find 

with the chronological features of the Bible, our 

mind is directed to an old Scripture which suddenly 

seems to have a new importance. We refer 

to the statement, "I saw four angels standing 



on the four corners of the earth, holding the four 
winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on 
the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.... Hurt not 
the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed 
the servants of our God in their foreheads."— Rev. 7:1-3. 

We have long seen that these symbolic winds represent 
strife, anarchy, the great time of trouble which is 
held in check by Divine power until the completion of the 
harvest work— the sealing of the living members of the 
elect class with Present Truth. We long ago pointed out 
that these four winds, let loose, coming together, will constitute 
a whirlwind, which is the symbolical figure used in 
the Bible to represent the great time of trouble approaching. 
And this whirlwind corresponds to the typical one 
by which Elijah, the prototype of the Church, was taken 
away. Winds also represent false doctrines.— 
Ephesians 4:14. 

"THE PRINCE OF THE POWER OF THE AIR" 

Nothing that we see further contradicts any of the 
foregoing, but rather, corroborating it, throws a light 
upon it. The additional thought is that these winds or 
powers of the air, held in restraint, represent the fallen 
angels, whose Prince is Satan, "the Prince of the power 
of the air." Our thought is that the evil angels would 
long ago have done injury to the symbolical earth, sea 
and trees, had it not been for the restraint of Divine power. 
Symbolically, the earth represents organized society; 
the sea represents the disorganized masses, and the trees 

R4823 : page 157 

represent the household of faith. The letting loose suddenly 
of the fallen angels will account well for the suddenness 
of the coming trouble, which everywhere in the 
Scriptures is one of its particular features— "in one 
hour"; "suddenly as travail upon a woman"; "as it was in 
the days of Noah," and "as it was in the days of Lot." 

Again there is a resemblance between the days of 
Noah and the days of Lot, not merely in respect 
to the suddenness of the calamity which came, but 
also in regard to the violence and licentiousness of those 
periods. Already human prejudice and passions are 
manifesting a heat such as never before was known— and 
this, notwithstanding the much greater provision of army 
and police regulations for the control of society. If discontent, 
selfishness, passion, frenzy, can sway mankind 
under present conditions, what may we expect when the 
"powers of the air" shall be allowed to gain a temporary 
liberty for the very purpose of manifesting the evil tendencies 
of the unregenerate heart; for the very purpose of 
demonstrating that no liberty can bring true happiness, 
except that which is in full accord with the Divine 
requirement? 



R4823 : page 157 

"THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST-BORNS" 

"The General Assembly of the Church 
of the First-borns. "--Heb. 12:22,23. 

THE Church of the First-borns" is not to be 

confounded with the Church of the First 

Resurrection. The word first, in the phrase 

First Resurrection, signifies better, superior. 

The First Resurrection includes only the 

Lord and "the Church, which is his Body"; 

in other words, the Bride Class. But in 

this glorified Church of the First-borns are 

included all those who are born of the 

Spirit. Those who are to be of the spirit 

nature will be those who have been developed throughout 

the Gospel Age— before God's favor goes to the world. 

This Church of the First-borns includes all who come 

into covenant relationship with God before the New 

Covenant is put into force. Some will have part (an inferior 

part, however, to that of the Church) with the 

great "High Priest of our Profession" in instituting the 

New Covenant. They will all have some share with him 

in dispensing the blessings of the New Covenant to all 

the families of the earth— to Israel first, and then to all 

nations. 

"YE ARE COME UNTO MT. ZION, THE HEAVENLY 
JERUSALEM" 

This Church of the First-borns is prophetically pictured 
in the Old Testament in connection with the Passover. 
In that night when all the first-born of Egypt were 
slain, all of the first-born of Israel were passed over. 
These escaped because of the blood on the lintels of their 
houses and because of their partaking of the lamb within. 
We know that afterward all of the first-born of Israel 
were exchanged for the one tribe of Levi; and that this 
tribe was separated or divided into two parts— one a 
priestly class and the other a servant class. The former 
were called Priests; the latter Levites; though, of course, 
all were Levites. These two classes were types of the 
Church of the Gospel Age. 

"But ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the City 
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; to the General 
Assembly of the Church of the First-borns." (Heb. 12:22,23.) 
More properly we understand this to signify 
that we have approached— this is that to which we are 
coming— it is in sight. Some have already reached it. 
Our Lord has reached the goal. And some others of 
the First-borns have also reached the goal; and some of 
us have not yet reached it. But this is what we are 



approaching. We shall all have come into power and into 
our place in the Divine Plan, at the close of this Gospel 
Age. Thereupon will follow the "time of trouble" with 
which this Age will end, typified by the trembling of the 
mountain of Sinai. Then, in the same connection, we 
read that we are approaching an innumerable company 
of angels. 

The Apostle seems to be here setting before us 
the glories of the future. Not only shall we see our 
Heavenly Father and our Heavenly Lord, and be ushered 
into the Assembly of the Church of the First-borns, but 
we shall be ushered into the presence of an innumerable 
company of angels. These are the angels who encamp 
around about those that fear the Lord and deliver them. 
(Psa. 34:7.) They are sent to be ministers for those who 
shall be heirs of salvation. (Heb. 1:14.) They have 
been with us here overseeing our interests; and it will 
be part of our joy on the spirit plane to make their acquaintance. 
If the Apostle had neglected to mention 
these, we would think it strange; for he is enumerating 
the things to which we are approaching. 

Thus we see that the Church of the First-borns includes 
the "Great Company" of the Levites as thoroughly 
as it includes the smaller company of the Priests. As the 
Levites had no inheritance in the land, so not only the 
"Little Flock" but also the "Great Company," the servant 
class, the companions of the Bride, have no share in the 
earthly inheritance, but will have a share in the heavenly 
inheritance. 



R4824 : page 158 

ALL THINGS TO ALL MEN-WINNING SOME 

WE ARE well aware how our foes seek to 
put an evil construction upon everything 
the Editor says and does. The Adversary 
is continually on the alert to take advantage 
of human weaknesses, prejudices, 
etc., and to slander, malign and suggest 
evil in respect to everything. Our Lord 
called attention to this in his own case. 
He says that when John the Baptist came 
living an abstemious life the people said, 
"He hath a devil and is mad." And when the Son of 
Man came eating and drinking, they said, "Behold a gluttonous 
person, a wine-bibber." In a word, there is nothing 
that either God or his people can do that the Adversary, 
"the accuser of the Brethren," and those who 
have his fault-finding spirit, cannot use as an occasion for 
fault-finding. "As he was, so are we in the world." 
Those out of harmony with the Gospel we preach, 
and those of a jealous spirit are grieved to note the 
blessing of the Lord connected with the Harvest work. The 



very blessing for which we have been striving for forty 
years, and the very blessing which we know from the Scriptures 
can last but a brief time, excites our foes to envy, 
anger, hatred, slander. They convince themselves that 
everything we may do to co-operate with the Lord in the 
attainment of the wide publicity of the Truth must be 
evil. Thus we are charged with pride and ambition, etc., 
because we are making use of business methods to promulgate 
the "good tidings." 

We quote St. Paul's words, "It is a light thing that I 
should be judged of you or of any man; yea, I judge 
not mine own self. There is one that judgeth me, even 
God." We think it not worth while to give explanations 
to our foes respecting our reasons for permitting 
our portrait in the newspapers, on the bill-boards, etc.; 
nor need we explain to them why we wear a silk hat. 
It is none of their business. And if they were as decent 
as worldly people in the matter of minding their own 
business, it would be to their advantage, both for the 
present and for the future life. They should remember 
St. Paul's advice, "Study to be quiet and to mind your 
own business."— I Thess. 4:11. 

To our friends we say, We have changed in no particular. 
Our decided preference would be for a very 
quiet life. It is painfully annoying to us to be so prominently 
in the public eye. We could easily end it all and 
drop back again into obscurity. Why do we not do so? 
Because, to our understanding, that would not be God's 
arrangement. We believe that it is of him that the Truth 
has a flare-up of popularity at this time— to be followed 
very shortly, we believe, with an apparently disastrous 
climax, which will be all the more hard to bear because 
of the wide-spread publicity. As it was only five days 
between the time when the people cried, "Hosanna," before 
our Lord, until they crucified him, so we expect no 
real popularity from the world, nor from the chief priests, 
scribes and Pharisees of our day, without its reaction. 

Although thus expecting we are using the present opportunity 
for all that it is worth and are not shunning 
to declare the whole counsel of God as wisely and as 
lovingly, yet as faithfully, as we know how. We leave 
our case and that of our traducers in the hands of the 
Lord and will be satisfied with his decision. 

When God's time shall come to say, "It is enough!" 
we will be glad to experience the promised "change." 
But meantime we will count our afflictions as light as possible 
and rejoice in them and in all of our experiences. 
Neither the slander nor other oppositions of our enemies 
shall swerve us from the path which we believe is marked 
out for us by our Lord.-Matthew 5:11,12; 11:18,19. 



R4823 : page 158 

"SUFFER LITTLE CHILDREN TO COME" 



PARENTS HAVE INQUIRED on several 

occasions respecting their children and how 

they should in some manner indicate that 

they had dedicated them to the Lord. We, of 

course, declined to baptize the infants, because 

such a course would have been contrary 

to the Word of God— because baptism 

is therein stated to be for believers— 

an outward expression or symbolization of 

their consecration to the service of the 

Lord, even unto death, and of their faith that, so doing, 

they would be sharers with the Lord in the likeness of 

his resurrection. 

However, we remembered how Samuel in childhood 
had been presented to the Lord in consecration, and of 
how our own parents had told us that they had devoted 
us to the Lord and his service in infancy, and of how all 
Jewish boys were, in a sense, set apart to holiness, in 
harmony with the Lord's will. We remembered also how 
children were brought to Jesus by their parents, that he 
should bless them or pray a blessing upon them. We remember 
that the disciples thought this too insignificant a 
work for the Master and were sending them away, when 
Jesus called to them, saying, "Suffer (permit) the little 
children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of 
such is the Kingdom of God." (Mark 10:14.) We gave 
notice that hereafter we will have a Child-Blessing Service 
in the evening of each Sunday we are in Brooklyn. 
And we see no reason why we may not extend this opportunity 
to any who desire it on the occasion of our visit 
to any of the classes— in conjunction with the less public 
meeting. 

It is our opinion that the influence of this service upon 
the parents and upon the children will be favorable, impressing 
upon the former their responsibilities. The fact 
that the children have been formally devoted to God in 
public may assist the parents in fulfilling their obligations 
and later assist the children as they shall come to a 
knowledge of the fact that they were thus committed to 
Divine care by their parents. 

Nothing in this, however, should be understood as signifying 
a law, or even an obligation or custom. It is arranged 
merely for the convenience of those who desire 
it. Nor need such a service be performed merely by one 
person. Anyone serving as a minister of the Truth 
would, at the request of the parents of an infant, be fully 
justified in thus publicly stating the matter and asking 
the Divine blessing. 



THUS MAY HE BLESS AND KEEP THEE 
NUMBERS 6:24. 



The Lord bless thee! 

How shall he bless thee? 

With the gladness that knoweth no decay; 

With the riches that cannot pass away; 

With the sunshine that makes an endless day— 

Thus may he bless thee! 

And keep thee ! 

How shall he keep thee? 

With the all-covering shadow of his wings; 

With the strong love that guards from evil things; 

With the sure power that safe to glory brings— 

Thus may he keep thee! 



R4824 : page 159 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRANTS 

THE reports of the celebration of the Memorial 
Supper this year have come in much 
more satisfactorily than on any previous 
occasion. The total number celebrating the 
Memorial reported up to this writing is 
ten thousand five hundred and seventy. We 
will probably hear later from a sufficient 
number to run this total to twelve thousand. 
Many will be interested to know how the 
different Ecclesias stand numerically. For 
their satisfaction we append the numbers from fifty upward. 
These numbers, as a whole, of course, are very 
small, as compared with the large organizations of Christendom, 
but we believe that they represent such as have 
really made quite full and intelligent consecration of their 
lives to God, such as are able to give a reason for the hope 
that is in them, in meekness and reverence. We must assume 
that of our thirty to fifty thousand WATCH TOWER 
readers more than the aforementioned number partook 
of the Memorial Bread and Cup, but why they failed to 
report we cannot understand. So far as we have knowledge 
the Lord's people have never had, in late years at 
least, a celebration of deeper spiritual significance, nor one 
more thoroughly appreciated, both as respects the merit 
of our Lord's death and our pledge to partake of his cup. 

PARTICIPANTS IN LARGER ECCLESIAS 

Brooklyn, N.Y., 461; Chicago, 111., 390; Pittsburg, 
Pa., 330; Boston, Mass., 280; Philadelphia, Pa., 175; Los 
Angeles, Cal., 175; Cleveland, Ohio, 145; Washington, 
D.C., 133; St. Paul, Minn., 120; St. Louis, Mo., 114; 
Seattle, Wash., 110; Toronto, Ont., 110; Providence, R.I., 
105; Dayton, Ohio, 97; Indianapolis, Ind., 96; Buffalo, 
N.Y., 85; Detroit, Mich., 83; Bristol, Eng., 80; Cincinnati, 
Ohio, 77; Oakland, Cal, 76; Sheffield, Eng., 73; Orebro, 



Sweden, 72; Stockholm, Sweden, 72; Lancaster, Pa., 
71; Columbus, Ohio, 70; Lynn, Mass., 68; Toledo, Ohio, 
65; Kingston, Jamaica, 63; Portland, Ore., 62; San Antonio, 
Tex., 61; Baltimore, Md., 60; Springfield, Mass., 
58; Kansas City, Mo., 58; Pasadena, Cal., 56; Binghamton, 
N.Y., 55; Houston, Texas, 55; Richmond, Va., 55; 
Camberwell, Jamaica, 53; Spokane, Wash., 53; Atlanta, 
Ga., 51; Birmingham, Ala., 50. 

Additional reports from England have just been 
received and are as follows: London Tabernacle 
and suburban districts, 515; Manchester, Eng., 140; 
Liverpool, Eng., 67. The report from Glasgow, 
Scotland, is delayed. It should be in the neighborhood 
of 300. If matters progress as we hope, 
there will probably be over 500 next year reporting from 
Travancore District, India. We will hope also for some 
reports from Africa. Meantime we remark that two of 
the above reports are from Jamaica, the classes being 
composed almost exclusively of negroes. The Lord be 
praised for the encouragement of numbers, but specially 
for the evidences of spiritual prosperity! 



R4824 : page 159 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK PROSPERING 

GLAD ARE WE to report that the Colporteur 

Work is showing a considerable 

improvement this year in America. The 

dear laborers in this part of the Harvest 

field are taking fresh courage, as we hoped 

they would. The Swedish field is also 

yielding good results. We are hoping for 

fresh enthusiasm in Norway, Denmark, 

Germany and Great Britain, where there 

seems to have been a slacking of the hands 

and a weariness in well-doing and a fainting by the way. 

We have every reason to believe that the present year 
may be one of the best ever known in the harvest work. 
The religious public are becoming more and more awake 
to the necessity for some clearer light upon God's Word, 
and prejudice seems to be giving way to reason, except 
with a bigoted few, with whom the Lord will have, doubtless, 
some other way of dealing in his own due time. 

The field in Great Britain appears to us as most fertile. 
We find that the printing and binding there can be 
done more cheaply still than here. And this means that 
the British, where times appear to be stringent, can be 
supplied with cloth-bound Volumes at One Shilling per 
copy, and the Colporteurs can have them at one-half of 
this, plus carriage. This extremely low price should 
greatly augment the circulation of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES in Great Britain. And the financial stringency 
there should make the people the more anxious for the 



reading matter, which will explain to them why creation 
groans at present and also of the glorious arrangement of 
the Divine Plan for its relief. 

We know of no more important part of the harvest 
work than that served by the dear Colporteurs. A very 
large proportion of those now enjoying "Present Truth" 
have had it thus brought to their notice. In this way many 
can be reached who could never be reached through the 
public platform; many who never attend religious services, 
and yet are hungering for the Truth, have it thus brought 
to their attention. The wide publication of the sermons 
seems to be helping to pave the way for the Colporteurs. 
Many of the unprejudiced purchase at once upon learning 
that Pastor Russell is the Author of the Books. 



R4825 : page 159 

WESTERN ITINERARY SERVICES 

Date. City. 

Friday, June 9, Cleveland, O 

Saturday, " 10, Indianapolis, Ind 

Sunday, " 1 1, St. Louis, Mo 

Tuesday, " 13, Kansas City, Mo 

Thursday, " 15, Wichita, Kans 

Friday, " 16, Pueblo, Colo 

Saturday, " 17, Colorado Springs, Colo 

Sunday, " 18, Denver, Colo 

Wednesday, " 21, Salt Lake City, Utah 

Friday, " 23, Los Angeles, Cal 

Saturday, " 24, Santa Cruz, Cal 

Sunday, " 25, San Francisco, Cal 

Monday, " 26, Oakland, Cal 

Tuesday, " 27, Sacramento, Cal 

Thursday, " 29, Portland, Ore 

Saturday, July 1, Tacoma, Wash 

Sunday, " 2, Seattle, Wash 

Tuesday, " 4, Victoria, B.C 

Wednesday, " 5, Vancouver, B.C 

Friday, " 7, Calgary, Alta 

Sunday, " 9, Winnipeg, Man 

Tuesday, " 11, Duluth, Minn 

Sunday, " 16, Toronto, Ont 

--FOR THE INTERESTED- 

Time. Place. 

2:30 p.m., K. of P. Auditorium 

9:30 a.m., The Odeon, Grand & Finney Aves 

2:30 p.m., Evanston Hall, 1013 Holmes St 

10:00 a.m., Crawford Theater, Topeka & William. 

3:00 p.m., Grand Opera House, 47 Main 

2:30 p.m., Temple Theatre, Nevada & Kiowa 



10:00 a.m., Woodman Hall, 1715 Cal. St 

10:30 a.m., Knights Columbus Hall, E. 1st So. St 

10:30 a.m., Elks' Old Hall, 231 Spring St 

10:00 a.m., Hackley Hall 

10:00 a.m., Lyric Hall, 513 Larkin St 

10:00 a.m. & 2:00 p.m., First Baptist Church, Telegraph Ave. 

2:00 p.m., Redman's Hall., 10th St., bet. I & J 

10:30 a.m., & 2:30 p.m., I.O.O.F. Hall, E. 6th & E. Alder... 
10:00 a.m., & 3:00 p.m., Masonic Temple, 736 St. Helens Ave. 

10:00 a.m., Faurot's Assembly Hall, East Pine 

10:00 a.m., Broad St. Hall 

9:30 a.m., I.O.O.F. Hall, Pender & Hamilton 

10:00 a.m. & 2:00 p.m., Eagle Hall, 1st St. W 

10:30 a.m., Odd Fellows' Temple, Kennedy St 

9:30 a.m., The Auditorium, 3d Ave. E. & 1st St 

10:00 a.m., Broadway Hall, 450 Spadina Ave 

--FOR THE PUBLIC - 



Time. 



Place. 



7:30 p.m. 
8:00 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:45 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
8:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
8:00 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 



B. of L. E. Audit'm, St. Clair & Ont. 

K. of P. Auditorium. 

The Odeon, Grand & Finney. 

Convention Hall, 13th & Central Sts. 

Crawford Theatre, Topeka & William. 

Grand Opera House, 4th & Main Sts. 

Temple Theatre, Nevada & Kiowa. 

Auditorium Theatre, 14th & Curtis Sts. 

Salt Lake Theatre, State & 1st So. Sts. 

Auditorium, 5th & Olive Sts. 

Casino Theatre. 

Dreamland Rink, Steiner St. 

First Baptist Church, Telegraph Av. 

Clunie Theatre, K St., bet. 8th & 9th. 

Armory, 10th, 11th, Couch & Davis. 

Tacoma Theatre, 9th & C Sts. 

Dreamland Pavilion, 7th Ave. & Union. 

A.O.U.W. Hall, Blanchard & Yates. 

Vancouver Horse Show Bldg. 

Al Azhar Temple, 506 17th Ave. West. 

Walker Theatre. 

The Auditorium. 

Massey Hall, Shuter & Victoria Sts. 



page 161 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII JUNE 1 No. 1 1 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 163 

Wisdom From Above the Noblest 
Science 163 

Chicago Dissatisfied With Revivals 164 

Tameness Emptying the Churches 165 

Right Habits of Thought 165 

The Truth of a Thing is But One of 

the Tests 165 

Sowing and Reaping 167 

The Sin Unto Death 169 

The New Will Cannot Sin While It 
Remains a New Will 170 

Could Our Example Lead Another Into 

the Second Death? 170 

Sennacherib Turned Back 171 

Jehovah's Suffering Servant 172 

Ransom— Ransom-Price— Sin Atonement 173 

"O, Glorious Day" (Poem) 173 

Some Interesting Letters 174 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 



not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



FIVE-DAYS BIBLE STUDENTS CONVENTION 

Oakland, San Rafael and San Francisco brethren extend a 
most cordial invitation to all outside friends to attend the 
5-day joint-local Convention in San Francisco— June 22, 23, 
24, 25 and Oakland June 26. Brother Russell will speak 
twice in San Francisco— June 25— and in Oakland June 26. 
Pilgrim service will be arranged for all days. Opportunity 
for water baptism will be arranged in Oakland June 26. 

Arrangements will be made for visiting friends. Rooms 
may be engaged in advance at 50 cents, 75 cents, $ 1 and up 
per day. Send full data and money as soon as possible to 
"Sec'y Hotel Committee, I.B.S.A.," 2018 Green street, San 
Francisco. Data should show sex, color, those that wish to 
room together or are willing to share room and bed to save 
expense, also rate desired, exact dates, etc., and hour and 
route of expected arrival, if known. Free sleeping accommodations 
will be furnished by local brethren to those that can 
come, but cannot afford room rent; these should also advise 
promptly in advance. Visitors' mail may be sent in care of 
above address. 

Meetings and headquarters for four days in San Francisco 
will be at Lyric Hall, 513 Larkin street, with public lectures 
afternoon and evening of Sunday, June 25, at Dreamland 
Rink. 

Meetings and headquarters in Oakland, June 26, will be at 
corner of Jones street and Telegraph avenue. 

TORONTO, ONT., CONVENTION, JULY 15-17 

All services for the interested in Broadway Hall, 450 



Spadina Ave. On Sunday, July 16th, Brother Russell will 
address the general public at 3 p.m., and again at 7.30 p.m. 
in Massey Hall, corner of Victor and Shuter Sts. 

The Eastern Canadian Passenger Association, embracing 
the territory east of and including Port Arthur, Sault Ste. 
Marie and the St. Clair and Detroit Rivers has granted a rate 
of one fare for the round trip plus 25c. on the certificate plan. 
Buy a single trip ticket to Toronto and secure a standard 
certificate showing that you have purchased a one-way full-fare 
ticket to Toronto. This certificate, plus 25c, will, if 
the required number attend the convention, entitle the holder 
to a return ticket free. Deposit your certificates with the 
proper party at the Convention Hall immediately after 
arrival. 

Inquire of Brother Wm. A. Sinclair, 193 Concord Ave., 
Toronto, as to rooms, sleeping accommodations, etc. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and testimony at 10.30 in the 
Brooklyn Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m. 
in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. 
Felix St. Evening service in Brooklyn Tabernacle, 7 p.m. 

Those desiring water baptism or to present their children 
in consecration should notify in advance. 

A COLORED PILGRIM BROTHER 

Brother Walton is engaged in Colporteuring, but is pleased 
to serve classes composed wholly or mainly of colored 
people, when requested. Additionally we have other colored 
Brethren of good education, good address, and as clear in the 
Truth as white Brethren who might give some of their time 
similarly. We invite classes of colored friends who so 
desire to send in applications for such service. 

TRACTS IN MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 

Be careful not to put more Tracts into your envelope than 
the stamps will carry. Otherwise the Post Office will put 
"postage due" and the envelope will be refused and all be 
wasted. 



R4825 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
WISDOM FROM ABOVE THE NOBLEST SCIENCE 



WE REPEAT that the wisdom from above is 
the noblest science and the best instruction. 
Well do the Scriptures say, "The entrance 



of thy Truth giveth light." Well did the 
Lord through the Prophet foretell of our 
day— The wisdom of their wise men shall 
perish and the understanding of their prudent 
men shall not be manifest— Isa. 29:14. 

The great Sir Isaac Newton, guided by 
the promise of the Lord through the 
Prophet Daniel, declared his belief in the possibility of 
rapid transit amongst men. Daniel the Prophet declared, 
"Many shall run to and fro and knowledge shall be increased." 
The philosopher, guided by his faith in God's 
Word, declared his belief that some day mankind would 
travel at the rate of fifty miles an hour. And yet the locomotive 
was centuries away, and the power of steam had 
not even been discovered. Nearly two centuries later, a 
worldly-wise man, scoffing at the Bible, scoffed also at the 
philosopher who would allow the Bible's suggestions to influence 
his expectations of the future. The infidel savant, 
Voltaire, called the Christian Newton "a poor old dotard, 
misled by that old Book, the Bible." We all know by this 
time which of these great men was the dotard! 

Scientists are still guessing and still repudiating the 
guesses of each other. To such an extent is this true, 
that no scientific book written more than twenty-five years 
ago, except the Bible, is worth a penny. No college, no 
school, no professor, no man of learning, would recommend 
any scientific work of twenty-five years ago as 
being authoritative— scientific. But this failure of their 
brethren in the past in no way intimidates those who call 
themselves learned at the present time. They keep on 
looking wise and guessing just the same. They keep on 
laughing at the Bible and reviling it and speaking of its 
being unscientific and do not see its beauty and the real 
fulfilling of its promises. They still have a fashion of 
breaking a chip off a rock, looking at it long and carefully 
and then declaring, with an air of wisdom, the hundreds 
of thousands or millions of years since that stone was 
soft mud and sand or gravel. They keep a stiff upper lip, 
knowing that they are merely repeating the words and 
mannerisms of their predecessors and teachers. They 
know, also, that the more astounding their statements, the 
more wise the laity will think them to be and the more they 
will honor them. Any man who can, by looking at a piece 
of stone, reckon up all the hundreds of thousands of 
years since its formation, must be a wise man indeed in 
the estimation of the street urchin, or the farmer and 
others, who, though more intelligent, have never done 
any thinking, but have merely swallowed the advice 
of others. 

SOME WHO DO A LITTLE THINKING 

This is the kind of trash that is dispensed in many 
of the school-books of our day. And when the students 
inquire, how, then, does it come that the Bible tells of 
only six thousand years of the history of man upon the 



earth? the professors merely sneer and smile at the simplicity 
of the question and say, You will know more about 
it before you graduate. You must study geology, biology, 
etc. There is, indeed, a small class of people who, without 
great pretention, do a little common-sense thinking 
and have intuition. Some of these, properly enough, take 
note of the fact that certain alluvial processes of our far 
West, when dug are soft and can be worked with a pick 
or a shovel, but in a very short time, when exposed to 
the air, become absolute stone. These same thinkers take 
note of the fact that humanity has learned in our day to 
combine various clays and gravels and to make therefrom 
concrete and cement stone work. These are asking with 
propriety, Why must we assume thousands or hundreds 
of thousands or millions of years for the hardening of the 
stones and clays which constitute the surface of our 
earth, when man knows how to produce such hardness in a 
few hours? 

The celebrated "Mark Twain" had a good many grains 
of common sense in his make-up. It was part of his 
delight to poke fun at the pretensions of geologists respecting 
some of their theories. One of his amusing illustrations 
along this line discussed the Mississippi river 
and the changes known to have taken place in it within 
a few years. The supposition that similar changes had 
taken place every year for a thousand years would, he argued, 
imply that in that period the Mississippi river extended 
out and over the Gulf of Mexico several hundred 
miles. His irony was to the point. 

It is not scientific nor wise to assume that the conditions 
of today or of this century or of many centuries 
have been true for thousands of years. Who does not 
know that for years the Missouri river has been so erratic 
in its course, so prone to cut new channels for itself, 
that farms in one State, by its changes of course, have 
been forced to be parts of another State. But geologists 
get so into the habit of guessing, and rely so much on the 
guesses of their predecessors, that they are slow to profit, 
slow to learn to base their calculations upon facts rather 
than fancies. "God is not in all their thoughts." His 

R4825 : page 164 

Word is neglected; hence the proper foundation for reasoning 
and judgment along geological lines is lacking. 

THE GALLEY HILL MAN 

Some twenty-three years ago a human skeleton was 
found imbedded in clay sand eight feet below the gravel 
which, we are assured, appeared to be in its original state. 
The finder of this, of course, felt sure that he had found 
a treasure, and in order to be a treasure and valuable it 
must be classed as very, very ancient. All theories and 
imaginations respecting a flood tide of the River Thames, 
or respecting a burial, must be discouraged. The find 



must be a valuable one for the sake of the finder. 

The next thing necessary to be found was a gray-haired 
professor who also should be made famous. Dr. 
Keith, conservator of the Royal College of Surgeons, was 
the man of the hour. He has become famous through the 
wisdom he has displayed and the information he has 
given to the world in respect to mankind. He declares 
that the skeleton found belongs to a man who lived one 
hundred and sixty-four thousand years before the time 
when the Bible says Adam, the first man, was made in 
the image of his Creator! 

We sit appalled at such wisdom. If we dared ask so 
great a man a small, trifling question, which, perhaps, any 
foolish person would know how to answer, our question 
would be, "How long, O sage, may we suppose the bones 
of an ancient Briton might have continued in good preservation 
had they not been ruthlessly disturbed?" We might 
further ask whether or not a sandy loam might be considered 
a favorable burying ground, so that corpses in 
general would not disintegrate and go to dust in a comparatively 
few years? Surely a miracle must be claimed 
by Prof. Keith for the preservation of these bones, so as 
to give him an opportunity of enlightening the world respecting 

R4826 : page 164 

the Briton of one hundred and seventy thousand 
years ago ! 

But the Professor hedges a little. He first says what 
nobody could dispute, namely, "No accurate estimate 
could be made of the age of a skeleton." But the professor 
was too scientific to stop with that sensible remark. 
He goes on:— 

"We must judge of the past from what we know of 
the present, and on this basis the land movement is a 
slow one, for so far as can now be told, the level of the 
river has scarcely changed since the Roman period. If, 
then, a movement of a foot be allowed for each thousand 
years, one may with some safety assign a period of at 
least one hundred and seventy thousand years to have 
elapsed since the high level terrace was laid down at 
Galley Hill. Further research will probably show that 
the period is much longer." 

Here the generous professor leaves room for some ambitious 
rival to come forward and claim a still greater 
miracle— that the bones of this skeleton were miraculously 
preserved for millions of years. Nevertheless, "The 
Word of the Lord standeth sure," writes the Apostle. 

As another illustration of the exactness of scientific 
men and of the reliance we may place upon their conclusions, 
note the following:— 

Prof. Hauser recently found in Southern France a 
human skeleton. He thought and studied very carefully 
over the subject to ascertain as nearly as possible the 
exact minute at which the corpse had been deposited. His 
conclusion, after this deliberation, was that it had been 



where he found it for a hundred thousand years— more 
than sixteen times as long as man has been upon the earth, 
according to the Bible. 

But now comes Prof. Klattsch of Brescia who, after a 
similar amount of thinking, studying, etc., to find the exact 
moment, tells us that the skeleton was deposited four hundred 
thousand years ago. Of course, it makes no difference 
to the poor man whose skeleton it was or what these 
professors say, and it makes even less difference to us, 
except as the little discrepancy of three hundred thousand 
years proves to us the "exactness" of "scientific" attainment 
along such lines. The more we see of the foolishness 
of men, the more we should rely on the wisdom and 
Word of God. "The wisdom of this world is foolishness 
with God." 

Let us, dear readers, be willing to be smiled at incredulously 
by Dr. Keith and others. And let us smile back 
again good-naturedly and stick to God's Word and trust, 
with good assurance, that in the dawning of the Seventh 
Thousand-Year period Messiah's Kingdom will be established 
and the blessings of mankind begin and the shadows 
of ignorance fade away, and God be found true and many 
wise men mistaken.— Rom. 3:4. 



CHICAGO DISSATISFIED WITH REVIVALS 

For three consecutive seasons Chicago has supported 
an expensive evangelistic campaign, having sought the 
leadership of the greatest men in this field. And, in turn, 
says The Christian Century (Chicago), Torrey, Gipsy 
Smith and Chapman have "inspired and disappointed the 
hopes of Chicago churches that this city might be stirred 
with new religious life." 

The Northwestern Christian Advocate (Methodist, 
Chicago) recently undertook a questionnaire addressed 
to the various Chicago pastors of its denomination, 
"asking each to tell what results the recent 
Chapman-Alexander meetings brought to his church, his 
community, and the city as a whole." When these pastors 
frankly state that, "for the most part, the results 
are negligible in their churches," observes The Christian 
Century, "it is time for some one to arise and ask if 
the $50,000 spent in this evangelistic campaign could not 
have been spent to better advantage for the Kingdom of 
God." The replies of forty Methodist preachers are 
thus summarized: 

ADDITIONS TO MEMBERSHIP 

Twenty-two report "none"; one reports ninety; one reports 
forty; one reports thirty-six; one reports thirty; one 
reports twenty-one; one reports twenty; and the remaining 
twelve show lesser numbers aggregating thirty-four. Total 
for forty churches, 27 1 . 



ADDITIONS TO SUNDAY-SCHOOL 

Thirty-five report "none"; one reports six; one "cannot 
tell"; one has "largest [attendance] in the history of the 
school"; one "cannot accommodate any more"; one, "some 
increase." 

ATTENDANCE UPON MORNING SERVICE 

Thirty-six report "no increase"; one reports an increase; 
one, "the congregation fills the house"; two, "slight increase." 

ATTENDANCE UPON EVENING WORSHIP. 

Thirty-eight report "no increase"; one reports "some increase"; 
one reports "best we have had." 

ATTENDANCE UPON MID-WEEK PRAYER -MEETING 

Thirty-five report "no increase"; two report "better 
attendance"; two report "some increase"; one reports "gratifying 
increase." 

INCREASED RELIGIOUS INTEREST IN CHURCH AND COMMUNITY 

Twenty-one report no change; thirteen report "slight increase"; 
five report "marked increase"; one reports the 
influence to have been less than favorable. 

The meetings are declared "profitable," but "they did 
not reach the class it was hoped they would." "Relatively 
few of the unconverted were present." One man 
declares that "the people were not stirred by the meetings 
and Christians attended for the most part from a 
sense of duty."— Literary Digest. 

R4826 : page 165 

TAMENESS EMPTYING THE CHURCHES 

"Speaking the truth in love" does not suit the combative 
natures of two of our religious contemporaries. 
That plan is all very well, exclaims the editor of The 
Congregationalist and Christian World (Boston), but 
speaking in that mild temper is "tame when compared 
to speaking the truth in the heat of controversy." This 
editor finds no simile within his own sphere of activities 
to express his feeling of the weakness of one method as 
contrasted with the other, so he boldly sets them forth 
as "basket-ball compared to a prize-fight with knuckles." 
"The decline of religious controversy is surely one reason 
for the falling-off of Sunday-morning congregations at 
church," he asserts. Dr. Buckley, in The Christian Advocate 
(Methodist, New York), echoes approvingly and 
adds that "the decline of religious controversy also has 



a great effect on evening services." He finds the smiles 

used by The Congregationalist "highly original and expressive," 

going on to supply some more himself: 

"When Christianity dispenses wholly with controversy 
it will be like a sleeping man— harmless and 
helpless; it will be a sad spectacle. 

"We were entertained at the house of a friend in 
New Hampshire, where Henry Ward Beecher was spending 
a day or two. It was his birthday and he was 
jubilant. 

"He conducted prayers, and his utterances were 
equal to any of his published prayers in beauty, simplicity, 
and comprehensiveness. 

"Immediately after he arose, he called the writer to 
him and pointed to a large picture hanging on the wall, 
representing a huge mastiff sound asleep with a piece of 
meat placed before him, and a lap-dog quietly drawing 
it away. Said Mr. Beecher, pointing to the sleeping 
mastiff, 'That is Orthodoxy,' and to the little dog, 'That 
is Heterodoxy.' 

"So it is and ever will be. Controversy was the life 
of Paul's works— polite controversy, brotherly controversy; 
but strong in exposing error and building up 
the truth. The Epistles are full of controversy. Moreover, 
many of Christ's sayings were strictly controversial. 

"It is more than a fine art to combine in one sermon 
the forcible overthrow of an error and a heartfelt appeal; 
but it is possible to attain unto it."— Literary Digest. 



R4826 : page 165 

RIGHT HABITS OF THOUGHT 

"Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever 
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever 
things are of good report— if there be any 
virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things."— Phil. 4:8. 

AS THE mouthpiece of the Lord, the Apostle 

Paul is here giving instruction to the 

Church respecting how she should build 

herself up. Referring to the great influence 

of the mind over the body, he lays 

down certain rules for thinking; for as a 

man thinketh, so he will become. The 

more he thinks on good things, the better 

he will be. The more he thinks on evil 

things, the more evil he will be. The 

things we think about, the Apostle says, should be honorable, 

just, praiseworthy, beautiful. If a thing has 

none of these qualities the Lord's people should not think 

on it at all. A wonderful transformation of character is 



effected by thinking on those things which have wisdom 
and depth of instruction— those things which come from 
no one else but God. 

"WHEN THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH IS COME IT WILL GUIDE 
YOU INTO ALL TRUTH" 

St. Paul was the one privileged to see the Lord after 
his ascension. We perceive that he, as well as all the 
other Apostles, had fulfilled in him the Master's words, 
"Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in 

R4827 : page 165 

heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be 
loosed in heaven." (Matt. 18:18.) That is to say, the 
Apostles would be so guided by Divine wisdom that 
whatever they should declare necessary in life, would 
be upheld in heaven, and whatsoever they should declare 
unnecessary, would be so considered in heaven. Hence, 
the whole duty and responsibility of the Church is outlined 
by this Apostle. Whatever we see in the Old Testament 
Scriptures that is valuable to us, we perceive 
that our Lord through the Apostles has marked out. 

Much that our Lord said was spoken in dark sayings. 
The exposition of some of these sayings and some of 
these particular instructions he left to the Apostles, 
under the direction of the Holy Spirit. The reason why 
Jesus did not give the explanation of the deeper and 
more spiritual things was that the disciples were not 
then spirit-begotten and could not understand these 
things; whereas, after their begetting of the Holy Spirit, 
they were able to understand the deeper things of the 
Word of God. 

Our Lord said, "When he, the Spirit of Truth, is 
come, he will guide you into all truth;... and he will 
show you things to come." (John 16:13.) This he has 
done through the writings of the Apostles and by believers 
all through the Gospel Age. Thus the Lord is 
making ready for the glorious consummation of our 
hope; and thus the Bride is making herself ready for 
the marriage of the Lamb, which will shortly take place. 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are 
the issues of life." (Prov. 4:23.) These are inspired 
words of the wise king, Solomon, and it was evidently 
with the same thought in mind that the Apostle penned 
the words of our text. How beautiful this, the Apostle's 
final admonition to the Philippian Church, whom he addressed 
with affection as his "joy and crown"; and how 
much in keeping with the thought that out of the heart 
are the issues of life! 

The heart represents the will, the intentions; the will 
must be kept true and centered in God, for it is the governing 
power of the whole man. Yet, though the will 
is the controlling power of man, it is also subject to 
influences. If the thoughts be impure, unjust, or unholy, 



the power of the will becomes more and more impaired. 
Hence the wisdom of the admonition of the Apostle as to 
what should be the character of our thoughts. In those 
who are striving to perfect holiness in the fear of the 
Lord— to adorn themselves with the beauty of holiness— 
the thoughts must not be neglected and permitted to 
browse in every pasture, but must be disciplined to feed 
upon pure and healthful food, as the Apostle directs. 

THE TRUTH OF A THING IS BUT ONE OF THE TESTS 

Is this true, or is it false? is the first question to be 
asked in the consideration of any matter. Love for the 
Truth lies at the very foundation of a righteous life, and 
whoever sympathizes with falsehood or exaggeration is 
more or less defiling himself; but whoever cleanses his 
thoughts is to that extent purifying his entire character. 
With our poor and imperfect brains there is great danger 

R4827 : page 166 

of our being misled; and hence the Word of God 
exhorts us earnestly that we should not touch that which 
we realize is untrue. 

The truth of a thing, however, is but one of the 
tests to which we should subject every matter. Who 
does not know that there are many things that are true, 
and yet dishonorable, not worthy of our thoughts. The 
true, but dishonorable and unworthy things presenting 
themselves for our consideration are, perhaps, oftenest 
in connection with the weaknesses, the errors, the follies, 
or what not of our neighbors, our brethren. The dismissal 
of these thoughts, so unworthy, will leave us the opportunity 
and the energy, if we will, to spend upon things 
that are honorable as well as true, worthy of our attention 
as New Creatures in Christ Jesus. 

"Things that are just." Here we have another limitation. 
That which is just is that which is right. Justice and 
righteousness are synonymous terms. Very often that 
which is just is supposed to be the same as that which 
is lovely; as, for instance, The Golden Rule, "Do unto 
others as you would have others do unto you." This is 
not the rule of love, but of justice. We have no right 
to do unto others anything that we would not that they 
should do to us. In keeping the Golden Rule, therefore, 
we are not keeping the great Law of Love, but we 
are taking a step in the right direction. No one should 
begin to think about love until he is just. Love would 
be something more than that which is right. Love is 
more than justice. We have no right to expect more 
than justice. Whatever we receive more than justice is 
love, favor. 

JUSTICE SHOULD BE THE RULE OF OUR LIVES 

In thinking on those things suggested by the Apostle, 



we should think, first of all, on our own course. 
We should critically consider whether we are always 
thinking on these things which are right, just. We 
should never be prejudiced in the matter. Justice 
should be the rule of our lives, of our conduct. Again, 
in thinking on these things, we might naturally think 
in respect to the conduct of others. We could think 
about the influence, for instance, of various things. We 
could allow our minds to dwell much on the injustices 
practiced about us and elsewhere; on how much injustice 
is done in Africa against those who could rule themselves 
better; on how much injustice is done in business, 
etc. Thus there could be a great deal of muckraking. 
But this should not be the subject of our general 
thoughts. We should think of the good things, the 
higher things, the happier things; not only the good 
things of this life, but the blessed things of the life to 
come; and thus have our minds running along the lines 
of justice at all times. 

WE SHOULD NOT WAIT FOR THE LORD'S CHASTENING 
HAND 

No one can cultivate justice until he gets some appreciation 
of what it is. This necessary knowledge is obtained 
through the Scriptures. Some are born with a 
larger sense of justice than are others and some are 
born who seem to have no appreciation of right or wrong. 
But whether we have, naturally, a keen sense of justice 
or not, the Bible is the standard. As we know, the 
Scriptures say that we should do unto others as we would 
that they should do unto us; that we should forgive 
others as we would they should forgive us. When we 
have considered well these first lessons, then we are 
ready to cultivate justice and to put it into practice in 
our daily lives. This we do by asking in respect to our 
words and acts, Did I tell the truth? And was it just to 
tell it? Was it right to tell it? Was it in harmony with 
what I should wish others to tell in respect to my affairs? 
Did I do the right thing? 

Whoever is in the school of Christ is there to study 
and practice along the lines of justice and of love. It 
is the work of a life time. We find that we can improve 
from day to day. We should not wait for the Lord to 
chasten us, but should be so desirous of having the 
Lord's will done in us that we would scrutinize our 
thoughts. We should walk circumspectly. We should 
think about what we are doing, about what we are thinking. 
We should not allow our thoughts to ramble. People 
who do so do not keep themselves under proper grip. 
The will dominates the life. First of all, we should 
make a full surrender to the Lord by giving him our 
wills, the control over our thoughts, our words, our actions. 
Those who have accepted the control of Christ 
over their affairs are not at liberty to act as they will. 
They are to be controlled by his Word, and to walk according 



to his rules. Our Master said, "A new commandment 
I give unto you, that ye love one another 
as I have loved you." (John 13:34.) This is more than 
justice. The Lord so loved the world that he laid down 
his life for them. So should we be ready and willing to 
lay down our lives for the brethren. 

We are not to allow our minds to run along lines that 
would be unjust. We are to learn to apply this test 
of justice to every thought and word and act of ours, 
while learning at the same time to view the conduct of 
others, so far as reason will permit, from the standpoint 
of mercy, pity, forgiveness, helpfulness. But we cannot 
be too careful how we criticize every thought we entertain, 
every plan we may mature, that the lines of justice 
shall in no way be infringed by us with our heart's 
approval. 

OUR MINDS SHOULD BE FILLED WITH THAT WHICH IS 
PURE AND LOVELY 

In scrutinizing our thoughts from the viewpoint of 
purity, we should consider, first, the nature of the 
thoughts; and, second, their influence upon others. Not 
only should our thoughts be true and honorable and just 
and right, but they should be pure, and such as will not 
excite others to impurity. We should avoid anything that, 
while not impure in itself, might have the effect of arousing 
impurity in another. The Apostle's thought seems 
to be that we should guard our thoughts at all times. 

"Whatsoever things are lovely" calls to our attention 
the fact that we should not allow our minds to dwell upon 
things that are not lovely, that are not praiseworthy. We 
might permit our business to so fill our thoughts that we 
would think continually about that particular thing; for 
instance, one interested in the iron business might always 
think about structural iron; another, about the coal business; 
another, about potatoes and codfish, etc. These 
things might be just enough, true enough, honorable 
enough, but constant thought on these lines is not profitable 
to the New Creature. When we are employed in 
digging, we should give attention to that business; when 
we are in the iron-work business, we should give proper 
attention to it. But when we are in the thinking business, 
we should not allow our minds to dwell on the 
things which the Apostle stipulates to be injurious. We 
must endeavor to bring our thoughts into subjection and 
train them along the lines that will transform us more 
and more into our Lord's glorious character likeness. 

Our thoughts must not only be true, honorable and 
just, but they must be pure, they must be beautiful. By 
the word beautiful we understand, not only the thoughts 
relating to the beauties of nature, the flowers, the animal 

R4828 : page 167 

creation, the fruits, etc., but also and chiefly the things 



of character— the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit- 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love. With these things our minds can become 
filled and enamored. If, on the contrary, we allow ourselves 
to neglect these things that are pure, just, lovely, 
we shall not grow in the fruits of the Spirit; but by 
thinking on these things and cultivating them in our 
hearts we become more and more God-like. If we do 
not cultivate these desirable qualities, then will be developed 
envy, hatred, strife, works of the flesh and of the 
Devil— the fruits contrary to righteousness. 

In a word, then, we can hardly overestimate the importance 
of right thinking. There are on record instances 
of persons who were naturally depraved in mind, but who, 
by giving their attention to the things of the Truth, have 
become very noble characters, indeed. We can scarcely 
overestimate the power of the mind over the body. If 
we take pleasure in the cultivation of the fruits of the 
Spirit, they will prove a rich blessing to ourselves and to 
others. Thus we shall follow in the Master's footsteps 
and eventually become overcomers and associates with 
him in the Kingdom. 

PURITY OF THOUGHT AN ESSENTIAL 

We are to love and cultivate that which is pure to 
such an extent that that which is impure will become painful 
to us, distressing, and we shall desire to drop it from 
memory. This will be accomplished only by continually 
thinking upon those things that are pure, and avoiding 
the giving of thought to the things that are impure. We 
are to recognize true loveliness and to esteem it. When 
we would think on the purest of things, we must of necessity 
lift our mental vision to as high a point as possible 
and, as nearly as we may be able, discern the loveliness 
of the perfect character of our God and of our Lord 
Jesus Christ and, proportionately, the loveliness manifested 
in one and another of the followers of Jesus who 
walk closely in his footsteps. 

"If there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things." While we should not think to 
praise ourselves nor to strive to obtain praise, yet we 
should strive to be praiseworthy. We should think about 
the praise of God. If there is anything that has any 
value, any merit, that has anything worthy of praise, we 
should recognize it. We should note in those about us, 
and particularly in the Church, the elements of character 
which are worthy of praise. We should not underestimate 
gentleness, faithfulness, patience. We should take 
note of constancy, of energy, of devotion to duty. We 
should not think of the trifling failures of others or of even 
their greater failures. If we continue to fill our minds 
with unhappy thoughts, we shall do injury to ourselves. 
As we continue to recognize the commendable things in 
our own lives and in the lives of those about us, we shall 
become the more God-like. 



Things of any virtue, or value, things in any degree 
praiseworthy— the noble words, or noble deeds, or noble 
sentiments of anyone— we may safely meditate upon and, 
as a consequence, find ourselves growing toward those 
ideals upon which our minds, our new natures, thus feed. 

Thus shall we become more and more transformed by 
the renewing of our minds, and approach nearer and 
nearer to the glorious likeness of our Master, being 
changed from glory to glory, inch by inch, step by step, 
little by little, during the present life; and our thoughts 
being in this attitude and our union with the Lord maintained, 
we shall have part in the First Resurrection, 
which will perfect us forever in the Lord's image and 
likeness. 



R4828 : page 167 

SOWING AND REAPING 

"Be not deceived,. ..he that soweth to his flesh shall of the 
flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of 
the Spirit reap life everlasting."— Gal. 6:7,8. 

THE thought of sowing is that of planting 

with a view to development or result. 

Some time the harvest will come. All of 

our thoughts, all of our actions, have an 

effect on future character. Little by little 

the character is made up. The sowing of 

today will bring the reaping of tomorrow. 

If our thoughts and our attention are 

given to earthly things, the result will be 

an increase of development along earthly 

lines; but if our thoughts and attention are given to 

heavenly things, the development will be along spiritual 

lines. 

Sowing to the flesh, minding the things of the flesh, 
means gratification of the desires of the flesh, minding 
the things that are craved by our fallen nature. If 
yielded to, these cravings will grow stronger and stronger. 
It is a mistake to suppose, as some do, that a reasonable 
gratification of the flesh is proper. Every gratification 
of the fallen flesh satiates only the animal propensities. 
Those who continue to yield to these propensities will 
ultimately reach corruption, death— the Second Death. 
Those who mind spiritual things set their affections on 
things above, not on things of earth; those who seek 
to develop themselves along spiritual lines, will progress 
in spiritual attainment. In due time such will reap a 
character likeness to the Lord, and become copies of 
God's dear Son, sanctified more and more through the 
Truth. To such is promised the gift of life eternal. 

The words of our text are addressed to the Church, 
and relate, therefore, to "those who have made a covenant 



with the Lord by sacrifice." If these live after the 
flesh, they shall die, as the Apostle says; for they have 
already surrendered their human life-rights. If by earnest 
endeavors they seek to lay down their lives and to 
develop the new life by mortifying the flesh, by putting it 
to death, by striving to overcome the weaknesses which 
they inherit, they shall shortly be rid of all the impediments 
and be clothed upon with the new body. Then 
they shall be like the Lord. 

FEW REALIZE THE EXTENT OF PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY 
FOR CHARACTER 

Comparatively few realize to what extent we form 
our own characters, to what extent our minds, our affections, 
are gardens in which we may plant either the 
thorns and thistles of sin, or the merely moral and practical 
qualities corresponding to the useful vegetables, or 
those seeds which produce the fragrant and beautiful 
flowers and fruits which more particularly represent the 
heavenly and spiritual graces. Whatsoever a man soweth 
he shall also reap, whether he sow to the flesh or to 
the spirit. Whoever, therefore, seeks for the heavenly 
things, joint-heirship in the Kingdom, etc., must plant, or 
set out in his mind, in his affections, those qualities and 
graces which the Lord marks out as essential to the development 
of characters such as will be "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light."— Col. 1:12. 

Thus the Father throws upon all those whom he calls 
to this "high-calling," this "heavenly-calling," and who 

R4828 : page 168 

accept the call and make a covenant thereunder, the 
responsibility for their success or their failure in attaining 
the prize. Through his Word he tells them of their 
own natural weaknesses and imperfections, and shows 
them how he has provided a full off-set or counterbalance 
for these imperfections in the merit and sacrifice of the 
Redeemer; he shows them also what are the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit which they must possess, in heart, 
at least, if they would be joint-heirs with Christ; he 
shows them also, in the Redeemer's life as well as in 
his teachings, the copy which all must follow who would 
reach the same glorious station and be his joint-heirs. 

We might look at this matter merely from the standpoint 
of the responsibility which it throws upon us, and 
might well feel overawed thereby. Rather, however, we 
should view it from the standpoint of Divine grace, and 
consider what a blessed privilege has been granted us, 
of being transformed by the renewing of our minds, 
that we may come more and more to know and to strive 
for the good and acceptable and perfect will of God. In 
addition to all this, God has set before us the grandest 
reward imaginable for the doing of that which is merely 
our duty and our reasonable service— the doing of that 



which would bring us the largest measure of joy and 
peace, aside from a future reward.— 2 Pet. 1:3,4. 

WE NEED CONSTANTLY TO PLANT GOOD SEEDS AND 
WEED OUT THE EVIL 

There is for all mankind a natural attraction 
toward earthly things; even though, during this reign of 
evil, the earthly things are blemished and in many respects 
distasteful to those who have learned to love 

R4829 : page 168 

righteousness and hate iniquity, there is still, nevertheless, 
a strong attraction toward the marred and blemished 
earthly things. Like weeds, earthly affections and 
desires spring spontaneously from seeds which come we 
know not whence. The Christian, therefore, who would 
keep his heart in the love of God, must not only keep 
planting good seeds, keep setting his affections on heavenly 
things, but he must keep rooting out the weeds of 
earthly desire and attraction. 

Our new life is not manifest to all, nor upon all 
occasions to any. This the Apostle intimates when he 
says, "Your life is hid with Christ in God"; it is a life of 
new desires, new aims, new aspirations, which the world 
can neither see nor fully appreciate, though it sees some 
outward manifestations of the new life in our daily conduct. 
Even the "brethren" may not be able to appreciate 
the progress of the new life in us; and we ourselves may 
at times be perplexed respecting the rapidity and strength 
of its growth; and we may need to look back over weeks 
or months, or perhaps years, in order to determine unquestionably 
that it is growing. Our new life, represented 
by our endeavors to follow the will of Christ, is 
hidden thus in Christ and in the Father. 

In harmony with this thought the Apostle in one 
place declares that neither the world nor the brethren 
were capable of judging him— that only the Lord, who 
could read the heart and know all the conditions, testings 
and weaknesses to be striven against, could properly 
judge him. He even declares, "Yea, I judge not mine 
own self." (I Cor. 4:3.) It is an excellent plan neither 
to condemn others who claim to be walking conscientiously 
as children of the Lord, nor even to condemn 
ourselves if we are sincerely striving to do the Lord's 
will. We should simply press along, day by day, doing 
the best we can to cultivate the heavenly graces and to 
serve our Master, leaving all the results with the Lord. 
He careth for us, and so long as our hopes and aims 
and objects of life are centered in the heavenly things 
and our lives thus hid with Christ in God, we need fear 
no evil, present or future; for the Lord will be with us 
and bless us and keep us from falling and, ultimately, 
present us to the Heavenly Father both blameless and 
faultless. 



PUTTING OFF AND PUTTING ON 

Coming down to a particularization of the changes 
which take place in those who have consecrated themselves 
wholly to the Lord, the Apostle enumerates certain 
alterations of disposition which should be attempted 
and, so far as possible, accomplished, namely, the putting 
away of all the following: anger, wrath, malice, evil-speaking 
impurity of language and falsehood in its every 
form. (Col. 3:8,9.) The necessity for such correction 
of life might, at first thought, seem to be unnecessary 
to mention, such evil traits being too coarse and 
entirely opposed to every true Christian principle; but, 
as we scrutinize the matter we find that the Apostle has 
really taken into his list nearly all the weaknesses of the 
flesh which beset those who have become "New Creatures 
in Christ." 

What is more common with Christian people than to 
become angry? How many there are who have named 
the name of Christ, but who have malicious or, at 
least, unkind thoughts respecting others, and who harbor 
these, permitting them at times to influence their conduct! 
How many are there who indulge in evil-speaking 
—that is, slander (here translated blasphemy) ! This 
is often done in such a manner as to deceive, not only 
the hearer, but also the speaker as respects his real intention 
in speaking of others discreditably, unkindly. 

If all evil and impure language were avoided, what a 
wonderful world this would be! Every Christian should 
see to it that, henceforth, every word which proceeds 
from his mouth shall be such as will minister grace to the 
hearers, such words as will do only good and be edifying. 
Finally, how much need there is, not only of having 
good intentions in the heart, but also of expressing those 
good intentions truthfully one to another, without deception, 
without hypocrisy. But it requires that a heart 
be very pure and very full of love if it would be very 
truthful; otherwise it would lead to trouble continually. 
If the unloving, ungenerous, unkind hearts, full of evil 
surmising, malice, hatred and strife, were to express 
themselves frankly it would add immensely to the trouble 
of the world. The Apostle therefore urges, first the 
purifying of the heart, and then general candor. 

With the thought before our minds of the oneness 
and equality of those who have been accepted into the 
Body of Christ, the Apostle urges upon our attention the 
necessity not only of putting off the evil dispositions of 
our fallen flesh, but also of putting on, cultivating, the 
various graces of the Spirit exemplified in our Head, 
Christ Jesus. -Col. 3:12-14. 

He specifies these: (1) Compassionate sentiments; a 
disposition of largeness and generosity of heart toward 
everybody and everything— toward the saints, toward our 
neighbors, friends and relatives, toward our enemies, and 
toward the brute creation. Amplifying, he continues, 



showing that it would imply (2) kindness toward all; 
(3) humbleness of mind, the reverse of boastfulness, 
headiness, arrogance; (4) meekness, or gentleness of 
disposition; (5) long-suffering, or patient endurance 
with the faults and weaknesses of others. It implies 
that we should bear with one another's peculiarities of 
temperament and disposition, freely forgiving one another, 
if there be found cause of offense in each other- 
learning the meanwhile to correct ourselves, as we see 
our own blemishes mirrored in others. And the standard 

R4829 : page 169 

for all this course of conduct is found in the Lord's 
course toward us; for he surely has been generous, 
kind, forbearing and forgiving. 

THESE INJUNCTIONS ARE ADDRESSED TO THE CHURCH 
ONLY 

The Apostle brings to the attention of the "holy and 
beloved," the Elect, the fact that he is not attempting a 
reformation of the world along these lines, but merely a 
transformation of those who have entered into a special 
covenant with the Lord. All who have thus covenanted 
with the Lord and who hope to make their "calling and 
election sure" to membership in the glorified Church, will 
not only seek to cultivate these fruits of the Spirit in their 
own lives, but also to assist in the cultivation of the same 
fruits, as they may have opportunity, in their Christian 
friends and neighbors; and above all, will seek to exercise 
so good an influence upon their own families that, as their 
children receive from them, as parents, the natural life 
and the necessary instructions and start therein, these 
may also, if possible, receive from them a start in the new 
life, and the necessary instructions and equipment for it. 

But the Apostle, as the mouthpiece of the Holy Spirit, 
is a thorough instructor. Not only does he tell us what 
dis-graces to put off and what graces to put on, but, viewing 
the Lord's Body arrayed in these qualities of heart- 
compassion, kindness, humility, meekness, patient endurance, 
forbearance and forgiveness, he adds, "And above 
all these put on love, which is the bond of perfectness." 
Love is thus pictured as the "girdle" which binds and 
holds in place the folds of the robe of Christ's righteousness 
with its various graces. In other words, the Apostle 
would have us see that forbearance, meekness, patience, 
etc., must not be matters merely of courtesy or merely 
of policy. However much they might partake of these 
qualities in the beginning, the wearers will not be perfected 
in heart, nor be fit for the Kingdom, until they 
have reached the place where these various graces of 
their wills, or intentions, are bound to them by the cords 
of love— love for the Lord, love for righteousness, love 
for the "brethren," and sympathetic love for the whole 
groaning creation. Love is, indeed, "the bond of perfectness," 



the very Spirit of the Lord. 

CAN WE BE DECEIVED IN THIS MATTER? 

In our text the Apostle says, "Be not deceived." The 
question naturally suggests itself, Is there danger that 
we may not know whether we are sowing to the spirit 
or sowing to the flesh? We answer, there is danger of 
being deceived along this line. The Scriptures represent 
that the flesh is very crafty; that the natural mind 
is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, and 
that the new mind needs to guard continually lest it fall 
into a trap of the old nature. If one is living according 
to the flesh, he may expect to reap accordingly. 
Though others may be deceived, God cannot be mocked 
by our outward service of him and his Truth while we 
inwardly live according to the flesh. If we plant corn, 
we reap corn; if we sow wheat, we reap wheat. In all 
the affairs of our lives we are either building up the old 
nature that we agreed should be destroyed, or faithfully 
seeing to it that the deeds of the flesh are mortified and 
killed, that we may prosper as New Creatures. 

We "Sow to the flesh" every time we allow the 
fleshly, selfish, unjust, unrighteous desires of the flesh 
to have sway in our hearts and lives. Each sowing 
makes more sure the end of the way, which is death- 
Second Death. On the contrary, each sowing to the 
Spirit, each resistance of the desires of the flesh toward 
selfishness, etc., and each exercise of the new mind, of 
the new will, toward the things that are pure, the things 
that are noble, the things that are good, the things that 

R4830 : page 169 

are true, the things that are spiritual, is a sowing to the 
Spirit, which, if persevered in, will ultimately bring the 
attainment of the Lord's gracious promises and arrangements 
—everlasting life and the Kingdom. 



R4830 : page 169 

THE SIN UNTO DEATH 

THE HUMAN MIND, with its various qualities, 

is very much like a legislative body. 

The vote, or decision, of that body is its 

will. So the vote or decision of our minds 

is the will. Once, when we knew no better, 

the vote was for sin. But when light came 

in we voted out the mind of the flesh and 

voted in the mind of Christ and agreed with 

ourselves, individually, that we would be 

New Creatures, dominated by that new 

mind. As we say that the old will died when the will of 



Christ came in, so we think it proper to say that the old 
will is being revived, raised from the dead, when we turn 
again to the "beggarly elements of the world." 

What is the influence which revives the old will? It 
is minding the things of the flesh. If we live after the 
flesh we shall die as New Creatures. (Rom. 8:13.) We 
mind the will of the flesh when we permit the fleshly desires 
which we have given up, abrogated, gotten free 
from, to become again the ruling, or controlling influence 
of our minds. So, then, the new mind is dead and the old 
mind, or will, revived when we seek to do the will of the 
flesh rather than the will of the Lord— to mind earthly 
things instead of heavenly things, etc. 

In the case of all those who have not passed "beyond 
the veil," the New Creature, which has been begotten of 
the Holy Spirit, has merely a fleshly body, or organism, in 
which to exercise itself. This body is not at first fully 
under the control of the new will. It is the duty of the 
new will both to rule the body and to bring it completely 
into subjection, even unto death. After gaining this victory, 
the New Creature receives the new body which God 
intended for him. By its opposition to sin the New Creature 
demonstrates its loyalty to God, its harmony with 
righteousness. God judges this New Creature, not according 
to the flesh, but according to the will. If the flesh 
should gain the victory over the new will and there 
should be a fall, it would not mean that the new will had 
ceased, but that it had not been on the alert. 

In such a case the Lord might, in time, judge that the 
new will was not worthy of the highest honors, because 
it had failed to keep the body under and to sacrifice the 
fleshly interests. Or, if a wrong course were persisted in, 
the new will would become so weakened and the flesh so 
strong that there would be a gradual dying of the new 
will; and finally it would cease to exist. The Apostle 
John, in speaking of this matter, declares that these New 
Creatures are to so keep themselves that "that Wicked One 
touch them not." (I John 5:18.) Again, he says, "He 
who is begotten of God cannot sin," so long as the "seed" 
of God abides in that individual. In other words, so 
long as the mind, the will, is in complete subjection to 
the Divine will, he could not willingly, knowingly, intentionally, 
do that which is opposed to the Divine will, just 
as a person could not go north and south at the same 
time. 

R4830 : page 170 

THROUGH LACK OF KNOWLEDGE, ETC., THE NEW 
NATURE MAY FOR A TIME LIE DORMANT 

We believe that there are instances in which persons, 
begotten of the Holy Spirit, have fallen away from zeal 
and obedience to the new will on account of lack of spiritual 
nourishment, lack of knowledge, lack of appreciation 
of things that strengthen the new nature and 



"Build it up in the most holy faith;" sometimes this is 
on account of ignorance, superstitions, which cause it to 
lose its zeal. This might happen when the new will was 
neither dead nor had given way entirely to the flesh, as 
might seem to be the case. Thus, while the new will was 
submitting itself and allowing the old will to have its way, 
the conduct might be blameworthy through lack of spiritual 
nourishment, as has been stated. Such persons have 
been regained through a better understanding of God's 
Word— by more knowledge; and have been known to turn 
out very noble Christians, even when the new mind for a 
time had been dormant. The Apostle warns us against 
this state saying, "I keep my body under"; "Forget not 
the assembling of yourselves together"; "Build one another 
up in the most holy faith. "-I Cor. 9:27; Heb. 10:25; 
Jude 20. 

When one, once begotten of the Holy Spirit, has willingly, 
intentionally adopted the old life of sin, then the 
"seed" with which he was begotten has perished and he 
is one mentioned by the Apostle as "twice dead, plucked 
up by the roots" (Jude 12), one under condemnation of 
the Second Death, for whom there would be no more 
sacrifice for sin. (Heb. 10:26.) When he first presented 
himself to God and was accepted through the merit of 
Christ, the new will was recognized of God and the person 
was begotten of the Holy Spirit. Old things had 
passed away; all things had become new. His body was 
not new; but he had a new will, a new purpose. When 
later he willingly left the service of the Lord and willingly, 
knowingly and intentionally became the servant of 
sin, his course would imply that his new will had died; 
that his old will had come to life and had gained the 
ascendency. 

THE NEW WILL CANNOT SIN WHILE IT REMAINS A NEW 
WILL 

Thus, by losing the Divine will and voluntarily accepting 
the will of the flesh again, the New Creature 
could commit the sin unto death. This, however, would 
not mean that the new will— which is always in harmony 
with God— could sin. If the will sins it has ceased to be 
a new will. If one never willingly turns from God, he 
would never commit the sin unto death. So the losing 
of this "seed" of the desire, the spirit, to do that which 
is pleasing to God, would be the step by which one passes 
from the life condition into the death condition. We 
have never as yet had the new life in its fullness. But 
we could lose the spirit, the new mind. If we lose the 
spirit, the mind, we lose all. 

As there was a particular moment in which the Lord 
accepted us and we were begotten of the Holy Spirit, so, 
likewise, in the event of the Second Death, there must be 
a particular moment at which that would take place. Similarly, 
as we learn of the Lord's will we come gradually 
to the point of presenting our bodies living sacrifices. 



As this was a gradual work, so we should suppose that the 
retrogression, departure from the Lord, would be gradual. 
A sudden denial of the Lord does not seem probable, 
neither would it be in line with the declaration of Scripture. 
The falling away is a process of retrogression, a 
departure from the living God and from our covenant 
with Him. This may be, first of all, a gradual departure 
from the arrangements by which we have made a covenant 
of sacrifice with the Lord. This might more and 
more increase until it becomes a defiance of God, a deliberate 
and wilful sin. 

Stumbling is one thing; but wilful sin is another. The 
righteous man may stumble many times and yet recover 
himself. We that are spiritual may recover such a one, 
remembering ourselves, lest we also be tempted. (Gal. 6:1.) 
These stumblings are not, however, what is referred 
to as "the sin unto death." The Second Death condition, 
according to the Scriptures, we understand to imply the 
full giving over of the individual, his entire abandonment 
by the Lord and his going into utter, hopeless 
destruction, from which there will be no resurrection. 
But no one could come into this condition without deliberately 
and wilfully abandoning the Lord and without 
having received chastisements for the purpose of bringing 
him back and of restraining him from going into this 
condition. 

AFTER BEGETTAL THE WORK OF TRANSFORMATION OF 
CHARACTER BEGINS 

Our begetting as New Creatures is at the time when 
we make a full consecration of our lives to the Lord and 
receive the merit of Christ as necessary to cover our 
blemishes. God's acceptance of this consecration is manifested 
by the impartation of the Holy Spirit, spoken of 
in the Scriptures as the begetting of the Holy Spirit. The 
work following this begetting is that of renewing the 
mind— "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, 
that ye may prove what is that good and acceptable and 
perfect will of God." (Eph. 4:23.) The Apostle was not 
here speaking to the world, to sinners, or to any one except 
the brethren. Although the wills of these brethren are 
already renewed, yet it is another thing to bring every 
thought into harmony with the will of God in Christ. 
We should demonstrate to ourselves, first, what is the 
good will of God— what is his will as to our following 
righteousness, etc.; then what is wholly acceptable to him; 
and, thirdly, what is his perfect will. (Rom. 12:1,2.) This 
gradual development is to proceed with those who are 
Spirit-begotten; and only those who are thus brought to 
the graduating point will be members of the Bride class, 
perfected in the First Resurrection— "Blessed and holy is 
he that hath part in the First Resurrection; on such the 
Second Death hath no power, but they shall be priests of 
God and of Christ and shall reign with him a thousand 
years."— Rev. 20:6. 



R4831 :page 170 

We are not to understand that the conduct of one 
could send another into the Second Death, without his 
co-operation. No one could intervene to separate us from 
God. As the Apostle asks, "Who shall separate us from 
Christ?" (Rom. 8:35.) But whatever influence we have 
may be used for either the assistance or the injury of 
another. It is possible for us, not only to so live as to be 
helpful to others, but to so act as to injure others. Nothing 
in the example of another could give us eternal life; 
but the doings and example of one might be an assistance 
to another; and if we can be of assistance to each other, 
we can also be injurious. 

COULD OUR EXAMPLE LEAD ANOTHER INTO THE 
SECOND DEATH? 

The question, then, comes up, in what way could a 
brother's example so stumble another that he could go 
into the Second death? We answer that if one should 
be influenced by another to violate conscience, one might 
thus be started on the downward course which would lead 
him from righteousness. It might be a small matter to 
begin with, but shortly it would lead off into sin. We 
should so guard our actions and our words that others 

R4831 :page 171 

would be made stronger and more tender in their consciences; 
we should try as far as possible to help them 
in the right way. 

The Apostle speaks of our liberty becoming a stumbling-block 
to those that are weak— "For if any man see 
thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol's temple, 
shall not the conscience of him which is weak be 
emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols?" 
(I Cor. 8:10.) Thus we might, unintentionally, not only 
offset the good that we might do, but do harm when we 
are not aware of it. If the same tongue can curse men 
and praise God (James 3:9), how careful we should be 
to speak that only which will be helpful and uplifting and 
not destructive and injurious! 



R4832:page 171 

SENNACHERIB TURNED BACK 

-JULY 2.-ISAIAH 37:14-38.- 

God is our refuge and strength, a very 
present help in trouble."— Psa. 46:1. 



IN A PREVIOUS STUDY our attention was 
drawn to the good King Hezekiah of Judah, 
his zeal for the Lord and the notable 
Passover celebration which he brought 
about and the overthrow of idolatry following. 
Our present study relates to him at a 
later period in his reign. The Assyrian 
empire to the north and east, with its capital 
at Ninevah, had become great and powerful 
and threatened to become the first 
Universal Empire. 

Before Hezekiah came to the throne of Judah his 
father entered into a treaty whereby peace was secured 
by the payment of an annual tribute. Egyptians, Philistines 
and Sidonians urged Judah to join them in the confederacy 
by which they hoped all might regain their liberty 
from the Assyrian yoke. Urged by his people, 
Hezekiah joined this confederacy and stopped the tribute 
money— contrary to the Lord's admonition through the 
Prophet Isaiah. The measure was popular, and the king 
did not seem to realize how fully the Prophet represented 
the Lord in the matter. He should have remembered that 
Israel was under a special Covenant with the Almighty 
by which He was their Sovereign, their King, and the 
Arbiter of their destiny. The error was allowed to work 
out a serious penalty for the disobedient, but when the 
king and the people repented and gave evidence that the 
lesson had been learned. Divine mercy came miraculously 
to their assistance, as we shall see. 

SENNACHERIB THE CONQUEROR 

The King of Assyria, with a large army, took the field. 
Knowing the difficulties of a siege of Jerusalem, he did 
not begin with it, but passed down the Mediterranean 
coast, overthrowing the Sidonians and Philistines, to Joppa 
and farther south; and then eastward to Lachish, a fortified 
city of Judah. The whole country was filled with 
fear, as nearly forty cities of Judah, one after the other, 
fell. King Hezekiah and his counselors resolved to 
avoid, if possible, a siege of war, and sent ambassadors 
to King Sennacherib apologizing for their temerity 
in refusing the tribute money and asking what compensation 
would satisfy him. 

The penalty was a heavy one, amounting to nearly one 
million dollars, which at that time was a much larger sum 
than it would be today. The payment of it required the 
removal of much ornamental gold from the temple, but 
it was paid over and the release granted. The successful 
Sennacherib, about to attack Egypt, rued his agreement 
with Judah, and, in violation of his compact, his general 
appeared before Jerusalem and demanded its surrender. 

R4833 :page 171 

Loudly did he proclaim the victories already achieved 



and warned the people of Jerusalem not to trust in their 
God for deliverance, telling them that other peoples had 
trusted in their gods and that all had failed before 
Sennacherib. 

Fear prevailed in Jerusalem. The king and his counselors 
were not only fearful of war and captivity and the 
loss of their all, but they dared not trust the people lest 
they should surrender and open the city gates. Then it 
was that the king and his advisors and the people sought 
the Lord in prayer. 

The Lord was waiting to be gracious, as He always 
is to those who are His true people. He delayed, 
however, to give the word of comfort, until the 
necessities of the case had humbled the people and taught 
them a lesson of faith and dependence upon their God. 
Then came the answer of the Lord, the prophecy that the 
King of Assyria should not come into the city nor shoot 
an arrow there, nor even come before it with shields, nor 
cast up embankments of siege, but that the Lord would 
defend the city as His own. Doubtless the prophecy 
seemed strange to the people. By what miracle this could 
be accomplished they could not think. The lesson to us 
is that: 

"God moves in a mysterious way 

His wonders to perform; 
He plants His footsteps in the sea, 

And rides upon the storm." 

A HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE THOUSAND SLAIN IN A 
NIGHT 

Isaiah briefly and poetically declares that the angel of 
the Lord smote the camp of the Assyrians, without explaining 
in what manner. We remember the statement 
of the Scriptures that wind and fire and lightning may 
be the Lord's messengers or angels. Quite probably, in 
this instance, the messenger of death may have been a 
malignant form of fever said to prevail at times to the 
northeast of Egypt; but it matters not to us what messenger 
the Lord used to turn back the Assyrian hosts. 

The lesson for us is to note the Divine power which 
overrules, orders and directs, so that all things shall work 
together in harmony with His will. It was not His will 
that Assyria should become the first Universal Empire. 
That honor was reserved for the kingdom of Babylon, a 
century later— at exactly the proper time when God was 
prepared to withdraw His own typical kingdom, of the 
line of David, from the earth— to be "overturned, overturned, 
overturned" until the Messiah should come. 

The lesson to the Christian is that we should keep 
right with God, abiding under the shadow of the Almighty; 
and that so doing, all things shall work together 
for our good. 

"THE ENEMY MELTED LIKE SNOW AT THE GLANCE OF 



THE LORD" 

The story of Sennacherib's defeat by the angel of the 
Lord has been put into verse by one of our great poets, 
Byron, as follows:— 

"The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold, 
And his cohorts were gleaming with purple and gold; 
Like the leaves of the forest when summer is green, 
That host with their banners at sunset were seen. 

"Like the leaves of the forest which autumn hath blown, 
That host on the morrow lay withered and strown; 
For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast 
And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed. 



"And the tents were all silent, the banners alone, 
The lances unlifted, the trumpet unblown; 
And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword, 
Hath melted like snow at the glance of the Lord." 



R4831 :page 172 

JEHOVAH'S SUFFERING SERVANT 

-JULY 9TH.-ISAIAH 52:13; 53:1-12.- 

" Jehovah hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all." 

IN THIS STUDY we have a Divinely drawn 
portrait of the experiences which God foreordained 
should come upon the One whom 
He has promised shall ultimately be the 
great Messiah of glory who will exalt the 
nation of Israel and through it pour blessings 
upon all the families of the earth. 
Thus it is written, "In thy Seed shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed." Much 
of the prophecy of this study has already 
been fulfilled, but not all of it— the glorious features are 
yet to come, and we believe are nigh, even at the door. 
These prophecies were written nearly seven hundred 
years before our Christian Era. They had their most striking 
fulfilment in the personal experiences of Jesus. However, 
it should not be forgotten that a faithful handful, a 
"little flock," the followers of Jesus, have walked in His 
steps during the nineteen centuries of this Age; they have 
followed Him through evil report and through good report; 
they have suffered with Him, and the reproaches 
of those who reproached Him have fallen upon them; and 
when the hour of glorious revelation, the Kingdom power, 
shall come, these will be with their Redeemer and share 



His throne and glory, and, as His Bride, share His name. 
"This is the name whereby she shall be called, Our 
righteousness of Jehovah."— Jer. 23:6; 33:16. 

The key to the understanding of the long delay in the 
establishment of Messiah's Kingdom is found in the fact 
that the Church is a very part of Him, members of His 
Body. Had it not been the Divine intention to gather 
an "elect" few from Israel and from all nations to be the 
Bride of Messiah, and a sharer in His Kingdom, there 
would have been no need of the long delay between the 
sufferings of Jesus and the outpouring of the glorious 
blessings which His death secures. 

Again it must be remembered that the elect Church is 
wholly different from the nominal church, as represented 
in its various systems. The true Church of God consists 
only of the saintly few who may be found inside and outside 
of all denominations of Christendom. "Gather My 
saints together unto Me, saith the Lord, those who have 
made a covenant with Me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) Of 
these St. Paul wrote, "The world knoweth us not even 
as it knew Him not." But the assurance comes— "The 
Lord knoweth them that are His." The completion of 
the selection and character-perfecting of this "little flock" 
will come— the end of the "sufferings of Christ"— and immediately 
the glory will follow, the glory of the Messianic 
Kingdom. 

THE PROPHETIC SUMMARY 

In the first three verses of our study, the entire work 
of Messiah, not only in its preparation, but also in its 
revelation in Kingly power, is set forth. It is applicable, 
specially, to the Head, but is applicable also to the members 
of His Body. A preferred translation reads:— 

"Behold my Servant shall deal wisely; He shall be exalted 
and lifted up and shall be very high. As many were 
astonished in Thee; but His visage was so marred more 
than any man. For so shall He startle many nations; 
kings shall shut their mouths to Him, for that which had 
not been told them shall they see, and that which they 
had not heard shall they understand." 

There are two reasons why the world and its great 
ones will be astonished when the Millennial Kingdom shall 
suddenly burst upon the world. They have heard such 
chimerical and unreasonable statements respecting Messiah's 
Kingdom, even from the people of God, that they 
will be taken completely by surprise when they shall behold 
the reality. Some have told them that Messiah's 
reign was accomplished during the period of the Dark 
Ages, in the triumph of the Church of Rome. Others 
have told them that Messiah's reign is now in progress, 
that the various kingdoms of earth, at war and preparing 
for war, are branches of Messiah's Kingdom. 

Still, others have claimed that the Kingdom is to be an 
evolutionary matter brought about by moral reforms. 
When it shall be ushered in, following a great social 



revolution, it will be so much more majestically grand than 
anything dreamed of that every mouth shall be stopped 
and, as the Lord through the Prophet declares, that Kingdom 
of Messiah shall be the "desire of all nations."— 
Hag. 2:6,7. 

AS SEEN BY HIS FOLLOWERS 

Chapter 53, verses 1 to 6, picture the experiences of 
Jesus as viewed from the standpoint of the disciple of His 
day and since. Following their commission, they have told 
the wonderful story of the Savior's love and sacrifice, even 
unto death. But how few have heard, in the true sense of 
hearing; how few have appreciated it; how few have seen 
in Jesus the Arm of Jehovah, stretched down for the relief 
of Adam and his race from sin and death! Only a handful, 
the saintly few, really and truly believe the message, for 
surely every true believer would not only accept the proffered 
share of the Redeemer's merit, but also the proffered 
share of His sufferings, that they might have a share also 
in the glory to follow. We read: 

"Who hath believed our report, and to whom is the Arm 
of the Lord revealed? For He shall grow up before Him 
as a tender plant, and as a root out of dry ground. He 
hath no form or comeliness; and when we shall see Him, 
there is no beauty that we should desire Him. He is despised 
and rejected of men; a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted 
with grief; and we hid, as it were, our faces from 
Him; He was despised, and we esteemed Him not. Surely 
He hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows, yet we 
did esteem Him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. But 
He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised 
for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon 
Him and with His stripes we are healed. All we, like 
sheep, have gone astray; we have turned every one to his 
own way; and the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of 
us all." 

Not understanding that there must be a sacrifice for 
sin before the Divine blessing could come, the Jews looked 
for a mighty hero, a conquering general, to deliver them 
from the Roman yoke. Hence their disappointment in 
finding Jesus a gentle teacher, full of tenderness and compassion, 
laying down his life for the "sheep." He, indeed, 
had the blessing of purity and Godlikeness, but this was 
not the blessing of their dreams and hopes. The experiences 
endured by Jesus were misunderstood by many- 
misunderstood even by His disciples, one of whom said, 
"Far be it from thee, Lord; this thing shall not happen 
unto Thee"— his crucifixion; and when the crucifixion did 
come, it was accepted by the many as an evidence of 
Divine disapproval, as an evidence that Jehovah repudiated 
the Servant and the service. 

A MORE MATURED VIEW 

Verses seven to nine portray the matured view of 



Jesus' disciples as they began to consider more carefully 
and to understand more fully their Master and His work. 
As with the Head, so with many members of His Body, 
the Church; only after their decease is their real spirit 
understood and appreciated from the Divine standpoint. 
We read: "He was oppressed, yet He humbled Himself 

R4832 : page 173 

and opened not His mouth. As a lamb that is led to 
the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, 
He opened not His mouth. By judicial oppression he 
was taken away; and as for His future offspring, how 
could there be any, for He was cut off out of the land of 
the living! For the transgression of my people was He 
stricken. And they made His grave with the wicked, and 
with the rich in His death; of all He had done, there was 
no violence, neither was any deceit found in His mouth." 

How could one dying as Jesus died, without natural 
children and as a felon, ever expect to become the great 
Messiah, of whom it is written, "He shall be called Wonderful, 
Counselor, a Mighty One, the Prince of Peace, 
and the Father [or Giver] of everlasting life!" How 
could the crucified Jesus give life to any one? 

The Scriptures explain that in the Divine arrangement 
He purchases Adam and Adam's race, condemned through 
Adam's fall. Being raised from the dead by the Heavenly 
Father, Jehovah, Jesus is now the glorified One, merely 
waiting for the completion of the Church which is His 
Body, that He may take to Himself His great power and 
reign, as the Messiah of Israel and of the world. During 
the Messianic reign, opportunity will be given to 
Adam and all of his race to be resurrected or uplifted out 
of sin and death conditions— up, up, up to full human 
perfection and everlasting life— to all that was lost in 
Adam, to all that was redeemed through the cross. 
This is explained in the following verse: "He shall 
see His seed"— His progeny; so many of Adam's progeny 
as will obey Him He will adopt as His children, giving 
them life everlasting on the plane of human perfection. 

THE PROPHETIC EXPLANATION 

Verses ten and eleven give the following prophetic 
explanation of the experiences of Jesus: "Yet it pleased 
Jehovah to bruise Him; He hath put Him to grief. Thou 
shalt make His soul an Offering for sin; He shall see His 
seed. He shall prolong His days, and the pleasure of 
Jehovah shall prosper in His hand. He shall see of the 
travail of His soul and shall be satisfied. By His knowledge 
shall my righteous servant justify many, when He 
shall bear their iniquities." 

THE REDEEMER'S EXALTATION 

The last verse of our study points out to us that the 



exaltation of Jesus in His resurrection, far above angels, 
principalities and powers and every name that is named, 
was as a reward for His faithfulness in doing the will 
of the Father, according to His covenant of sacrifice. 
Jehovah also tells us that this great reward Jesus will 
share with His Church, His Bride, "the strong, the overcomers. 
Finally the Prophet summarizes the Master's 
work as respects the present Age: 

"Because of this will I divide Him a portion with the 
great, and He shall divide the spoil with the strong, because 
He poured out His soul unto death and was numbered 
with the transgressors; yet He bare the sin of many 
and accomplished intercession for the transgressors." 



R4832 : page 173 

RANSOM-RANSOM-PRICE-SIN ATONEMENT 

BUT ONE Ransom-price was arranged for by 

our Heavenly Father and provided for 

in the death of his Son, our Lord 

Jesus Christ. That Ransom-price is for 

the sins of the whole world. But the 

world has not yet gotten its share of the 

benefit of that Ransom-price provided 

more than eighteen centuries ago; for it 

still "lies in the Wicked One." (I John 5:19.) 

Our Lord, knowing the Father's 

will in this matter, declared, "I pray not for the world, 

but for them which thou hast given me."— John 17:9. 

The application of the merit of the Ransom for the 
Church was made when our Lord Jesus "ascended up on 
High and appeared in the presence of God for us"— the 
Church class. (Heb. 9:24.) His application of his merit 
for us was manifested by the Pentecostal blessing, which 
has since continued with all of the "us" class, begetting 
these to the new nature, as joint-heirs with our 
Redeemer. 

Our great High Priest will not make application of 
his Ransom-merit on behalf of the world until the end of 
this Age, until he shall have finished the use of it 
on behalf of the Church— now enabling those drawn of 
the Father to "present their bodies living sacrifices, holy 
and acceptable to God, their reasonable service."— 
Rom. 12:1. 

During this Age, he accepts, therefore, as part of 
his own sacrifice, the offering of the Church. This enables 
this class, as referred to by the Apostle (Col. 1:24), 
"to fill up that which is behind of the afflictions 
of Christ for his Body's sake, which is the Church." 
Thus, suffering with him in this present time, they will 
shortly be glorified with him in his Kingdom as his 
Bride. 

To recapitulate: The Ransom-price is one thing, and 



the Sin-atonement made with that Ransom-price is quite 
another. The Ransom-price for all was provided by our 
Lord in the work finished by him at Calvary. The appropriation 
of the Ransom-price is two-fold:— 

(1) In this Age, for or on behalf of, the Church. 

(2) In the coming Age, for the sealing of the New 
Covenant with Israel, which will be open for acceptance 
by all the families of the earth— all nations. 

The Atonement, so far as God is concerned, all proceeds 
from the Ransom-price provided at Calvary. The 
first application of that price was made after our Lord 
ascended up on High, when he appeared for us, his 
Church. The second application of the Ransom-price 
will be at the close of this Age, when, as the Great 
Priest, he will mediate the New Covenant with the 
House of Israel and the House of Judah. This Covenant 
is different from the Covenant under which the 
Church is developed, namely the Abrahamic Covenant, 
which has no mediator, and which is a Covenant of sacrifice, 
while the New Covenant is a Covenant of Restitution, 
to return man to his original condition of 
perfection. 



R4834 : page 173 

"O GLORIOUS DAY" 

"Thou hast been faithful— 

Thou hast borne the cross, 

The thorns have pierced thy feet; 

But now the night is past— 

The day has come— bright, 

Glorious Day of endless joy and love. 

The trial time hath proved thee true 

And thou art safe, Beloved, 

In thy Father's home. 

"O, glorious Day, for thee we long! 
We will be faithful, will the 
Burdens bear, sustained by grace Divine. 
In meek submission to thy holy will; 
Dear Lord, by faith we clasp thy hand 
As side by side we tread the Narrow Way, 
And wait— for it will surely come- 
Some day, some dear, sweet day; 
O, tarry not too long ! " 



R4833 : page 174 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
PRAYER AND TESTIMONY MEETING 



DEAR PASTOR:-The matter of a topic for the Wednesday 
evening testimony meeting was brought up at our Board meeting 
recently. It seems to some of us that it would be fine if 
we could have a topic suggested in THE WATCH TOWER, so 
that all would be considering the same topic, and so that, 
wherever we might be, we would know what the topic is. 

Some suggested your sermon-text as the topic, but so many 
do not get the sermon until after Wednesday, that it hardly 
seemed best. Others suggested the MANNA text for Wednesday 
as the topic. We hope that in due time you may have 
some plan for a general topic, if it seem best to you, and the 
Lord's will in the matter. Yours in the Redeemer, 
R. H. BRICKER.--PA. 

IN REPLY 

We have had many suggestions relative to the advisability 
of unanimity of topic for these meetings. We take this opportunity 
of reiterating the counsel offered in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Volume VI., namely, that we know of no meetings 
more helpful than the testimony meetings, where they 
are properly conducted, and after the friends have had 
about a month's experience with them. Testimonies as to 
one's conversion years before, or as to how one first received 
the knowledge of the Truth, may be very good in 
General Conventions, etc., but such testimonies we certainly 
believe very tedious and tiresome in a weekly class. It would 
be tiresome also for the friends to tell you what they ought 
to do and what experiences they ought to have. What is 
desirable and refreshing is crisp, up-to-date testimonies 
touching the events and experiences of the preceding week. 
Such meetings tend to make all of the classes holding them 
more attentive to note the providences of God and the lessons 
of life daily and hourly. Thus more valuable experience 
is gained daily than when such things are passed by with 
little or no attention. 

We recommend this plan for Wednesday evening and that 
Thursday's MANNA text become the topic for each new week 
ending with the Wednesday night meeting. 

There is nothing in the nature of a bondage in this suggestion. 
But those who approve might accept it, and those 
who do not approve may do otherwise. It is the affair of each 
class. It would be, however, very nice to know, not only 
that the Vow and its prayer daily draw all of the Lord's 
people close to the Mercy Seat, but also it would be pleasant 
to know that all are thinking of God's providences along the 
same lines each week. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been seeing some of the Truths for about seventeen 
years, but did not have an understanding heart, I suppose, or 
else the sacrifices were too great. But our Heavenly Father 
allowed me to see the imperfection of human love and 



happiness away from Him, and now the eyes of my understanding 

are being opened that I may understand His blessed 

Word. 

I symbolized my consecration unto death last month, and 
we have started a little class up here in Doylestown. I am 
enclosing some clippings on the use and abuse of narcotics. 
I gather from I Cor. 8:13, that we should not stumble or 
offend any of the brethren and that must apply to all matters. 

You can see from the clippings how scientists are classing 
caffeine with the harmful, nay, dangerous narcotics. 

We should be so glad to have an article in THE TOWER 
on the subject of abuse of such things as coffee: "and every 
man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things." 
(1 Cor. 9:25.) This seems to me to include even the very 
small sacrifices of our daily life, if the things sacrificed are 
in any sense harmful. 

Yours in the Blessed Redeemer, E. J. HAYMAN. 



page 174 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Pardon me for taking a few moments of your valuable 
time to express my appreciation of the Truth. In the four 
years I have been privileged to have it, it has caused a 
great hunger, not only for the knowledge of God's Plan, but 
also that I might be found in the likeness of His character. 

The March 15 TOWER was especially helpful in that it 
searched my heart as to what effect the Truth has had 
upon me— how much I have permitted it to cleanse me from 
all "filthiness of the flesh and spirit." 

Thanks be unto God, where there was envy and jealousy 
there is now a greater measure of the Spirit of Christ. I find 
myself grieved by the least omission in my allegiance to His 
law of liberty. 

Words fail me to express my thankfulness to the Lord for 
His goodness in permitting me to be awake to my own condition 
and to allow the Truth to reveal to me the secrets of 
my heart, while thousands of Christian people are asleep, not 
only to their heart condition, but to the marvelous work the 
Lord is performing in the earth today! 

Yours in the Harvest work, H. FINJORD.-Minn. 



R4833 : page 174 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Please find enclosed $1, for which send THE WATCH TOWER. 
I received a copy of the issue of the 15th of last January, 
from which kindly date my subscription. 

"The Divine Plan of the Ages," the New Testament, and 
a few copies of THE WATCH TOWER which you have sent me, 
have been of more service than all of the preaching I ever listened 
to. 



I have been called a skeptic and an infidel for forty years, 
but, when the kind of light we had is considered, it is no 
wonder the world is full of skepticism. Give me light! more 
light! 

Very respectfully yours, W. M. BURKE. 



page 174 

DEARLY LOVED BROTHER:- 

Greetings in the name of "him by whose kind favor 
heavenly Truth has reached our ears." 

Knowing that your time is much occupied, I have hitherto 
restrained my desire to write, but as present circumstances 
forbid my seeing you in the flesh, I trust you will permit me 
to express my loving sympathy for and confidence in you as 
the Lord's faithful servant. 

May he stand by you and strengthen you, and may his 
strength be made perfect in your weakness, enabling you to be 
faithful until death, when you shall hear the "Well done, good 
and faithful servant; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord!" 

Your Sister in the glorious hope, 

LIZZIE BAUR.--SCOTLAND. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Please accept the enclosed as a small token of my love for 
the dear Lord, and also for yourself as one of his very own. 

I can never praise him enough for all his great, loving 
kindness in the way that he has led me and is still leading me 
day by day. 

It is now rather more than three years since your books 
came my way, and I can truly say they have been the best 
years of my life. 

I was hungering for the food which I could get nowhere, 
for, although a regular attendant in the nominal church, I got 
nothing there and I did not understand my Bible. 

But now, praise the dear Lord, since getting the "key," 
which was supplied in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, how I love 
to read my Bible!— for now I know, to some extent, our dear 
Heavenly Father's great love as shown in his glorious Plan 
for the salvation of mankind— first for the Church and then 
for the world. 

I want to tell you that I took the Vow some time ago. I 
feel that I need every help I can get. 

I am sorry that I shall not be able to hear your address, 
as I am confined to bed. But I shall not forget you at the 
Throne of Grace, nor shall I forget all who are associated 
with you in the great "Harvest" work— that you may all be 
abundantly blessed and strengthened in your labor of love, 
and that the true "wheat" may all be safely garnered. 

With much Christian love, I am, 

Your Sister in his dear service, 

MARY LAWSON.-ENG. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Enclosed find twenty-five cents, for which please send me 
PEOPLES PULPIT one year and also "interesting sermons," as 
mentioned in a recent issue. 

This is the literature I have been wanting ever since I 
was old enough to think for myself. It is almost like a 
glimpse of Paradise to read Pastor Russell's sermons. May 
God bless and prosper you in your work. 

I. N. RITTER.--KANSAS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have much pleasure in writing to you and thanking you 
as I have already thanked the dear Lord, for the many blessings 
I have received through you and your writings. 

I have been in Present Truth only about six months. But 
during that short space of time the Lord has taught me many 
things which have been a great blessing, far greater than I 
asked or dreamed. I am pleased to tell you, dear Brother, that 
I am still progressing in the Truth, and striving to keep humble, 
and thus faithful. But to tell you all this was not the only 

page 175 

reason that this letter was written. I am pleased to tell you, 
dear Brother, that I have taken the Vow, and I find it a great 
help, especially in the keeping of my heart; it keeps me continually 
on my guard, and thus I am able to gain many 
victories over self. Now, dear Brother, I pray the Lord will 
bless you and the great work that he has given you to do. 
He is faithful and true, and waits for us to prove faithful, so 
that he can reward us with that crown that he has in store 
for them that are faithful. 
I am your Brother in the one hope of our calling, 
J. T. JAHME.-Eng. 



R4833 : page 175 

BELOVED PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I have been thinking over the article in the January 1 
TOWER, "Was the Alarm Clock Right?" Does it really matter 
to any of those who are striving faithfully to carry out their 
consecration vow? All I have of real solid truth, I gratefully 
acknowledge has come through that faithful Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society which God raised up to feed his flock 
with meat in due season. Who can shut their eyes to the 
rapidly fulfilled prophecies of the holy Prophets, our dear 
Saviour and the Apostles? Is not Daniel's prophecy alone 
sufficient warning to the household of faith to set their house 
in order? But apart from the vast amount of evidence we 



have of the near close of the Gentile times, I think the "Shaking 

R4834 : page 175 

among the dry bones of the House of Israel" would alone 
be sufficient to prove that the time is at hand. It was necessary 
that the Lion of the tribe of Judah should be able to take and 
open the Book and loose the seven seals thereof, for to him 
was committed the task of carrying out the Divine Plan. But 
as far as the little flock is concerned, it is not necessary that 
they should know the exact hour of the closing of the Gentile 
Times. Surely, enough of the precious Present Truth has 
been revealed to awaken even the dullest believer. 

We are to live by faith, and our faithfulness in this matter 
may be one of the tests of our faith. Who, I would ask, could 
read the parable of the Ten Virgins, and not see its application 
to the time in question? They all slumbered and slept, but 
at midnight there was a cry made, "Behold the Bridegroom!" 
Only the five wise virgins who took oil in their vessels with 
their lamps were ready at the sudden call to follow the Bridegroom, 
and went in with him to the marriage. Undoubtedly 
the attitude of every true child of God is one of prayerful 
watchfulness. The sealing in the forehead has been ample to 
all who are earnestly seeking to be overcomers through the 
blood of the Lamb. God's wonderful Plan of Salvation, as shown 
in the STUDIES, is sufficient for all those who have by Divine 
love been called and chosen and are faithfully striving through 
the merit of Jesus to be honored, and we have our Heavenly 
Father's promise that the Adversary shall not be able to pluck 
them out of his hand. 

Oh, how many have reason to thank God for the wonderful 
help they have received through the STUDIES, THE WATCH 
TOWER and all the other helps to the footstep-followers of our 
Redeemer! 

Beloved Pastor, may the dear Lord continue to make you a 
blessing to his Church until your work is finished, and you 
hear the "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joy of thy Lord," is the prayer of your humble fellow-servant 
in Jesus. 

The enclosed $10 is for use in the Harvest Work, to be used 
in whatever way you think best. It comes in grateful acknowledgment 
of the blessed hope gained through the STUDIES and 
the other helps, and with an earnest prayer that our Heavenly 
Father will guide and strengthen you through the coming year 
as in the past, and continue to make you a blessing to the 
household of Faith through our precious Redeemer. 
JOHN MCCARTHY. 



page 175 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I am writing you because I wish you to have my name as 
one of those who have taken the Vow. It is some time since 
I made it my own, but have delayed sending in my name until 



now. In talking with a dear Brother recently in regard to the 
matter, I saw that I was neglecting a privilege and am glad 
now to state my position respecting the Vow. I realize that 
it has proved a great blessing to me and a constant reminder 
of the narrowness of the way that leads us upward to the life 
immortal. It is surely of the Lord, from whom cometh all 
good and perfect gifts. With much Christian love, I remain, 
Yours in the one hope, 

FRANKLIN H. MACKENZIE.-Mass. 



page 175 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study V.— The Organization of the New Creation. 
JULY 2 

(75) Is this illustration of the Apostle that of a fully developed 
human body? P. 239, par. 2. 

(76) While unity of faith is desirable, upon what is the 
Scriptural idea of unity based? P. 240, par. 1, first half. 

(77) What are the two essentials upon which unity must 
be demanded? P. 240, par. 1, last half. 

(78) Should we expect and look for a continuance of the 
Lord's gifts to the Church in respect to prophets, pastors, 
teachers? P. 241, par. 1. 

(79) Why should force not be used in an attempt to 
unify the members of the Church? P. 241, par. 2. 

(80) What lessons may the antitypical "Royal Priesthood" 
learn from the typical priesthood? P. 242, par. 1,2. 

JULY 9 

(81) Should mental or physical deformities in any member, 
unfitting him for public service, hinder his spiritual development 
or recognition as possessing full rights at the 

Lord's table and at the Throne of Heavenly grace? P. 243, 
par. 1, first half. 

(82) Who are to be regarded as "Elders" in the Church? 
P. 243, par. 1, last half, and par. 2. 

(83) What is the meaning of the word Bishop, and what 
is the relation between the terms bishop and elder? P. 244, 
par. 1. 

(84) How is the term "general overseer" applicable to an 
elder in the Church? and what qualifications should be expected 
in such a one? P. 244, par. 2. 

(85) What spirit gradually led to Papacy and later to 
sectarian and unscriptural divisions into clergy and laity? 
P. 245, par. 1. 

(86) While all the elders are caretakers, what various 
services may they render according to individual qualifications? 
P. 245, par. 2. 



JULY 16 

(87) What does the word prophet strictly signify? P. 
246, par. 1. 

(88) What is the most essential qualification to eldership? 
P. 246, par. 2. 

(89) What is the duty of every member of the Church 
with respect to the selection of leaders? P. 247, par. 1. 

(90) Is it absolutely necessary for every Ecclesia to have 
a public servant? P. 248, par. 1. 

(91) How should the self-seeking and novices be regarded 
in selecting elders? P. 248, par. 2. 

(92) What explicit advice is given by the Apostles Paul 
and Peter concerning the character, etc., of those who should 
be recognized as elders? P. 249, par. 1,2. 

JULY 23 

(93) Is there any limitation as to the number of elders 
in an Ecclesia? P. 249, par. 2. 

(94) Is it essential that an elder be "apt to teach"? and 
does this necessarily imply ability for public speaking? P. 
249, par. 3, first part. 

(95) Should we expect the Lord to raise up public 
speakers in every Ecclesia? and if none are supplied, what 
should be the conclusion and our course of action? P. 250. 

(96) How may elders, not so apt to teach, exercise other 
talents? P. 250, par. 1. 

(97) What does the word Pastor signify? and how does 
it apply to an elder? P. 251, par. 1. 

(98) What is the Scriptural injunction respecting "Elders 
that rule well"? (1 Tim. 5:17,18.) P. 251, par. 2. 

JULY 30 

(99) What is the significance of the word Deacon? P. 
252, par. 1. 

(100) With the foregoing view of the subject, should we 
understand that no distinction as respects service obtained in 
the early Church? P. 252, par. 2. 

(101) How is the word deacon specifically applied in the 
New Testament? P. 253, par. 1. 

(102) Mention a notable example of the fact that deacons, 
while serving chiefly in temporal affairs, were not hindered 
from exercising their talents in other ways. P. 254, par. 1. 

(103) What was the most marked characteristic of the 
early Church arrangement? P. 254, par. 2. 



page 177 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Acceptable to God 179 

"Keep Back Thy Servant From Presumptuous 

Sins" 180 

The Rewards of Sacrifice 180 

Sacrifices Acceptable During the Gospel 

Age Only 181 

The Work of Grace in the Heart 182 

We Must Learn Thoroughly the Lesson 

of Love 182 

"Study to Show Thyself Approved" 183 

Divine Justice and Mercy 185 

A Godly Young King 186 

Deliverance From the Curse 187 

191 1— Conventions Program— 1911 187 

"Love Casteth Out Fear" 188 

Face to Face With Trouble (Poem) 188 

"Christ in You the Hope of Glory" 189 

The Robe of Christ's Righteousness 189 

Questions of Interest 190 

Some Interesting Letters 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



FIVE-DAYS BIBLE STUDENTS CONVENTION 

Oakland, San Rafael and San Francisco brethren extend a 
most cordial invitation to all outside friends to attend the 
5-day joint-local Convention in San Francisco— June 22, 23, 
24, 25 and Oakland June 26. Brother Russell will speak 
twice in San Francisco— June 25— and in Oakland June 26. 
Pilgrim service will be arranged for all days. Opportunity 
for water baptism will be arranged in Oakland June 26. 

Arrangements will be made for visiting friends. Rooms 
may be engaged in advance at 50 cents, 75 cents, $ 1 and up 
per day. Send full data and money as soon as possible to 
"Sec'y Hotel Committee, I.B.S.A.," 2018 Green street, San 
Francisco. Data should show sex, color, those that wish to 
room together or are willing to share room and bed to save 
expense, also rate desired, exact dates, etc., and hour and 
route of expected arrival, if known. Free sleeping accommodations 
will be furnished by local brethren to those that can 
come, but cannot afford room rent; these should also advise 
promptly in advance. Visitors' mail may be sent in care of 
above address. 

Meetings and headquarters for four days in San Francisco 
will be at Lyric Hall, 513 Larkin street, with public lectures 
afternoon and evening of Sunday, June 25, at Dreamland 
Rink. 

Meetings and headquarters in Oakland, June 26, will be at 
corner of Jones street and Telegraph avenue. 

TORONTO, ONT., CONVENTION, JULY 15-17 

All services for the interested in Broadway Hall, 450 
Spadina Ave. On Sunday, July 16th, Brother Russell will 
address the general public at 3 p.m., and again at 7.30 p.m. 
in Massey Hall, corner of Victor and Shuter Sts. 

R4844 : page 178 



A DONATION OF MIRACLE WHEAT 

Brother Bohnet writes us that he has gradually accumulated 
a crop of miracle wheat from the few grains he 
obtained as a start. He prefers that the first opportunity for 
obtaining this wheat shall go to THE WATCH TOWER readers. 
He will sell it for $1 per pound, including postage, and give 
the entire proceeds to our Society. All orders for this wheat 
should be addressed, Miracle Wheat Bohnet, 17 Hicks street, 
Brooklyn, N. Y. This will keep mail on this subject separate 
from his personal mail and from ours. 

Brother Bohnet promises to be ready to ship this wheat 
by August 1. He says miracle wheat should be sowed one-fourth 
as thick as common wheat. Ordinarily it should produce 
from ten to fifteen times as much proportionately to the 
amount sown. To save keeping account, money should 
accompany the order. WATCH TOWER readers will have the 
preference up to August 15, after which orders will be attended 
to indiscriminately, so long as the supply holds out. 
This wheat should be sown in the fall. 

page 178 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for July follow: (1) 32; (2) 
24; (3) 95; (4) 176; (5) 130; (6) 105; (7) 57; (8) 
182; (9) 260; (10) Vow; (11) 281; (12) 129; (13) 
135; (14) 110; (15) 229; (16) 330; (17) 315; (18) 324; 
(19) 145; (20) 9; (21) 46; (22) 78; (23) 65; (24) 3; 
(25) 279; (26) 193; (27) 131; (28) 249; (29) 259; 
(30) 322; (31) 217. 



R4834 : page 179 

ACCEPTABLE TO GOD 

"Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart, 
be acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my 
Redeemer."— Psa. 19:14. 

HOW BEAUTIFUL in the sight of right 

thinking men is a well-balanced, self-possessed 

and disciplined character! And 

in contrast with such, how unlovely are the 

undisciplined and ungoverned— the selfish, 

the unjust, the unkind and the violent-tempered! 

Naturally, the one awakens in 

us emotions of pleasure and admiration, 



and the other, of pain. And if such is the 
appreciation of virtue and the abhorrence 
of the lack of it among men who have lost much of the 
original image of God, with what a keen appreciation 
must they be observed by a pure and holy God! 

Men of the world who have no personal acquaintance 
with God have no special thought as to how they appear 
in His sight; but with what carefulness should those who 
love Him and who value His approval study to conform 
their conduct to His pure and holy mind! True, all who 
are "begotten again," notwithstanding their imperfections 
and shortcomings through inherited weaknesses, are 
acceptable to God through Christ, whose robe of righteousness 
amply covers them; but the measure of their 
acceptableness to God, even through Christ, is only to the 
extent that, while availing ourselves of His imputed 
righteousness, they are earnestly striving to attain actually 
to the standard of perfection. By so doing they manifest 
their real appreciation of the Divine favor. 

With what confusion and chagrin would one be 
covered who, in the midst of a fit of violent temper or an 
unjust or mean transaction, unworthy of his dignity or 
his profession, should be suddenly surprised by the appearance 
of a beloved friend of high and noble character! 
And yet, the eye of such a One is ever upon us. And only 
to the extent that we dismiss this thought from our minds, 
or else that we undervalue the Lord's opinion and approval, 
can we allow the evil propensities of the fallen 
nature to run riot. 

"WHEREWITHAL SHALL A YOUNG MAN CLEANSE HIS 
WAY" 

Realizing the downward tendency of the old nature, 
how constantly should the above prayer of the Psalmist 
be in the minds of God's consecrated children! But how, 
one inquires, may the difficult task of subduing the inherent 
depravity be accomplished? It is hard for one, 
particularly under exasperating circumstances, to control 
a hasty or violent temper, for another to bridle a gossiping 
tongue; and especially if the trials of life to some 
extent put their colored glasses on the eyes. And then 
what a host of inherent weaknesses there are, which 
every one of God's true children realizes and knows that 
he must strive against, if he would be acceptable with 
God! The thoughts of our hearts are not manifest to 
fellow-men until we express them in words or actions; 
but even the very thoughts and intents of the heart are 
all open and manifest to God. What a comfort to the 
honest-hearted! 

The Psalmist repeats this inquiry, saying, "Wherewithal 
shall a young man cleanse his way?" and then 
replies, "By taking heed thereto, according to Thy Word." 
Then he frames for us this resolution: "I will meditate 
on Thy precepts and have respect unto Thy ways; I will 
delight myself in Thy statutes; I will not forget Thy 



Word." (Psa. 1 19:9,15,16.) Here is the secret of a 

pure and noble life, acceptable to God. It is to be attained, 

not merely by prayers and righteous resolutions, 

but, in addition to these, by careful painstaking heed, by 

systematic and diligent effort at self-cultivation, by care 

and perseverance in weeding out evil thoughts, and 

by diligent and constant cultivation of pure, benevolent 

and noble thoughts, and by nipping in the bud the weeds 

of perversity before they bring forth their hasty harvest 

of sinful words and deeds. 

But observe, further, that this heed or care is to be 
taken, not according to the imperfect standard of our 
own judgment, but according to God's Word. The 
standard by which we test our lives makes a vast difference 
in our conclusions. 

The Psalmist further commends this standard to us, 
saying: "The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the 
soul. [That is, if we take heed to our ways according to 
God's Law, it will turn us completely from the path of sin 
to the path of righteousness.] The testimony [the instruction] 
of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple 
[the meek, teachable ones— clearly pointing out to them 
the ways of righteousness]. The statutes [the decrees, 
ordinances and precepts] of the Lord are right [the infallible 
rules of righteousness], rejoicing the heart [of 
the obedient]. The commandment of the Lord is pure, 
enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean 
[not a mental, servile fear, but a noble fear, begotten of 
love— a fear of falling short of His righteous approval], 
enduring forever. More to be desired are they [the Law 
and the testimony of the Lord] than gold; yea, than 

R4835 : page 180 

much fine gold; sweeter also than honey and the 
honeycomb. 

"KEEP BACK THY SERVANT FROM PRESUMPTUOUS SINS" 

"Moreover, by them is thy servant warned [concerning 
the dangers of the way and the snares of the Adversary, 
and concerning everything which is calculated 
to discourage, or to hinder his growth in grace], and in 
keeping of them there is great reward. Who [in the use 
merely of his own fallible judgment and without the 
standard of God's Law] can understand his errors [can 
rightly judge himself]?" 

But when, as we measure ourselves by this standard, 
we detect and deplore our shortcomings, let us remember 
the Psalmist's prayer: "Cleanse thou me from secret 
faults"— thus supplementing our efforts by our prayers. 
-Psa. 19:7-12. 

But there is still another part of this prayer which the 
Lord thus puts into our mouths. It reads: "Keep back 
thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not 
have dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and I 



shall be innocent from the great transgression." Let us 
consider what kind of sins would be presumptuous sins. 
To presume signifies to take for granted without authority 
or proof. A presumptuous sin would, therefore, be taking 
for granted and asserting as truth something which God 
has not revealed, or the perversion of what He has revealed. 
To claim and hold tenaciously as a part of God's 
Plan any doctrine, merely on the ground of fallible human 
reason and without Divine authority, would therefore be 
a presumptuous sin. 

Of this nature is the sin of those who malign the 
Divine character by boldly teaching the blasphemous 
doctrine of eternal torment without warrant from the 
Scriptures, and in direct contradiction of them. And 
there are many other sins of greater and less degree 
which partake of the same character. But the words here 
seem to refer directly to some particular error into which 
there is danger of drifting— "Then shall I be innocent 
from the great transgression"— evidently, the sin unto 
death referred to by the Apostles also. (I John 5:16; 
Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31.) Such a sin would be that of 
presuming upon the love of God to bring us salvation, 
even though we should wilfully refuse it through the 
channel which He has appointed— the precious blood of 
Christ, shed for our redemption. 

"BLESSED IS THE MAN WHOSE DELIGHT IS IN THE LAW 
OF THE LORD" 

Well, indeed, may we pray and strive to be kept back 
from presumptuous sins— sins of pride or of arrogant 
self-will which does not meekly submit to the will of 
God! Let us, beloved, beware of the slightest tendency 
toward pride and self-will, or the disposition to be wise 
above what is written, or to take for granted what God 
does not clearly promise. "Then," indeed, if we watch 
and strive against the very beginning of that proud and 
haughty spirit which surely presages a fall, we shall be 
"innocent from the great transgression." 

"Blessed is the man whose delight is in the Law of the 
Lord, and who doth meditate therein day and night. He 
shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that 
bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall 
not wither, and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper." (Psa. 1:1-3.) 
If we make the Word of God the theme of our 
constant meditation, its principles will soon be assimilated 
and become part of our mental makeup, making our 
characters more beautiful and commendable both to God 
and to our fellowmen; and in harmony with this habit of 
the mind the acts of life will speak. 

The purified fountain will send forth sweeter waters 
than formerly, bearing refreshment and good cheer to all 
who come in contact with it. It will make happier homes 
—better husbands, better wives and better children. It 
will sweeten the temper, soften the voice, dignify the 
language, cultivate the manners, ennoble the sentiments 



and lend its charming grace to every simple duty. It will 
bring in the principle of love and cast out the discordant 
elements of selfishness. Thus it will make the home the 
very garden-spot of earth, where every virtue and every 
grace will have ample room to expand and grow. 

It will not only thus favorably affect the individual 
and the home-life, but it will go out into the avenues of 
trade, and truth and fair-dealing will characterize all the 
business relations; and thus will God be honored by those 
who bear His name and wear the impress of His blessed 
Spirit. 

While the heights of perfection cannot be reached so 
long as we still have these imperfect bodies, there should 
be in every child of God very perceptible and continuous 
growth in grace, and each step gained should be considered 
but the stepping-stone to higher attainments. If 
there is no perceptible growth into the likeness of God, 
or if there is a backward tendency, or a listless standstill, 
there is cause for alarm. 

Let us constantly keep before our eyes the model 
which the Lord Jesus set for our example— that model of 
the complete fulfilment of the will of God, in which the 
whole Law was kept blamelessly. Let us follow His steps 
of righteousness and self-sacrifice as nearly as a full 
measure of loving zeal and faithfulness and loyalty to 
God will enable us to do, and we shall have a blessed sense 
of the Divine approval now, and the glorious reward of 
Divine favor in due time. 



R4835 : page 180 

THE REWARDS OF SACRIFICE 

"I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

NOWHERE IN THE SCRIPTURES are we 
commanded by the Lord to sacrifice our 
earthly rights and privileges. The Divine 
commands end at the line of justice. In 
other words, justice and righteousness are 
one and the same thing. Sacrifice, self-denial, 
taking up the cross to follow Jesus, 
are all propositions away beyond the Divine 
Law. The Law Covenant proffered a 
perpetuation of human life to all who would 
fulfil its requirements. None of the Jews, with whom 
that Covenant was made, were able to fulfil those requirements, 
except the One who came from above and 
for whom was provided a perfect human body, which 
enabled Him to keep the requirements of the Law Covenant, 
entitling Him, therefore, to everlasting earthly life. 
The New Law Covenant, under the antitypical Mediator, 



will offer the same reward of everlasting human 

perfection to all who will fulfil its requirements. Its 

superiority over the first Law Covenant will consist in its 

having a better Mediator, capable of helping mankind 

fully out of condemnation, death and weakness and authorized 

so to do because of the merit of His "better 

sacrifices." 

R4835 :page 181 

But while Jesus, born under the Law, was obligated 
to the conditions of that Covenant and fulfilled them and 
through them had a right to everlasting earthly life, He 
did more. He sacrificed that earthly life— laid it down- 
permitted sinful men to take it from Him without resistance, 
although He had the power to call for legions of 
angels for protection. This was His sacrifice. He did 
not sacrifice sinful weaknesses, for He had none. He 
sacrificed perfect life and all His legal rights and privileges. 
His reward for so doing was exaltation from the 
human nature to the divine nature— far above that of angels, 
principalities and powers. (Eph. 1:21.) Thus exalted 
He has the human rights (which He never forfeited) 
to give Adam and his race— their ransom-price. 
These He will give to them in the end of this Age, applying 
them to the sealing of the New Law Covenant, under 
which Israel and all mankind may be restored to all that 
was lost through the first man's disobedience. Meantime, 
the glorified Redeemer uses that sacrificial merit (which 
He intends to give eventually to the world) to cover (imputatively) 
the blemishes of those of the household of faith 
who may hear the Divine call (and accept the same) to 
follow in the footsteps of Jesus— to sacrifice and suffer 
with Him in the flesh, that they may be glorified and 
reign with Him on the spirit plane beyond the veil. 

SIN-OFFERING SACRIFICES ACCEPTABLE DURING THE 
GOSPEL AGE ONLY 

Throughout this Gospel Age the Law Covenant has 
continued upon the Jews only, the remainder of the world 
being without any Covenant with God and waiting for 
the "times of restitution" under the New Law Covenant 
of the future. (Acts 3:19-21; Jer. 31:31-34.) It is during 
this time (the Gospel Age) that God draws and calls 
a certain loyal class and gives them an opportunity of 
sharing with their Redeemer in sacrificial death. The 
faithful will be counted His members or His Bride or 
joint-heirs in His Kingdom of glory and honor and 
immortality. All men, in proportion as they know the 
Divine will (what is just, from the Divine standpoint), 
are correspondingly in duty bound to fulfil that righteous 
requirement or Law of God to the extent of ability. But 

R4836 :page 181 



those desirous of following in the footsteps of Jesus are 

shown what they can do more than justice; but they are 

not commanded to do more. All sacrificing is a privilege, 

not a duty, not a command. In harmony with this, St. 

Paul writes, not commandingly, but entreatingly, "I beseech 

you, brethren, ...present your bodies living sacrifices." 

He did not command this. To have made it a 

command would at once prevent the opportunity of sacrifice. 

What we sacrifice is something that is not commanded. 

Whatever is commanded of God is obligation 

and not sacrifice. 

The Ancient Worthies presented their bodies, laid 
down their lives, renouncing earthly rights, but they did 
not sacrifice. Why? Because it is one thing to kill and 
another to have the slain creature accepted of God as a 
sacrifice. God did not call for human sacrifices prior to 
Jesus' sacrifice of Himself. God was unwilling to accept 
imperfect, blemished creatures at His altar. They might 
lay down their lives, but He would not count them sacrifices. 
Jesus was accepted as a sacrifice because He 
was perfect and His followers, since Pentecost, have been 
acceptable as sacrifices, because they are perfect— made 
so by the Redeemer's imputation to them of a sufficiency 
of His merit to compensate their blemishes. 

Thus this Gospel Age is called the "acceptable day 
(or time) of the Lord," because, during this Gospel Age 
God is willing to accept a predestinated number as joint-sacrificers 
with Jesus. But as soon as that predestinated 
number shall have been completed the acceptable time 
will immediately end. No more presentations will be accepted 
as sacrifices— the antitypical Day of Atonement 
will have ended. 

But suppose that some should present themselves after 
the close of the acceptable time; what would be their 
status and God's dealing with them? 

Since God is unchangeable, we must assume that He 
would always be pleased to have His creatures devote 
their lives wholly and unreservedly to the doing of His 
will, as He was pleased with the faithfulness of the Ancient 
Worthies to lay down their lives before a Covenant 
of sacrifice was in force. We may reason that as God has 
promised human perfection to those Ancient Worthies 
who laid down their lives, He would be willing similarly 
to reward any who might follow the same course after 
the completion of the Church— after the ending of the 
acceptable time of sacrifice. 

Quite likely, therefore, there will be some in the end 
of this Age who, although faithful unto death, will not 
have been begotten of the Holy Spirit and not attain the 
spirit plane of being in the resurrection, but who will 
come forth members of the same class as the Ancient 
Worthies, who were developed before this Age began. 

THE PRESENTATION OF ONESELF ALWAYS A REASONABLE 
SERVICE 



In view of these facts our advice to all who love the 
Lord and who desire to be in complete fellowship with 
Him is the same message that has gone forth throughout 
this Age— "We beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God, present your bodies living sacrifices." We cannot 
now assure them that, after presenting themselves as sacrifices, 
God will accept them as such and grant them 
spirit-begetting to a new nature; but we can assure them 
that it will be their reasonable service and that God always 
gives large rewards to those who manifest their 
faith and loyalty towards Him and His cause. We can 
tell them, too, that, to our understanding, the Scriptures 
teach that the Ancient Worthy class (of which they may 
be a part if they fail to be accepted to the new nature) 
will be highly honored of God, perfect on the human 
plane and made "princes in all the earth." We can assure 
them that, to our understanding, these princes will 
have a glorious precedence over the remainder of mankind 
as the special representatives of the invisible Messiah 
class for a thousand years. We can assure them 
that, to our understanding, after participating in that glorious 
work, these princes will be uplifted at the close of 
the Millennium to the spirit plane of being— as part of 
the an ti typical Levites. 

Since none can know when the elect number will be 
fully completed all should be alike anxious to lay down 
their lives in the service of God and of His Truth. To 
say that we would refuse to serve because any uncertainty 
would prevail in our minds respecting the character 
of our reward would be to show our unworthiness of 
any favor of God, for, to be acceptable to Him, our service 
must not be rendered to obtain the reward, but to 
serve righteousness and to please God! "I delight to do 
Thy will, O God"— everything written in the Book. 
Hence at Memorial season all of the consecrated should 
manifest their love, loyalty, obedience, faithfulness, by 
symbolizing the Redeemer's death and symbolizing also 
their own desire to share in the sufferings of Christ as 
parts of the "broken loaf" and as participators in the cup 
of His suffering. 

As to how much we should expect for our children is 

R4836 : page 182 

another matter. It is not for us to say at how early an 

age the children might demonstrate loyalty to God and to 

the Truth in a manner pleasing and acceptable to God. 

Those who are parents should, in all reasonable ways, by 

example and precept, illustrate and exemplify their appreciation 

of the privilege of the Lord's service— even 

unto death. Furthermore, their children should be instructed 

weekly and, if possible, daily, in respect to the 

different features of the Truth, that they may receive as 

much as possible. God knows whether a child of 

even tender years and short mental and heart development 

might not present himself in an acceptable manner. 



Parents, therefore, should do their best by their children 
and leave the results with the Lord, with full satisfaction 
with whatever may be His wise, just and loving decision 
for them, either on the earthly or on the heavenly plane. 
We are to remember, however, that none can enter either 
of these planes of instantaneous perfection in the resurrection 
unless his trial be finished successfully in the present 
life and by passing into death. The remainder of 
mankind, however, as already shown, will then have 
glorious opportunities and possibilities before them. 



R4836 : page 182 

THE WORK OF GRACE IN THE HEART 

"The love of Christ constraineth us."— 2 Cor. 5:14. 

THE WORD constrain has the double thought 
of drawing together, holding together. 
The Apostle had been recounting his own 
activities in the Lord's service, and had 
stated that with some his course seemed to 
indicate an unbalanced mind. He explained 
that this was not so; that he had 
a sounder mind than ever before. He felt 
himself bound to Christ, constrained by 
love of Christ to love Him and all who 
were His with a pure heart. 

Why should this love constrain? For this reason: If 
we reckon that all are dead, then all need the service 
of the Life-Giver; and if Christ died for all, and if we 
now have come to life through Him, we should hereafter 
live not according to, or after, the flesh. We should 
give up the flesh entirely and live the new life which 
we have received from Christ. St. Paul would say, 
I am not mad; but I am so closely drawn to Christ 
that I have the same sympathetic love for others that 
He had. As He had laid down His life for the brethren, 
so would I. 

Our Lord's love was specially manifested toward His 
disciples, and chiefly toward those who were the most 
zealous and energetic— Peter, James and John having 
the particular love of the Lord. Similarly the Church is 
thus instructed. There is no exhortation to lay down 
our lives in the service of the world, but specially for 
those of the household of faith. We see that the benefits 
of Christ's sacrifice are to reach the whole world of 
mankind, every member of Adam's race. 

Assuming, however, that the Lord knew from the 
very beginning who would betray Him, and that Divine 
discernment would know all who would go into the Second 
Death, we could not think that the Lord would do 
anything on their behalf. In other words, the blessing 
of God is only for the "Israelites indeed." Only those 



who will come into harmony with Him will have the rich 

blessing and favor of the Lord. These are included in 

the redemptive work, not because of anything in themselves, 

but because of the love of the Lord, which is 

broad enough and deep enough for all who will receive 

it. But God cannot love wicked characters. His blessings 

are only for those who are His children now, or 

who will be, under the blessings and privileges which 

He later on will grant. It is our duty to bless all to the 

extent of our ability. 

THE CHIEF OBJECT OF OUR TRAINING THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF LOVE 

The work of grace for the Church during this Gospel 
Age is the transforming of our perverted characters and 
the re-establishing of them in the likeness of the Divine 
character, Love. Whoever fails to attain this transformation 

R4837 : page 182 

fails to attain God's will concerning him, and 

must, necessarily, fail to win the prize set before us 

in the Gospel. We are, to begin with, very poor material 

out of which to form likenesses of God's dear Son. 

We were "children of wrath, even as others." (Eph. 2:3.) 

The original likeness of God, possessed by Father Adam 

before he transgressed, has been sadly lost in the six 

thousand years intervening. Hence, instead of finding 

ourselves in the Divine likeness of love, we find that we 

were "born in sin and shapen in iniquity" to such a degree 

that instead of love being the natural, ruling principle 

in our characters, it is in many instances almost 

entirely obliterated; and what remains is largely contaminated 

with evil, self-love and carnal love— perversions 

which are in direct antagonism with the wholly unselfish 

love which is the essence of the Divine character. 

"This is life eternal, that they might know Thee, the 
only true God"— the God who is Love. (John 17:3.) To 
know God means more than to know something of His 
loving Plan and character; it means to know God in 
the sense of personal acquaintance and intelligent appreciation 
of His character; and no one can have this except 
as he partakes of the Spirit of God, the spirit of 
holiness, the spirit of love. And this spirit of holiness 
and love cannot be acquired instantly; it is a growth; 
and its development is the chief business (and should be 
the chief concern) of all who hope to know God in the 
complete sense which will be rewarded with life eternal. 

But since our transformation of mind or will is not 
accompanied by a physical transformation, or restitution, 
it follows that so long as we are in the flesh we shall 
have to contend against its inherited weaknesses and 
disposition to selfishness and sin. But this sharp and 
continual conflict not only selects a special, overcoming 
class, but serves to develop the desired character more 



quickly than will the more easy processes of the Millennial 
Age. In consequence, while it will require nearly 
a thousand years for the world's perfecting, the perfecting 
of the saints in character may be accomplished 
in a few years, under the special training of sharp 
discipline and the special course of instruction designed 
for the "little flock." But whether in a few years or 
many years, and whether with little or much friction with 
adversity, the transformation and polishing of character 
must be accomplished. This love-likeness of our wills 
to the will of God is the end to be sought, if we would 
finish our course with joy and with good hopes for the 
eternal glory. 

WE MUST LEARN THOROUGHLY THE LESSON OF LOVE 

If we possess the love of God in our hearts it will 
rule all the affairs of our lives and will make us God-like 
in thoughts, actions and words. In the School of 
Christ, the great lesson which the Master is teaching us 

R4837 : page 183 

day by day is the lesson of love, which we must learn 
thoroughly if we would attain "the mark for the prize 
of our high calling." 

In the School of Christ, all the instructions of the 
Divine Word and providences are intended to develop 
our hearts and influence our conduct in harmony with 
the lines of love. While the fruits and graces— meekness, 
gentleness, patience, etc.— are manifestations of the 
Spirit, yet the Holy Spirit must be present before these 
manifestations could appear at all; and while the spirit 
might be perfect, its manifestations might be imperfect. 
The vine may be good, but for a season the grapes will 
be immature. So with these graces of the Spirit. They 
are outward manifestations of the inward condition of 
the heart, which may attain perfection before these 
graces are perfect. Indeed, these graces may never be 
perfect on this side of the veil. 

At the moment of making consecration, before we 
had borne any fruits of the Spirit, we were not at the 
mark of perfect love. We were consecrated and had the 
right spirit, so far as we had knowledge. But we had 
not a sufficiency of knowledge to recognize what would 
be expected of us. For this we needed some development, 
some instruction in the School of Christ. The 
knowledge of what it would cost to follow Christ came 
gradually. If the will kept up with the knowledge, one 
would reach the mark of perfect love in the heart. The 
manifestations of the graces of character which this 
condition of heart produces may never be fully perfect 
in the present life, but only when we have the perfect 
bodies. The heart which shall have reached this condition 
will be in perfect tune with the conditions which 
will obtain on the other side. 



"BY THEIR FRUITS SHALL YE KNOW THEM"; YET 
PERFECTION IN THE FLESH IS IMPOSSIBLE 

We must recognize each other, in the good professions 
which we make to each other and in the evidences 
of these professions which are manifest. As a gardener 
might go to his vine and look through the different 
branches for grapes, so the Lord knows whether the 
heart is in the proper attitude to bring forth fruit. Of 
those who have openly professed a thorough consecration 
to the Lord, all those whose lives do not contradict 
their profession, and who are walking, not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit, may be known and recognized 
by us in the same way by which they will recognize us. 
"By their fruits we shall know them"— by the outward 
obedience, but not by the full fruit-development. We 
know each other, therefore, not by the full development 
of the fruits, but by the measure of the obedience and 
striving to obey the Lord. 

Absolute perfection would mean perfection of 
thought, word and deed, which is not our condition at 
the present time. The most that any of us can have 
now is perfection of love in our hearts; that is, a perfect 
love for God, for the Truth and for the brethren. Perfect 
love leads to sacrifice. "If ye love Me, keep My commandments. 
(John 14:15.) Those who have perfect 
love will fulfil their sacrifices. But at any time one may 
pass from the stage of perfect love to that of alienation 
and opposition. The person might come into such a condition 
of heart that the fervency of his love would become 
cool. Gradually he would become estranged from 
the Lord, and might become identified with the "great 
company" class. Then, if the chastisements of the Time 
of Trouble did not lead to a thorough reformation, he 
would pass on to the Second Death. 

After Love's provision of the Lamb of God (the Ransom-price 
for all mankind laid down by Him, and the imputation 
of His merit to the Church, all the various 
steps for our deliverance from sin are along the line of 
developing us in the character of love, the character of 
God, which alone, according to the Divine standard, 
will make us acceptable before the Father and bring to 
us His grace of everlasting life. How important, then, 
that we should be "taught of God" and develop this 
character! 

The work of grace for the world, during the Millennial 
Age, will be to make known to all mankind the 
gracious character of God and His provision for the salvation 
of all; and to transform all who are willing, from 
the depravity of sin to perfection of character- 
Love; making mankind once more images of God. This 
transformation of their wills, accompanied by a gradual 
physical transformation, will remove from them all the 
blemishes of sin and all hereditary inclinations thereto 
and leave them in the likeness of God, with a recollection 



of the undesirability of sin and its evil consequences. 



R4838 : page 183 

"STUDY TO SHOW THYSELF APPROVED" 

"Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. 
-2 Tim. 2:15. 

THIS TEXT does not say, "Study the Scriptures," 

but "Study to show thyself approved" 

—study to know what God would 

approve. And yet it means, first of all, to 

study the Revelation He has made. Then, 

after having come to some knowledge of 

the Scriptures, we must meditate upon them 

and consider how the Word is applicable to 

all of life's affairs. Thus we would study 

the nature of everything that we come in 

contact with, as to whether it is good or evil. The word 

"study" here is used with very much the same thought as 

when the Apostle says, "Study to be quiet." 

Evidently the central thought of this expression is 
the approving of ourselves to God, not to men. It is 
proper enough that we should have the approval of all 
good men and good women. But our study, primarily, 
should not be along this line. First, we should study to 
please God— to be approved of God. We notice that there 
is a contemplative study, such as David speaks of when 
he says, "I meditate upon thy Law day and night"— to 
see how that Law would work out its height and depth, its 
length and breadth of influence upon himself. And so the 
Apostle's thought here is that it should be our chief aim 
to please God. 

"Rightly dividing the Word of Truth" would signify 
the proper application of the Word of Truth; the understanding 
of how and when and where it should be applied 
and what was the purpose and thought and Plan of the 
Divine Mind in the giving of this Word of Truth, the 
Word of God's Message. Up to the advent of our Lord, 
God's Message had been given chiefly through the Old 
Testament Scriptures. Then God's Message was attested 
by Him who came from heaven. Additionally, our Lord 
left twelve chosen Apostles to be His special mouthpieces, 
to increase the Word of Truth, to increase the Word of 
knowledge, to increase the Word of explanation of the 
Divine Plan. Everything, therefore, that Timothy could 

R4838 : page 184 

recognize as being the Lord's Message he was to give 
heed to. For instance, one part of God's Message applies 
to the past, a part applies only to the Jews, still another 



part applies to Christians in the present life, and yet another 
part to their future hopes. 

WE SHOULD HAVE CLEARER LIGHT THAN HAD OUR 
FOREFATHERS 

And so, as we get the matter rightly divided before 
our minds, we get the true understanding, the special enlightenment 
needed in our day, and we are enabled to 
rightly divide the Word better than did our fathers, so 
that today we can see, as our fathers did not see, the 
teaching of God's Word respecting the "high calling" 
and "restitution"— the spiritual portion of blessing for 
the Church and the human portion of blessing for the 
world. We also see something about the times and seasons 
—which apply to the Church and which to the blessing 
of the world. 

Thus, in our Day, to rightly divide the Word of Truth 
necessitates the taking cognizance of everything that 
seems to be of the Lord and that throws any light upon 
the Word, and thus we may be able to "rightly divide" it. 
We must always bear in mind that in the Scriptures of 
the Old Testament "holy men of God spake as they were 
moved by the Holy Spirit," and that the Lord also said 
of the Apostles: "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall 
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on 
earth shall be loosed in heaven." 

We are not to forget that the Lord promised that He 
would guide His people in the way of the Truth and show 
them things to come. We are to "study" to show ourselves 
approved— study the doctrine and endeavor to have 
our course of conduct harmonize with it— study to perform 
faithfully the duties of a loyal soldier of the cross 
of Christ. 

The Christian soldier must study to perform even the 
smallest duty in a manner creditable to his calling; he 
must not permit himself to become entangled with other 
things which do not relate to his duties as a soldier and 
thus be side-tracked. The Christian soldier who turns 
aside to seek some personal, temporal advantage to the 
detriment of his duties as a soldier is to that extent an 
unfaithful soldier and likely to be drawn out of the ranks 
entirely. 

R4839 : page 184 

"Study to show thyself approved." Study the Word; 
study yourself, that you may become well acquainted with 
yourself; that you may know your talents for service- 
in what direction they lie, and what are your weak points 
and how they may be guarded against— that you may 
know both your abilities and your shortcomings. Then 
study to avoid error and to shun all foolish questions and 
profane and vain babblings. Remember that only "the 
foundation of God standeth sure"; that all other foundations 
are worthless and that all other theories must come 



to naught. But "The foundation of God standeth sure, 
having this seal, "The Lord knoweth them that are His." 
And let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart 
from iniquity."— 2 Tim. 2:19. 

WE SHOULD STUDY TO MAKE OUR IMPUTED RIGHTEOUSNESS 
MORE AND MORE ACTUAL 

There is much significance in the word "study" and it 
is important to note that this Divine injunction is given 
to the Church, to those who are believers in Christ and 
who have consecrated their lives to His service. Having 
been reckonedly cleansed from sin, we are to give all 
diligence to the work of studying to make this reckoned 
cleansing, this imputed righteousness, an actual thing, to 
the extent of our ability. It is purely of Divine grace 
that we are reckoned righteous before we are actually so. 
Looking at our hearts and seeing in them, not only our 
good and honest intentions, but also our desire for righteousness 
and our efforts to become righteous in the way 
He would approve, God accepts the will for the deed. 
Accordingly, He counts us as righteous now and treats us 
as His children, since we have been redeemed from the 
curse and have accepted His gracious provision for 
reconciliation. 

LET US STUDY TO SEE THAT OUR LIVES ARE AN HONOR 
TO THE CAUSE WE ESPOUSE 

Let us, then, study our hearts to see that we are striving 
daily to cast out all the old leaven of sin; to be sure 
that we are not content to allow it to remain in us and 
work in us; otherwise we prove by our course that our 
love for righteousness is growing weaker. Happy are 
those who find that they are not merely working down 
the leavened mass occasionally and allowing it again and 
again to ferment, but are casting it out, by constantly 
resisting sin, by cleansing their thoughts, words and deeds 
with the Truth and cultivating the blessed "fruits of the 
Spirit"— love, joy, peace, etc. 

Only the studious find the way to Divine approval and 
acceptance. Let us study to see that our lives are an 
honor to the cause we have espoused; that we abstain 
from even the appearance of evil; that we are circumspect 
in all our conversation, in our conduct— watching 
our thoughts, our lips, our lives. Let us study to be 
diligent in every duty, performing it with a ready mind 
and with joy and gladness of heart. Let us never lose 
sight of the fact that we are soldiers, and that as true 
soldiers we are to learn to "endure hardness." 

A soldier has many trivial duties to perform and he is 
as really doing his duty as a soldier when he is polishing 
his armor, foraging, cooking his meals, cleaning camp or 
building bridges for the army to pass over, as when he is 
fighting the enemy. Such things are incidental work, but 
are necessary and entirely consistent with his commission 



as a soldier and should not be regarded as entanglements 
and hindrances. These duties cannot be disregarded nor 
carelessly done without a measure of unfaithfulness. 

WHATEVER OUR CAPTAIN HAS RECOGNIZED AND APPROVED 
IS PROPER FOR US 

So with the Christian soldier. The routine of life- 
housework, shop work, daily toil, anything, everything, 
incidental to a proper and honest provision of "things 
needful" for ourselves and those dependent upon us for 
support, as well as for provision for the prosecution and 
care of the Lord's work— all this is a proper part of our 
engagement as soldiers of the Lord. 

The Apostle Peter was as truly serving the Lord when 
catching the fish from whose mouth he got the coin with 
which to pay his Master's taxes and his own, as when 
proclaiming, on the day of Pentecost, the "raising up" and 
ascension of the Lord. The Apostle Paul was as truly a 
soldier of the cross and doing his proper work as such 
when making tents (rather than be chargeable to any) 
as when at Mars Hill he preached Jesus and the resurrection. 
Whatever is done with a view to the glory and 
honor of our Lord, the Captain of our salvation, or for 
the benefit of any of our fellow-soldiers, or for our own 
preparation for this warfare, or in the discharge of obligations 
which our Captain has recognized and approved, 
is proper work for us as soldiers and is not entanglement 
in the affairs of this life. 



R4839 : page 185 

DIVINE JUSTICE AND MERCY 

-JULY 16.-2 CHRON. 33:1-20.- 

"Cease to do evil; learn to do well."— Isa. 1:16,17. 

MANASSEH, the central figure of this study, 

was the son of the good King Hezekiah. 

Manasseh succeeded to the throne of 

Judah in his twelfth year— the bad son 

of a good father. This matter of good 

fathers and evil sons, and evil fathers and 

good sons was probably due, frequently, to 

the good or evil character of the mothers, 

as well as to the fact that the king, occupied 

with the affairs of state, could not give 

proper attention to the cultivation of his own children. 

Doubtless, there are exceptions to every rule, but it is 

impossible to avoid a certain amount of reflection against 

the parents in respect to every scape-grace child. 

HOW FEW RECOGNIZE THE SACREDNESS OF PARENTAL 



RESPONSIBILITIES 

Parentage is undoubtedly the highest and most important 
function of human life. Yet how few realize 
the sacredness of parental responsibilities! The Prophet 
inquires, "Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?" 
While admitting the inference that none of our 
race can possibly be perfect, we must admit also that in 
the parents reside great possibilities respecting the good 
or evil of their children. This responsibility should be 
felt in mating— before marriage. We are not urging 
that marriage should be put upon the same plane as 
stock breeding, and the finer sentiments disregarded; but 
we do claim that the spirit of a sound mind should be 
sought in connection with the most important contract 
of life, affecting not only the destiny and happiness of 
the pair, but also of their offspring. 

Whoever will acquaint himself with the care exercised 
by the scientific florist and gardener for the obtaining 
of choice varieties of fruits and flowers and vegetables, 
will have reason to feel ashamed of the little attention 
that is paid to the attainment of proper ideals in 
respect to the human race— indeed, it is amazing that 
with the majority there is no ideal whatever; blind, brute 
passion alone is recognized. 

The breeder of fine horses, dogs, cattle, etc., will explain 
how careful he is with the mother during the period 
of breeding— her health, her surroundings, all are considered, 
because all have to do with her offspring, yet 
these same breeders of cattle, horses, poultry, etc., seem 
to give little consideration to the condition of the wife, 
the mother of their own children, during the period of 
gestation. How strange that a horse-fancier realizes 
that the breeding mare will be benefitted by pictures of 
running horses and by seeing horses racing, and that as 
a consequence her foal will be more speedy and more valuable, 
yet fails to apply this principle to his wife! 

Is it any wonder that children are born nervous and 
peevish when we know that the mother in bearing them 
was fretted and annoyed in a thousand ways? Is it any 
wonder that children are born to a heritage of passion, 
anger and lust, when we think of the experiences of 
their mothers which are thus impressed upon them? 
Surely all parents of reasonable judgment, understanding 
these matters, would lay proper foundations for 
character in their children— foundations upon which, 
subsequently, they would patiently, carefully and lovingly 
develop their children along the lines of the highest 
standards of righteousness and the beauty of holiness 
and loyalty to the Creator! But while this should be the 
endeavor of all, when could we hope ever to bring the 
world into a condition to desire and strive for such results? 
Never! Hope for the world would die were it 
not based upon the sure Word of the Lord, which promises 
mankind help from on High in the great Kingdom 
of Messiah. 



THE VALLEY OF HINNOM 

King Manasseh reintroduced idolatry, built altars for 
the worship of Baal in the courts of the temple, used 
enchantments and communicated with evil spirits. The 
Lord permitted him to take this course and apparently the 
majority of the nation were swayed either to good or 
evil by the example of their kings. Thus the people were 

R4840 : page 185 

made to err. The punishment for this course followed. 
The king of Assyria was permitted of the Lord to be 
the executioner of the punishment. He captured the 
city and took the king prisoner. The punishment for 
idolatry was not eternal torment, be it noted; that erroneous 
view came to us during the "Dark Ages." We are 
getting back to a better understanding of God and His 
Word. 

After the king had been in captivity a while, his 
senses commenced to return to him and he began to learn 
his lesson. Thoughts of his good father, King Hezekiah, 
and the Lord's blessings upon him, surely came to his 
mind. King Manasseh repented, sought the forgiveness 
of the Lord and obtained it, and was restored to his own 
kingdom. 

In connection with the king's idolatrous delusions, it 
is recorded in verse six that he "caused his children to 
pass through the fire in the valley of Hinnom." That 
valley lies just outside the city of Jerusalem, to the 
south. It is now considerably filled up and covered with 
orchards. Of old it was a deep valley. It was used for 
religious rites at one time. A great brass image erected 
there, the body of which was hollow, constituted a flue 
for the fires built underneath. The image had outstretched 
arms, which became heated and upon these 
arms children were sometimes offered in sacrifice to the 
false deities, wholly contrary to everything authorized 
by the Almighty. 

Later on, this valley of Hinnom was polluted so 
that it might never again be used as a place of worship. 
No doubt it was used as a place for the destruction of 
the offal of the city of Jerusalem— dead cats and rats 
and dogs, etc., were thrown there and fire and brimstone 
burned therein for the destruction of the foul gases. 
The bodies of the vilest criminals might after death 
also be thrown into this valley as refuse, indicating no 
hope of future life for them. 

In the New Testament, written in Greek, this "valley 
of the son of Hinnom" is styled Ge-hinnom, or, later, 
Gehenna. Our Lord several times used this valley in illustrating 
the Second Death— the hopelessness of all 
those who would wilfully, intelligently and persistently 
refuse the grace of God. 



LEARN TO DO WELL 

Our text, from Isaiah, is the Lord's admonition, 
"Cease to do evil; learn to do well." It represents God's 
general attitude toward our race. He does not chide 
us for being sinners, for He Himself explains that we 
were born in sin and mis-shapen in iniquity, in sin did 
our mothers conceive us. What the Lord desires in us 
is that, realizing our wrong condition, we shall turn 
therefrom to the best of our ability to do right. We 
shall not be able to effect this transformation in ourselves 
except so far as to have a right will and a pure 
heart, or honest endeavor for righteousness. To all such 
the Lord proposes succor, assistance, and this assistance 

R4840 : page 186 

He has provided for us in our Redeemer. He is an assistance 
already to those who can accept Him and His 
Word by faith. He will be an actual assistance to the 
great majority of mankind through the establishment of 
His Kingdom. Eventually all who will come to love 
righteousness and hate iniquity shall be enabled to attain 
eternal life, and all who will love iniquity and hate 
righteousness shall have the punishment of the Second 
Death, symbolically represented in Gehenna— "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord." 



R4837 : page 186 

A GODLY YOUNG KING 

-JULY 23.-2 CHRON. 34:1-13.- 

"Remember now thy Creator in the 
days of thy youth."— Eccles. 12:1. 

KING MANASSEH of our last lesson had a 
bad son, Amon, who reigned but two 
years, and was murdered by his courtiers 
in his own palace. His son, Josiah, the 
central figure of today's study, became king 
in his eighth year. By the time he was 
sixteen his heart had begun to seek after 
and to desire to serve the Almighty God. 
By the time he was twenty his religious 
convictions were so deep and fixed, and his 
authority as a king so in his own hand that he dared to 
begin the work of reformation. The idols and their 
temples and groves for idolatrous worship were destroyed. 
The valley of Hinnom, as already suggested, 
was desecrated and made a dumping-place for the offal 
of Jerusalem. 
The temple of the Lord was repaired and cleansed of 



all its idolatrous defilements, and worship and praise 
therein to the Almighty, was restored. More than this, 
the king extended his influence for the destruction of 
idolatry into what was once the territory of the two 
tribes, north of his kingdom. 

MISTAKE TO ASSUME THAT WILD OATS MUST FIRST BE 
SOWN 

What a force there is in our text, "Remember now 
thy Creator in the days of thy youth" ! What a great 
mistake some parents make in assuming that their children 
must have an experience in "sowing wild oats" before 
they will be prepared to appreciate righteousness 
and become its servants! This thought is reflected upon 
the minds of the young, both male and female; rarely do 

R4838 :page 186 

they seek to live by a higher standard than that expected 
of them by their parents or guardians. We have 
known saintly mothers to unintentionally lay snares for 
the feet of their children by introducing them to ways 
of the world in which they themselves would not walk. 
Their expressed sentiment was, "I must not put upon these 
children the weight of the cross, nor expect of them 
saintship; if ever they become truly consecrated saints 
of God they will then know the trials of the 'narrow way' 
and have plenty of them." 

Alas! such Christian mothers have failed to grasp the 
situation properly. They have failed to realize that, at 
the present time, there is no real happiness in the world 
except in the "narrow way." The "broad road" of self-gratification, 
pride, lust, sin, selfishness, is indeed a beautiful 
picture at a distance, but the picture is a mirage- 
it can never be reached— it is a delusion. The millions 
of those who throng the broad road of selfishness, pride, 
etc., are all bent on pleasure, seeking it with all their 
might; but how many of all the millions on that 
road have found pleasure? We hold that they are 
merely pleasure-hunters and not pleasure-finders; we hold 
that the only real pleasure and substantial joy in the 
world is to be found in the narrow way of self-sacrifice 
—in the footsteps of the Great Teacher— in taking up the 
cross to follow him— in laying down life as He laid down 
His— in "suffering with Him that we might also reign with 
Him"— in being "dead with Him that we might also live 
with Him." 

Of those who enter the broad road, few ever turn to 
the narrow way. Parents, friends, Christians have given 
them the misunderstanding that the broad road is 
the one of pleasure and happiness. When they find it the 
reverse they naturally think that the narrow way must 
be much less happifying, much less desirable. 

A CERTAIN SIMPLICITY AND HONESTY IN THE MIND OF 



EVERY CHILD 

Of the few who do find the narrow way after having 
walked in the broad road their plaint is, "Oh, why did I 
not earlier find the way of the Lord, the way of Truth, 
joy, peace and happiness!" 

Notwithstanding the depravity with which all are 
born, there appears to be a certain simplicity and honesty 
in the mind of every child. It is that principle 
which must be used by teachers and helpers in general, 
if the child is led in the right way, by which he would 
most quickly attain a relationship and harmony with his 
Creator; nor is it necessary always that there shall be 
a preceptor. At times, under God's providence, the message 
from on High reaches the heart, and draws it with 
seemingly little resistance. The hollowness of life is perceived, 
the need of wisdom from on High is recognized, 
and perhaps by the servant, perhaps through parental 
instruction, perhaps through the counsels of a friend, perhaps 
by a tract or a book, the young heart is shown the 
way of wisdom and is pointed to the Lord and to the 
narrow way. 

We are to remember that the will is the real director 
of our destiny, under Divine providence, and that it 
is all-important to have the will rightly directed and established. 
Many a one is in the broad road of sin and 
selfishness— away from God today— who has in his make-up 
many good qualities entirely out of sympathy with 
his position and course in life. But without the will to 
guide, to lead, he goes downward. Similarly there are 
some on the narrow way who have many physical, mental 
and moral blemishes of heredity continually drawing 
them toward the broad road, but who are kept in the 
narrow way of the Lord, not by the self-will of the 
flesh, but by the power of a renewed will. How important, 
then, the proper directing and fixing of our wills in 
youth! How much greater blessing we may enjoy in the 
present life, and how much more adequate preparation 
we may thereby have for the future life! 

King Josiah of today's study is an example of the 
proper course for every young person to take. First of 
all, the heart should be given to the Lord in the days of 
youth, before the evil days and evil experiences have 
come; before one shall have learned so much of evil that 
the remainder of life would not suffice to eradicate it. 
Then, like Josiah, when time shall bring us opportunities 
for the service of righteousness, let us be whole-hearted 
in our advocacy of the right and in our opposition to the 
wrong, and in everything show forth the praises of our 
God, with the motto, GOD FIRST. 



R4840 : page 187 

DELIVERANCE FROM THE CURSE 



"He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of 
God hath not life"; "but the wrath of God abideth on him."— 
1 John 5:12; John 3:36. 

THE BELIEVER referred to in this text is 

he who believes with the heart— not merely 

one with an intellectual appreciation of the 

fact that Christ is the Son of God: "With 

the heart man believeth unto righteousness." 

It means one who has come into 

relationship to the Son of God, to acknowledge 

Him as his Leader, the Head over the 

Body! "He that hath the Son hath life." 

At the present time such a one has this life 

imputed to him; but he does not, of course, possess it 

in its full sense. He has merely the begetting to the 

new nature and the promise that, if faithful, he shall 

have part in the First Resurrection. "Blessed and holy 

is he that hath part in the First Resurrection; on such 

the Second Death hath no power; but they shall be 

priests of God and of Christ and shall reign with Him 

a thousand years."— Rev. 20:6. 

In this resurrection change, which will come in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, such will, in the 
fullest sense, have life. Now, they are looked upon as New 
Creatures. They have passed from under the death condemnation; 
"For the wages of sin is death; but the gift 
of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." 
(Rom. 6:23.) Those who have accepted this gift are, 
therefore, in this condition. The remainder of mankind 
are still under the death sentence, the wrath of 
God. They are not under the sentence of eternal torment, 
but under the curse, the condemnation of death. 
All mankind were born under this sentence. So the 
Apostle again says that we "have escaped the corruption 
which is upon the world." (2 Pet. 1:4.) It is still 
upon the world, but we are free. 

THE NEW COVENANT TO BE MADE WITH ISRAEL 

There is a difference, however, between this Age and 
the next. Before the world shall be put on trial it will 
have a Mediator provided, composed of Christ, the Head, 
and the Church His Body. This Mediator will stand 
between Divine Justice and the masses of mankind. The 
first act of the Mediator will be to put into operation the 
New Covenant. Jeremiah the Prophet (31:31) tells us 
that the New Covenant will be inaugurated with Israel: 
"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make 
a New Covenant with the house of Israel and with the 
house of Judah." Messiah will be the Mediator of that 
New Covenant. Moses was a type of this greater 
Mediator; and the Law Covenant a type of this New Law 
Covenant. All the Jews will be transferred from Moses 
to Christ, the better Mediator; and from the Old Law 



Covenant to the New Law Covenant. 

This New Covenant will be open to all mankind as 
they come to realize their need, the supplying of which 
can be accomplished only through the Mediator. All 
must come under the arrangements of the Messianic 
Kingdom in order to share with the Jews in the blessings 
of that time. So we read, "And many nations will 
go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain 
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He 
will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths; 
for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word 
of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3; Mic. 4:2.) They 
will say, He has done for the Jew first; but he will also 
do for us. 

"HE SHALL BE CALLED WONDERFUL, COUNSELOR, 
MIGHTY GOD," ETC. 

Thus the Lord's blessing will extend from one nation 
to another until the whole world will be full of Divine 
blessings; and thus all the families of the earth will 
be blessed. This New Covenant arrangement, however, 
will bring blessings to mankind only in proportion as they 
accept the Mediator. All down through the Millennial 
Age the eyes of their understanding will be opened as they 
come into harmony with the New Covenant arrangements. 
Thus to gain life through the great Life-Giver 
in the next Age will be very different from the attaining 
of life now. All through that thousand years of His 
glorious ministration and reign, Christ, as the Mediator 
of the New Covenant, will be developing Israel and the 
world, raising them from their fallen condition and 
bringing them up to perfection. 

As Isaiah the Prophet puts it, "He shall be called 
Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting 
Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9:6.) So the 
relationship of the great Mediator to all the people will 
be that of a Father to His own children. The period of 
Christ's reign will be the time in which everlasting life 
will be given to whomsoever will; and every creature 
will have fullest trial, fullest opportunity to come up to 
everlasting life. At the end of the thousand years mankind 
will be delivered up to the Father to be finally tested. 

The relationship of Christ to the Church, however, 
is a different one. He is not our Father. He is our 
Brother. Nevertheless, He is the Advocate through 
whom we must come to the Father; through whom we 
may cry, Abba, Father. 

Our text applies now, primarily. It will apply in the 
Millennial Age, gradually, as men shall come to a knowledge 
of the Truth. The Jews will be transferred as a nation 
from the Law Covenant to the New Covenant. God 
kept them bound up under the Law especially to that end, 
that they might be transferred in due time. But as for other 
people, they will be obliged to accept the great Mediator; 
and thus from the moment they accept Christ the provisions 



of the New Covenant will cover them. But upon 
those who do not accept God's arrangements the wrath 
of God will still abide. 



page 187 

19 11 --CONVENTIONS PROGRAM-1911 

LONDON (ENG.) CONVENTION opened the season and has 
already been reported. 

BOSTON CONVENTION, May 28, 29, 30, was a blessed success. 
The average attendance was between 500 and 650, while the 
public services ran up to 2,000 for the discourse on "Zionism" 
to 4,000 who heard "Which Is the True Gospel?" The 
dear friends entered heartily into the work— physically and 
financially— and the Lord greatly blessed their efforts. 

THE WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR, already announced, will 
extend conventional blessings far and wide. Our dear 
Brother Jones' Special Train will surely add to the zest of the 
various programs. 

TORONTO (CANADA) CONVENTION, JULY 15, 16, 17, has secured 
very favorable railroad excursion rates, as elsewhere 
announced. Accommodations, $1.25 per day and up. Address 
Wm. A. Sinclair, 193 Concord avenue, Toronto, Can. 

ST. JOHN'S (NEW BRUNSWICK), August 20, 21, 22. This 
gathering will accommodate the friends of a considerable 
area, and no doubt will be a joy as well as a blessing. Rates, 
$1.25 per day and up. Address us. 

MOUNTAIN LAKE PARK, MD., SEPT. 1-11. This is expected 
to be the Convention event of the year. The place is a choice 
one for resting and Bible study. It is a Summer Tourist 
Rate Point so far as railways are concerned. We can secure 
no further concessions. Entertainment, $1.25 per day up to 
$3. Particulars later. This Convention will be the last for 
the year except possibly one at GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, Oct. 28, 
29, 30, concerning which we still await information. 



R4841 :page 188 

"LOVE CASTETH OUT FEAR" 

"There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth 
out fear; because fear hath torment."— I John 4:18. 

BETTER expressed could have been the 
thought of the text by saying, "There is no 
dread in love." We do not dread that 
which we love. In one sense, however, the 
more we love, the more we fear. We 
would not be so careful about pleasing a 
person whom we do not thus love. This is 
not the kind of fear, however, that the 



Apostle wishes us to cast out. On the 

contrary, it should be much enhanced. 

Consequently, the word dread would more accurately express 

the thought of our text. 

The Scriptures speak of some who have "no fear of 
God before their eyes." (Rom. 3:18.) Evidently these 
are unregenerate. Often, among men, there is a thoughtlessness 
in respect to God and the future. The Apostle 
in this text does not intimate that all hearts have fear; 
but that if any heart has fear, perfect love will cast it out. 
As the knowledge and love increase, the fear diminishes. 
We may say that those of the world who have a reverential 
fear are such as are in a preferable attitude of mind; 
they are in better condition than the thoughtless. In 
life, certain conditions which surround us call for reverence; 
and man's brain is so constituted that reverence 
will be a part of his mental attitude if he be not depraved. 
Hence, the Scriptures say that "The fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom." (Prov. 9:10.) The 
fear of the Lord, the reverence of the Lord, will bring a 
blessing. This fear of the Lord rather increases as the 
child of God comes to know His Maker; but it is a gradual 
process. 

There is a certain kind of fear which comes as the 
result of imperfect knowledge. We do not credit the 
Adversary with producing all the evil thoughts of the 
human mind, yet we believe he has very much to do with 
the evil influences which surround our race. People may 
be without fear of God; and we think that even after 
they have come to the Lord, and are learning to reverence 
Him and to know something about Him, they may 
lack the right kind of fear. Then the Adversary's plan 
will be to plant dread in their minds. 

So we find with all heathen peoples. As soon as they 
have any knowledge of God, the Adversary seems to conjure 
up slavish fear which crowds out love, and produces 
dread. We read that "The god of this world 
hath blinded the minds of them which believe not." (2 Cor. 4:4.) 
We think that this evil influence is accountable 
for many of the things which seem so remarkable 
to us. It explains the fact that the heathen have devilish 
doctrines mingled with dread of God; and that all the 
worldly who have knowledge of God, both Jews and 
Christians, have fear also— dread. Yet Christians have 
much greater light upon God's character than have 
others, and so should have correspondingly less fear than 
the heathen. 

A CERTAIN KIND OF FEAR PROPER 

Evidently our text is not intended to signify that a 
Christian should have no sense of fear. This fact is 
shown by the experience of the first Christian, our Lord 
Himself, in the Garden of Gethsemane. He there feared, 
as the Apostle tells us in speaking of this occasion, and 
He was heard in that He feared. He offered up strong 



cryings and tears to Him who was able to save Him out 
of death. (Heb. 5:7.) If the Master feared, so should His 
followers. The Apostle says, "Let us, therefore, fear, 
lest a promise being left us of entering into His rest, any 
of you should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 
How shall we harmonize these fears with our text. The 
text is, evidently, not intended to contradict the great 
lessons otherwise taught. Our Lord Jesus appealed to 
the Father who, He knew, loved Him; but He knew 
also, that the Father was absolutely perfect, righteous, 
just; and he feared lest He might have come short in 
fulfilling some of the requirements. 

So with us. Let us know that "God is love" (I John 4:8), 
but let us fear respecting ourselves, and have such 
a carefulness, such a desire to please God, that we should 
feel fearful lest in any degree we should come short. 
Ignorance begets fear; but love for God will enable us 
to cast out that fear, and will also enable us to come 
to God with great confidence. So let us "Draw nigh 
unto God" (James 4:8) with full confidence that He will 
bless us. This thought is the very opposite to that in 
the heathen mind. Their conception of a god is that 
of a demon. The Christian, on the other hand, who is 
walking in the footsteps of the Master, learns to love 
his God and to wish to do the Father's will only. Nothing 
is acceptable in the nature of a sacrifice that is not 
prompted by that love. "The Father seeketh such to 
worship Him as worship Him in spirit and in truth."— 
John 4:23,24. 



FACE TO FACE WITH TROUBLE 

"You are face to face with trouble, 

And the skies are murk and gray; 
You hardly know which way to turn, 

You are almost dazed, you say. 
And at night you wake to wonder 

What the next day's news will bring; 
Your pillow is brushed by phantom care 

With a grim and ghastly wing. 

"You are face to face with trouble; 

A child has gone astray; 
A ship is wrecked on the bitter sea; 

There's a note you cannot pay; 
Your brave right hand is feeble; 

Your sight is growing blind; 
Perhaps a friend is cold and stern, 

Who was ever warm and kind. 

"You are face to face with trouble; 

No wonder you cannot sleep; 
But stay, and think of the promise, 

The Lord will safely keep, 



And lead you out of the thicket, 

And into the pasture land; 
You have only to walk straight onward, 

Holding the dear Lord's hand. 

"You are face to face with trouble; 

And did you forget to look, 
As the good old father taught you, 

For help to the dear old Book? 
You have heard the Tempter whisper, 

And you've had no heart to pray, 
And God has dropped from your scheme of life, 

For— oh, many a weary day! 

"Then face to face with trouble; 

It is thus He calls you back 
From the land of dearth and famine 

To the land that has no lack. 
You would not hear in the sunshine; 

You hear in the midnight gloom. 
Behold, His tapers kindle 

Like stars in the quiet room. 

"Oh! face to face with trouble, 

Friend, I have often stood, 
To learn that pain has sweetness, 

To know that God is good. 
Arise and meet the daylight; 

Be strong and do your best! 
With an honest heart, and a childlike faith 

That God will do the rest." 



R4841 : page 189 

"CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY" 

"The mystery which hath been hid from ages and generations, 
is now made manifest to his saints;. ..which is Christ in 
you, the hope of glory."— Col. 1:26,27. 

THIS expression in various slightly different 

forms occurs many times in the New Testament. 

The consecrated children of God 

are spoken of as being "in Christ Jesus," 

whom God gave to be Head over the 

Church which is His Body. We are "baptized 

into Christ." This the Apostle explains 

as the Mystery hidden from the 

Ages, but now made known to us— that 

God was in Christ reconciling the world 

unto Himself. -2 Cor. 5:19; Col. 1:26. 

This Christ is composed of many members. (I Cor. 12:12.) 
The Greek word Christ corresponds to the 
Hebrew word Messiah. In either language the significance 



of the word is, The Anointed. In olden times the 
Priests were anointed with oil, as were also the kings of 
Israel. This ceremony seems to typify the anointing of 
the antitypical kings and priests. The Messiah, therefore, 
is the anointed King and Priest, whom God hath 
foreordained from before the foundation of the world 
—for putting some down and lifting up all who will be 
obedient to His arrangements. 

This Gospel Age is the time in which the Messiah is 
prepared. The Head of the Messiah, therefore, very 
properly, is first; and following Him the Apostles and 
all down through the Age the various members of the 
Body. This Age will end when the full number of the 
"elect" shall have been found and tested. Then the Body 
will have been completed. When The Messiah is complete, 
The Christ will be complete. 

This part of God's Plan is hidden from the natural 
man, who sees nothing in it. Only those who reverence 
God sufficiently and who are in close touch with His 
arrangement can see. It was hidden from the Jews, 
who saw not that Jesus was the Head of this Messianic 
Body, and was to be a Spirit-being, not human; and that 
God is taking from them and from all nations those who 
shall compose this Body. 

"YE HAVE AN UNCTION FROM THE HOLY ONE AND YE 
ALL KNOW IT" 

In view of the various statements of Scripture relating 
to this subject, we see how Christ is represented 
in us. In proportion as we have the Holy Spirit, in that 
proportion we are faithful members of His Body, and 
have the anointing in us. As the Apostle says, "The 
anointing that ye have received of Him abideth in you"; 
"Ye have an unction [or anointing] from the Holy One, 
and ye all know it." (I John 2:27,20.) It manifests 
itself to us as it would not to the world. We know that 
we have the mind of Christ— the opposite of selfishness. 
This we can more and more discern in others— better than 
in ourselves. As every good seed will bring forth good 
fruit, so we, if we abide in the Vine, shall bring forth 
the fruits thereof— meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness, 
long-suffering, love. 

Christ in you is the hope of glory in the sense that to 
this Christ, this Anointed One, God has promised glory, 
honor and immortality, the divine nature. Only those who 
possess this anointing, the Spirit of Christ, can properly 
possess this hope; for what we now have is merely an 
earnest of our inheritance and a foretaste of what is to 
come. But this call is to ignominy now. "They shall 
say all manner of evil against you" who have this anointing. 
The world will know you not, even as it "knew Him 
not." (I John 3:1.) This, which we have now, is a 
bitter foretaste; but coupled with this there is a joy which 
the world cannot give. 



R4842 : page 189 

THE ROBE OF CHRIST'S RIGHTEOUSNESS 

"Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, 
and whose sins are covered."— Rom. 4:7. 

THE "WEDDING GARMENT" mentioned in 
the Lord's parable (Matt. 22:2-14), is the 
Robe of Justification, which becomes ours 
at the time of consecration. At the very 
moment of our begettal, when the Lord accepted 
us, we became probationary members 
of the Body of Christ, the Bride 
Class, and were covered with the Wedding 
Robe. 

This "wedding garment" is given, not 
to the Old Creature, but to the New Creature, to cover 
the blemishes of its imperfect body. At the moment of 
God's acceptance of our sacrifice, and of the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, the New Creature is reckoned as 
coming into existence and as wearing this robe. Thenceforth, 
the Old Creature, from the Divine viewpoint, is 
non-existent— "Old things are passed away; all things 
are become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) But this New Creature 
must have a new body. The New Creature has the old 
body, but a new will— the will of Christ. The Apostle 
tells us that we should not be satisfied with merely reckoning 
ourselves dead according to the flesh, but that we 
should reckon ourselves as having been made alive in 
the Spirit. If the Spirit of Christ be in us, it will 
quicken our mortal bodies— vivify them.— Rom. 8:8-14. 

These mortal bodies, then, which were under the influence 
of the old imperfections and under the old course 
of life, have now, under the new mind, a restraining, or 
constraining influence put upon them and the New Creature 
is expected to use the new mind, or will, to overcome 
the desires of the flesh. While in this body of 
flesh, the New Creature is expected to demonstrate such 
faithfulness in the development of character that he may 
be accounted worthy of being raised in the First Resurrection 
as a Divine being. Having this imperfect body, 
he needs the robe of Christ's righteousness to cover his 
imperfections. 

THE ROBE DOES NOT COVER SINS OF THE NEW MIND 

In studying this subject, it is well to keep in mind 
that the robe does not cover, as some seem to think, 
sins of the new mind. The Scriptures ascribe no sin 
to the new mind, and no perfection in righteousness to 
the fallen flesh. If the new mind were disloyal to God, 
the robe would not cover it; it would cease to be a new 
mind. To continue to have the imperfections of the 



flesh (which we have inherited from Adam) covered, 
the New Creature must remain loyal to God; otherwise, 
it will deserve the Second Death. Hence, these New 
Creatures, with imperfect bodies under the control of 
the new mind, have the Bridal Robe granted to them, 
that they may have a standing in the sight of the Lord 
and of each other. 

This righteousness of our dear Redeemer is represented 
as being imputed to us. It is for us, then, to work 
out the glorious embroidery, the stamp of which is already 
upon the robe— the directions as to how we may 
work out the fruits of the Spirit thereon. 



R4842 : page 190 

QUESTIONS OF INTEREST 

THE GRADUAL END OF GOSPEL FAVOR 

QUESTION.— Do you understand the Scriptures 

to teach, either directly or indirectly, 

through the Parallels of the Jewish Dispensation, 

that it was necessary that all who 

would eventually constitute the "little 

flock" must have been in a justified condition 

previous to October, 1881? 

Answer.— No, we do not so understand 
the matter. 

Question.— Was it necessary that all who 
would be of the "little flock" should have made their 
consecration by or before October, 1881? 

Answer.— No, we do not so understand the matter. 

The chapter in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. II, showing 
the parallels between the Jewish and Christian Dispensations, 
makes prominent four dates, viz., (1) October, 
1874; (2) April, 1878; (3) October, 1881, and (4) October, 
1914; these dates being parallel to four in the Jewish 
harvest, viz., (1) The beginning of our Lord's ministry; 
the beginning of the trial or harvest time of the 
Jewish nation, October, 29; (2) The end of our Lord's 
ministry, His crucifixion, and the rejection of the Jewish 
nation as a nation, April, 33 (See SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
Vol. 2, chapter 7); (3) The close of the "seventy weeks" 
(Dan. 9:24-26) of favor upon the Jewish nation— October, 
36— after which the Gospel privileges were open 
to the Gentiles, Cornelius being the first convert; (4) 
The full end of trouble and destruction which came upon 
Israel's polity, October, 69. 

It should be clearly noticed that the parallels between 
the Jewish and Gospel Ages all belong to the nominal 
systems then and now, and if this is borne in mind, it 
will prevent our applying these parallels either to the 
gathering out of the Gospel Church or to the gathering 
of the Lord's people out of Babylon now. 



Noting these parallels, we find 1874 as the beginning 
of this "harvest" and the gathering together of the 
"elect" from the four winds of heaven; 1878 as the 
time when Babylon was formally rejected, Laodicea 
spewed out— the time from which it is stated, "Babylon 
is fallen, is fallen"— fallen from Divine favor. The parallel 
in 1881 would seem to indicate that certain favors 
were still continued to those in Babylon up to that date, 
notwithstanding the rejection of the system; and since 
that date we would understand that that relationship has 
been in no sense an advantageous one, but has been in 
many senses of the word a distinct disadvantage, from 
which only with difficulty could any free themselves, the 
Lord's grace and truth assisting. And in harmony with 
this parallelism, October, 1914, will witness the full end of 
Babylon, "as a great millstone cast into the sea," utterly 
destroyed as a system. 

Coming back: We concede it reasonable to infer that 
the close of the favors upon fleshly Israel represent 
the close of the special favor of this Gospel Age, 
viz., the invitation to the High Calling; accordingly, our 
understanding is that the open or general "call" of this 
Age to Kingdom honors ceased in October, 1881. However, 
as already shown in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, we make 
a distinction between the end of the "call" and the closing 
of the "door"; and believe that the door into the 
Kingdom class is not yet closed; that it stands ajar for 
a time, to permit those who had already accepted the 
"call" and who fail to use its privileges and opportunities 
in self-sacrifice to be thrust out, and to permit others to 
enter to take their crowns, in harmony with Rev. 3:11. 
The present time, therefore, from 1881 until the door of 
opportunity for sacrifice in the Lord's service shall fully 
close, is a period of "sifting" as respects all who are 
already in Divine favor, in covenant relationship with 
God. 

And since those who have gone into the "Feast" 
through the "door" represent all who are called (except 
those who have afterward been rejected and expelled), 
it follows that the places of those thus expelled must be 
taken by some who were not previously amongst the 
called, amongst the consecrated. This, we trust, makes 
plain the answer to your question, proving that some not 
previously consecrated will, in the eleventh hour, be admitted 
to the vineyard labors and to the rewards of the 
faithful, after the open call ceased, and before the "door" 
closes. 

Indeed, we are to distinctly remember that in 
speaking of the gathering to take place during this harvest 
time, our Lord mentions amongst others those who 
have been in the field (in the world), apparently referring 
to a class who previously had been neither justified 
nor sanctified through the Truth. See SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
Vol. Ill, Chap. 6. 



THE NEW CREATURE GIVEN THE ROBE 

Question.— Can the New Creature's body sin? 

Answer.— The New Creature's proper body is the Spirit 
body of the First Resurrection. But before getting it he 
is placed on probation and given his old human body to 
practice with. The New Creature cannot make the old 
body obey him perfectly. But he can develop strength in 
his endeavors to bring words, actions and thoughts into 
perfect accord with the perfect Law of God— Love. 

Unable to conquer, he must show the Captain of his 
salvation his loyalty to the core by "fighting a good fight." 

The imperfections of the flesh to which the new mind 
does not consent are all of heredity— all from Adamic 
weakness— all, therefore, forgivable by the Redeemer, who 
merely needs to be appealed to as the great Advocate. 
But every transgression of the flesh is charged to the New 
Creature, who owns the flesh and is using it. This obligates 
repentance, prayer, etc., and means the greater 
blessing to the New Creature. To whatever extent the 
New Creature gives consent or sympathy to the sin of his 
flesh he is worthy of "stripes," which correctively will assist 
in his character development. "What son is he whom 
his Father chasteneth not?" 

The New Creature only is given the wedding robe, 
the robe of Christ's righteousness, as a covering for his 
imperfect flesh. It represents his justification as a New 
Creature. It shows him as in Divine sight, holy, harmless, 
undefiled, through the merit of Jesus his Advocate 
and Redeemer. 



THE NEW CREATURE AND SIN 

Question.— Can the New Creature sin? 

Answer.— Yes! and No! The Apostle says, "He cannot 
sin, for his seed remaineth in him." (I John 3:9.) That 
is to say, so long as any New Creature continues to possess 
the Spirit of God, the Holy Spirit, he cannot consent 
wilfully to do sin. If one Spirit-begotten does sin wilfully 
it implies that prior to that wilful sin he parted with his 
spirit of holiness (lost the seed of his begetting) and got 
instead a spirit of sin, the spirit of the Adversary. In 
other words, a holy person, possessing God's Spirit of 
begetting, cannot wilfully and intentionally do that which 
he knows to be unholy and displeasing to God. He cannot 
take pleasure in sin. He once died to it, and to have 
it revive means a return to wallowing in the mire— "twice 
dead, plucked up by the roots"; ready to be taken and 
destroyed as a brute beast.— Judge 12; 2 Peter 2:12. 



R4843 :page 191 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I feel constrained today to say a few words concerning 
the joy which I feel in my heart and what I owe to your 
faithful ministry. No loyal heart could fail to be impressed 
by your unwavering fidelity to our Master and to His "flock," 
to whom you stand so peculiarly related. 

Appreciating the "Vow" submitted in 1908 as a Heaven-provided 
safeguard for the "flock," I felt from the first that 
subtle tests just ahead were sure to emphasize the needs of 
just such a safeguard. Realizing that there is a practical side 
to the Christian warfare, I promptly availed myself of the 
"Vow," at the same time realizing that our relation to it must 
be the same as to our original Vow of full consecration; that 
while the taking of the Vow was the initial step, its value 
as a safeguard is in the faithful carrying out of all it expresses. 
While the developments following this note of warning 
have been more startling than I had anticipated, I have 
been impressed as never before with the significance of the 
Scripture, "Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; the 
remainder of wrath (that which could not praise Him) shalt 
thou restrain."— Psa. 76:10. 

During 1909 I tabulated a large number of subjects being 
treated in WATCH TOWER concerning the "Ransom" and 
closely related topics. I feel that those wonderful explanations 
of Truth which have come to us, especially during the 
past two years in a faithful endeavor to shield the "sheep," 
are a forceful illustration of the "Vine and Branch" proposition 
—that nothing the Lord permits means loss to the fruit-bearing 
branches. The Divinely provided nourishment withdrawn 
from the unappreciative means added enrichment to 
those giving evidence of a disposition to use it. Truly, we 
have realized that the more searching the analysis the more 
glorious the Truth becomes; indeed, our hearts should be 
filled with wonder, love and praise. 

I am trying to weigh the serious side of it. Sometimes 
I cannot keep back the tears as I think of the abounding 
wealth into which we have entered. I feel that if we are not 
energized to greater appreciation and to greater faithfulness, 
as the reasonable acknowledgment of such favors, then 
we have lost all reasonable grounds for hope of their continuance. 
Surely we must enter into the spirit of His work 
now (the development of the "Bride"— laying down our lives 
for the brethren, not only willingly, but gladly), if we are to 
share in the ultimate work after the preparatory features 
are completed. 

God bless you richly, dear brother; our prayers follow you 
on your missions of love. We are constrained to express our 
sentiments in the language of the MANNA comment for Sept. 
1, as follows: "It is because we see Jesus to be the Father's 
choice that we unite ourselves to Him; because we see the 
Father's character manifested in Him, that we leave all to 
follow Him. Similarly, if we lend our aid, our support, to 
any human being in connection with the Divine Plan and 



service, it should be simply upon this ground— not merely a 
personal magnetism or favoritism, but because our hearts are 
touched by the Lord with the leader's being of His appointment. 1 

The hearts of the dear ones in these Lower Provinces of 
Canada are made glad with the hope of arrangements for a 
Three-Days' Convention during this season. 

We ask that you pray for us all, increasing faithfulness. 
Sister Black shares with me, dear brother, this expression of 
love for yourself and for the Lord's flock. 

Faithfully yours in the joy of service, 

W. W. BLACK.-CANADA. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I thank our Heavenly Father for the Truth and for you, 
through whom great blessings have come to me. I am also 
very thankful for the opportunity to be associated in the 
Harvest work, in Berkeshire Co., Mass., with Brother Goodwin, 
of Torrington, Conn., through whom I have received 
added blessings. 

I have recently had some remarkable experiences with the 
Jews, of whom there is a colony of about twenty families, including 
a Rabbi, in the vicinity of my home. 

Some time ago I distributed among them copies of Die 
Stimme, the Yiddish paper. The young people of the colony 
cannot read Yiddish and are asking for similar matter in 
English. As PEOPLES PULPIT sermons are along lines of 
Christian teaching, I have not distributed them, lest the motive 
be misconstrued. 

These people have the correct idea concerning the cause 
of the centuries of suffering which they and their ancestors 
have experienced. They acknowledge that Christ was sent 
of God to bless the world; even the Rabbi assented to this. 
They were very cordial, urging me to come again. 

This colony, composed mainly of farmers from Russia, I 
am told, has the support of the Rothschilds. They are looking 
for the resurrection of the Ancient Worthies, expecting 
it within a few years. 

Your statements upon Jewish matters, when clearly understood 
by them, will, it seems to me, be one of the most potent 
factors in uniting the Jews in the Zionist movement. Since 
the distribution of the Yiddish paper, I find your name a 
household word among them. I would like suitable literature 
(English) to give them, as they request it for the young 
people. Dear Brother, I wish always to be 

Your faithful brother in Christ, 

NEWTON T. HARTSHORN-MASS. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I am enclosing just a "mite" for use in the Harvest Work. 
Although I realize that you are very busy, I will take 
some of your time to tell you about it, for I know you will 
find it interesting. 



It is the contents of a "mite box" to which I contributed 
for six or eight months, putting in small amounts for each 
blessing which I received— not counting the daily blessings 
of bread and health, etc. It shows that the Lord was good 
to me, doesn't it? However, the most interesting part 
follows:— 

My box was one among several which our Sunday School 
teacher gave to us girls in 1909. We had previously withdrawn 
from the church with which we were associated, and 
its school, but had been held together by the Lord's loving 
kindness, and had weekly classes of our own. For some 
reason, which we could not then exactly understand, we 
were reluctant about sending the money to the Missionary Society 
of our denomination. 

About a year ago our teacher died after a short illness. 
I will not dwell upon the persecutions which she had suffered 
in the church, nor our own sorrow afterward. I will 
only say that God has opened the eyes of our understanding 
and enabled us to see Present Truth. As in her life she was 
a great blessing to me, so, also, in her death. I believe the 
Lord had me save the money for this very purpose, and that 
she was one of his bright "jewels." 

I cannot express the blessing which you have been to me, 
and the rest of us, and I thank Him for it. We daily remember 
you before the Throne of Heavenly Grace, and also 
the general interests of the work and the dear co-laborers. 

By His grace, one of the "Little Ones in Christ." 
MARY L. JENKINS.-MASS. 



DEAR PASTOR:- 

Having a growing conviction that the following extraction 
may be of interest to you (the more so after reading WATCH 
TOWER of March 15), I determined to send it along, hoping 
that you would be able to spare about two minutes of your 
valuable time for its perusal. 

The Rev. S. Manning, who traveled through the Holy 
Land in the early part of 1873, in recording his experiences, 
says concerning the barren slopes of southern Palestine: 
"Even yet we can trace the lines of those ancient terraces, 
showing what the land once was, and what it may yet become 
again when 'the time to favor Zion, yea, the set time, 
is come.' From our camp, a few miles north of Bethel, we 
could see the hills clothed to their very summits with fig 
gardens, now in their bright spring greenery. A Syrian 
gentleman, who was my frequent companion through this 
part of Palestine, plucked the young figs as he passed without 
stint or scruple. His reply to my question as to his right to 

R4844:page 191 

do so was instructive, as throwing light upon an incident in 
the life of our Lord, as to which some difficulty has been felt. 

"In the early spring, when the first leaves appear, an 
immense number of small figs are produced, which do not 



ripen, but fall from the branches, crude and immature, to the 
ground. To these we find a reference in Rev. 6:13. The 
true crop is not produced till later in the year. This first 
crude, 'untimely' growth, though of no commercial value, is 
yet plucked and eaten by the peasantry, sometimes with a 
pinch of salt, sometimes with bread. Like the wild fruit of 
our hedgerows it is free to all passersby. It was just at this 
early season, before the feast of the Passover, that our Lord 
and his disciples, having walked from Bethany, 'hungered.' 
Seeing a fig tree 'afar off having leaves' they sought fruit, 
but found none. Seeing leaves they had a right to expect 
fruit. Finding fruit they would have had right to pluck it, 
'for the time of figs was not yet'— the true and valuable crop 
was not yet produced. This incident He turned into a 
solemn lesson of warning to the Jews, etc., etc." 
Yours humbly in Him and His service, 

WILLIAM SMITH. 



page 194 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.). 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, five 
vols.; in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, four vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform 
with English edition, prices the same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 each. 



page 193 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII JULY 1 No. 13 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Unrest in Europe 195 

Ministerial Human Document 196 

Ravages of the Black Plague 197 

Present-Day Needs of Methodism 198 

Darwin's Evolution Theory Falling 198 

Heredity in the Blood 199 

"Blind Guides" (Illustration) 200-201 

$30,000,000 To Convert the World 202 

Heathen Double in a Century 202 

Our Missionary Work in India 202 

The Good Tidings in Africa 203 

Doctrinal Error Harmful 204 

No Cross, No Crown (Poem) 204 

The Love Required of the New Creation 205 

Goes Beyond the Jewish Law 205 

Finding a Lost Bible 206 

The Lord Is My Shepherd 207 

Our New Bibles 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



CROSS AND CROWN PINS 

No. 1. Cross and Crown design in ten-karat gold, five-eighths 
inch in diameter. The crown is burnished. The surrounding 
wreath is rustic in design— brilliant gold. The cross 
is of dark red enamel, with only the outlines showing gold. 
The pin has a patent fastening. Price, $1.15. 

No. 2. This is exactly the same as No. 1, except that instead 
of the pin it has a screw clamp at the back, making it 
more desirable for men's wear. Price, $1.15. 

No. 3. Exactly the same as No. 2, except that it is three-eighths 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 4. Exactly the same as No. 1, except that it is three-eighths 
inch in diameter. Price $ 1 . 

No. 5. Like No. 1, except that it is of silver instead of 
gold and wreath is washed in green. Price, 35c. 

These prices all include postage and are very much less 
than jewelers would charge, as we have them manufactured 
in large quantities for your convenience. 

POST-CARDS 

An excellent assortment of Scripture post-cards of our own 
selection, both Birthday and for general use. Price, 20c. per 
doz., $1.50 per 100 assorted, postpaid (40 birthday and 60 
general). 

QUESTIONS ON "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

We have these printed in cheap form and will supply them 
free, upon request, to those who have "Tabernacle Shadows." 

QUESTIONS ON FIFTH VOL. "SCRIPTURE STUDIES" 

Fifth Volume Berean Questions, put up in booklet form 
and convenient size. These may be had at 10c. per copy; 50c. 
per dozen. 



R4844 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 



UNREST IN EUROPE 



THE FOLLOWING "United Press" report 
from London seems to give a very moderate 
view of the Old World's affairs:— 

"After an undisputed reign of more 
than 1,000 years, the European 'ruling 
classes' are beginning to realize that the existence 
of their order is threatened everywhere. 
Not even the French Revolution 
itself— hitherto perhaps the most remarkable 
social upheaval in the world's history 
—was so significant as the present movement of the 
masses against the classes. 

"Curiously enough, it is in England, with all its conservative 
traditions and the freest government in 
Europe, that the feeling is strongest. To a great extent 
this is due to the fact that in Great Britain the upper 
classes and the landed interests have always been practically 
identical. And the land-hunger which has been 
increasing among the English masses for forty years past 
has intensified popular hostility against those representatives 
of the upper classes (which substantially means all 
of them) who have selfishly monopolized the land for 
their own pleasures. 

"Recent advanced legislation, tending toward the 
breaking up of the great landed estates, has made matters 
worse, too, instead of better. The people who want 
land are angrier than they were before, because they have 
secured only a part of what they consider their due, 
while the landed aristocracy is furious over having had 
to relinquish even a fraction of its possessions. 

"The change that has come over rural England in the 
past three decades, is, in fact, nothing short of marvelous. 
In the old days, if a villager failed to doff his 
hat to the parson or the squire, or if his wife omitted 
a reverential courtesy to them, it was a foregone conclusion 
that that couple would be driven from the village 
forthwith, or that at any rate, if they remained, their 
lives would be made intolerable. Today, even in cases 
where the farm laborer retains an outward appearance of 
respect for those above him, he looks on the latter as his 
natural enemies, and never misses a chance of voting 
against them at the polls. More than this, he has reached 
a point where he not only disputes the aristocracy's title 
to monopolize the land which he thinks should be his own, 
but refuses to acknowledge its superiority over him in 
any form. 

"In the towns, of course, where radicalism has long 
been rampant, the ruling classes have been hated for a 
much greater length of time than in the country. But 
whereas they were merely hated fifty years ago, their 
very right to exist is now disputed. Popular education 
and popular newspapers have been mainly responsible for 



the growth of this feeling. The average mechanic who 

has to work hard for small wages, denies the right of another 

to live in idleness upon what his father left him. 

The present-day British workmen's creed is that everyone 

in the world ought to start equal. 

"To a large extent, the growth of this sentiment has 
been at the bottom of recent labor troubles in England. 
Complaints have been made everywhere that the labor 
unionists have refused to obey their own chief's orders 
and have thus precipitated useless strikes. But this is 
only partly true. Leaving out the fact that most of the 
labor leaders belong to a passing generation, and are not 
in as close touch as they should be with the rank-and-file, 
there is quite a different reason for the men's unmanageability. 
And this reason is that the feeling of 
unrest and discontent is so rife as to render the masses 
of workmen anxious to defy rather than to treat with 
their employers. Just as the village laborer regards the 
squire, so the city mechanic regards the capitalist. Both 
country squire and city capitalist represent the ruling 
classes to the man who works. 

THE SPREAD OF SOCIALISM 

"Generally throughout Europe, the growth of Socialism 
is held accountable by the aristocracy for the masses' 
discontent. 

"In England, for instance, it is the Tories' custom to 
refer to any man of progressive political ideas as a 
'Socialist' They use the word as a term of reproach, but 
the truth is that it is really not the right word to use as 
the Tories use it. 'Advanced radicalism' would be more 
accurately descriptive. Not many English workmen admit 
that they are Socialists and not many of them are. 

"In Germany they do admit— assent it in fact. And 
the spread of Socialism in the Fatherland is making 
the old aristocracy shake in its shoes. No one there would 
be surprised by a Socialist victory at any election and 
when the Socialists secure control of the Reichstag the 
aristocracy's— and the monarchy's— days are numbered. 
German Socialists, like the English, are advanced Radicals. 
Their idea is less the rule of Socialism than an 
evening-up of conditions— with perhaps a not entirely unnatural 
desire, on the part of some of them, for revenge 
upon the privileged classes who have oppressed them so 
long. 

R4844 : page 196 

"In Austria-Hungary an identical process is at work. 
The dear-food riots— the revolt against the excessive 
cost of living— are the first expressions of the popular 
demand. Exploited, generation after generation by the 
greedy rich, the masses have lost their patience at last. 

"The strained industrial situation in France is due to 
the same cause. In France, however, the rebellion is not 



against an aristocracy, but against the ring of capitalists 
which runs the government and every thing else in the 
republic. As the members of this ring grow richer, the 
poor— and the middle classes— grow poorer every day. 
Concessions in one particular trade will do no good in 
France. What is needed is a change in the entire economic 
system. 

"Russia is no better off. The revolutionary movement 
there is and always has been an attempt to "pull" the 
system of feudal tyranny which grinds the people into the 
dirt. Unlike his fellows elsewhere throughout Europe, 
the Russian workman thinks nothing and knows nothing 

R4845 : page 196 

about the working of economic laws. All he knows is 

that for centuries he and his ancestors have been down-trodden 

—and he sees clearly who the people are who have 

been responsible for it. He simply takes the position 

that, if he can remove these people, it will be all the 

better for him. 

"The question is whether all these different national 
movements can ever be combined into one. Labor leaders 
answer affirmatively. Year by year international conferences 
are more successful in drawing the strings of such 
a union tighter. At the present moment there is the 
common ground of the increased cost of living upon 
which all are fighting. Those who are responsible for the 
high price of necessities are held always to be the ruling 
classes. It is against these that the campaign will be 
waged. 

"One thing, however, is becoming increasingly clear. 
It is that, so far as the working classes are concerned, 
the form of government makes very little difference. A 
monarchy may be more corrupt than a republic, or it may 
not. There is probably less corruption in England than 
in any other European country of the first class. There 
is at least as much of it in France as there is anywhere 
else upon the continent. 

"The truth is, as European workingmen see it, that 
the form of government counts less than the sort of people 
who conduct it. If labor unions or any other sort of 
organization can put matters straight with these people, 
then in the opinion of European workingmen, the condition 
of the masses is bound to improve without much 
regard for the actual form of government. 

"Naturally the upper classes are not insensible to the 
change coming over the attitude of those whom they 
consider beneath them. This is plain from their frantic 
appeals during outbreaks in Berlin, Vienna, Paris, Barcelona 
and South Wales to have the military hurled 
against the strikers and demonstrators. In every case 
these appeals were made by the wealthy under the guise 
of appeals for the maintenance of law and order. In 
reality, it is understood on all hands that the aristocracy 
throughout Europe realizes that it is in the last ditch. 



Hence its anxiety to put the popular movement down at 
all costs. 

"The class war in Europe has certainly begun. It will 
be marked by actual violence in spots, but in the main it 
will be fought out at the polls. And when the people 
that do the work begin to know their real strength, popular 
leaders declare, there will not be much chance left 
for those who have hitherto regarded it as their right to 
rule." 

MINISTERIAL HUMAN DOCUMENT 

While the average minister's salary outside of cities 
does not rise above $1,000— a figure about on a par with 
that of the unskilled laborer, human documents like one 
printed by The Standard (Baptist, Chicago) need cause 
no surprise. It comes from a minister who tells why he 
is quitting his profession to enter business. The editor of 
this paper tells us that the letter was not intended for 
publication; and the early part of it shows that it was 
addressed to an old friend of seminary days, who, with 
the writer, had "talked of the future and painted pictures 
of what we were to do for the Kingdom of God." 
Twenty-five years have passed and the old friend is given 
the reasons that led to this man's decision to desert the 
active ministry. Thus:— 

"To be perfectly honest with you, money has had 
much to do with my decision. I think you will not charge 
me with being mercenary in those days when you knew 
me well, and I am not conscious of caring any more for 
money now than I did then. I have never desired to be 
rich; I do not now desire to be. I have not gone into 
business with any expectation of making a fortune, but 
I do want to have something for the years when I can 
no longer work, and for my family, if I should be taken 
from them. I do want to be able to meet my bills as 
they fall due. A month ago in our ministers' meeting 
an old minister, shabby almost to raggedness, arose and 
told us that he and his wife were on the verge of starvation. 
He had no money, his credit was exhausted, they 
had no food, no coal, and were about to be put upon the 
street because they could not pay the rent. We raised 
some $30 among us and gave it to him, and I suppose he 
will go to the home for aged ministers; but it scared me. 
I saw myself in him. What reason have I to expect that 
I shall not be where he is twenty years from now? 

"Frugality? Well, I have not been thriftless. Wife 
and I have tried hard to lay up a little each year. We 
did get $500 saved up, and then Edna was taken with 
tuberculosis and it all went, and much more, before God 
took her home. I had $1,000 per year from the church 

at B . They paid it promptly, and possibly some men 

would have been able to save something out of it each 
year. We tried our best, and failed. Once the church 
thought of increasing the pastor's salary, but Deacon 
Edmunds argued that the minister should trust God; said 



that when he began life he had an income of only $200 
for the first year; spoke of the joys of Christian sacrifice; 
pointed to the Savior of the world and His self-abnegation, 
and the salary was not increased. I may say 
that the deacon is supposed to be worth not less than 
$200,000. Then I was called to this field at $1,200 per 
year. I have been here seven years, and there has never 
been a month since the beginning when my salary has 
been paid promptly. At times the church has owed me 
$600 and $700. I have borrowed and paid interest, have 
'stood off my creditors until I was ashamed to go upon 
the street, have scrimped and twisted and wiggled until 
my soul was raw. I've had enough. 

"Through all these years a conviction has been growing 
within me that the average church-member cares 
precious little about the Kingdom of God and its advancement, 
or the welfare of his fellowmen. He is a Christian 
in order that he may save his soul from hell, and for 
no other reason. He does as little as he can, lives as indifferently 
as he dares. If he thought he could gain 
heaven without even lifting his finger for others, he would 
jump at the chance. Never have I known more than a 
small minority of any church which I have served to be 
really interested in and unselfishly devoted to God's work. 

R4845 : page 197 

It took my whole time to pull and push and urge and 
persuade the reluctant members of my church to undertake 
a little something for their fellowmen. They took 
a covenant to be faithful in attendance upon the services 
of the church, and not one out of ten ever thought of 
attending prayer-meeting. A large percentage seldom 
attended church in the morning, and a pitifully small 
number in the evening. It did not seem to mean anything 
to them that they had dedicated themselves to the service 
of Christ. 

"I am tired; tired of being the only one in the church 
from whom real sacrifice is expected; tired of straining 
and tugging to get Christian people to live like Christians; 
tired of planning work for my people and then 
being compelled to do it myself or see it left undone; 
tired of dodging my creditors when I would not need to 
if I had what is due me; tired of the affrighting vision 
of a penniless old age. I am not leaving Christ. I love 
Him; I shall still try to serve Him. 

"Judge me leniently, old man, for I cannot bear to 
lose your friendship."— Literary Digest. 



THE CAUSE OF PORTUGAL'S REVOLUTION 

A Portuguese resident in London, being questioned by 
the Daily Mirror as to the reasons for the intense hatred 
evinced by the people of Portugal against the Church, replied 



to the following effect:— 

"The frenzied hatred of the populace of Portugal 
against the religious orders and the priesthood generally, 
which is so strongly marked a feature of the actual revolution, 
is no new thing in European history. 

"In Portugal today, as in Northern Europe four hundred 
years ago, the clergy exact privileges, social, moral, 
and financial, to which they have no just claim. 

"The religious fraternities possess vast wealth, which 
is every day growing greater, and they evade taxation 
and do as little as they possibly can towards the maintenance 
and defence of the State. 

"They are a clog upon the intellectual advancement 
of the country. Education is entirely in their hands, and 
Portugal has, as a consequence, the largest percentage of 
illiterates of any country in Europe, with the one exception 
of Turkey. 

"The mendicant Orders bleed the ignorant and superstitious 
peasantry to an incredible extent. Money, food, 
wine, garments— all is fish that comes to their net. The 
bitter proverb to the effect that 'three beggars make one 
priest,' once a household word in England and in Germany 
also, is still current in Portugal. 

"They infest the bedsides of the old, the sick, and the 
feeble-minded, and persuade them to bequeath large portions 
of their goods— sometimes all they possess— to the 
monasteries. 

"It is almost impossible for a layman who has a 
grievance against a priest or a religious house to get 
justice done to him." 

The situation described by a dispatch to the New York 
Sun is this:— 

"Popular feeling against the Church is very strong in 
Lisbon. The Government opposes excesses and says it 
will prevent them, but Quelhaes has been the scene of 
shameful vandalism by a mob. The accounts of the origin 
of the trouble there are conflicting. 

"The throwing of bombs by Jesuits is as vehemently 
denied on one side as it is asserted on the other. Sympathizers 
with the Jesuits say the mob attacked the Jesuits 
without the least provocation, but they admit that the Jesuits 

R4846 : page 197 

fired rifles in self-defense. Whoever was initially to 
blame, the seizure of the convent by the mob was followed 
by disgraceful barbarism, which was not checked by the 
authorities. 

"There is no doubt that the mob's object was plunder, 
and in the search for treasure the rioters smashed, tore, 
and generally destroyed almost everything of value within 
the building. 

"Sacred images, altar-vessels, priceless volumes, illuminated 
missals, gorgeous vestments were smashed or 
torn and trampled upon with senseless fury, while everything 
that was regarded as worth stealing was looted. 



Disgusting acts of ribaldry and defilement were also committed 
by the mob. 

"It was a brutal expression of the popular hatred for 
the priesthood, especially the Jesuits, which was the animating 
cause of the revolution far more than hostility to 
the monarchy. A similar orgy was enacted at the Trinas 
Convent. Apart from these scenes, however, the self-control 
of the people has been exemplary and the city is 
entirely orderly." 



RAVAGES OF THE BLACK PLAGUE 

Harrowing reports come from both China and India. 
Eighty-eight thousand four hundred and ninety -eight are 
said to have died in India in February, as reported by 
the British India Office. In Northern China the plague 
has been gradually progressing since early in December. 
And it is said that not one who has taken the disease 
has, thus far, recovered. Death follows it in from three to 
six days. 

This black death plague is said to be of the same kind 
as that which so devastated Europe in the Middle Ages. 
It is pneumonic as distinct from bubonic; that is to say, 
it attacks the mucous lining of the nostrils, throat and 
lungs, rather than the glands. It is so deadly that the 
physicians who inspect and those who handle the corpses 
take every precaution, some wearing a suit of linen from 
head to foot, and all breathing through pads of lint soaked 
with carbolic acid. Any houses in which the plague 
has appeared are so contaminated as to make necessary 
their burning. Japanese and Russian physicians are assisting 
Chinese authorities and physicians. It is feared 
that with the coming summer the disease may be further 
spread by fleas. Following is a clipping from the 
press: 

"The lives of scores of physicians have been sacrificed 
in the fight against the spread of the pestilence. Hundreds 
of soldiers have died in the plague zone. Orders 
have been given to prevent residents of certain sections 
of Manchuria and China from fleeing, but, despite this 
order, refugees are finding their way into Vladivostock 
and Shanghai. Traffic upon the Chinese Eastern Railway 
is practically dead. Advices from Kuang-Chang-Tsu, 
Mukden, Harbin, Feng Hua and other towns in Manchuria, 
state that the plague has made steady headway 
despite efforts of the Chinese and Japanese to head it off. 
Along the great wall conditions are appalling." 

The poor world needs the intervention of Divine 
power; although medical knowledge has greatly increased 
in recent years we recognize more and more that only 
power Divine can release humanity from the bonds of 
sin and death. 



ARTIFICIAL MILK, BUTTER AND CHEESE 

Information comes from Paris that a skilled chemist 
and Chinaman, Li Yu Ying, has discovered a means by 
which synthetically he can produce good imitations of 
cow's milk, butter and cheese from the China bean known 
as soja. It is said that he has already established a factory 
in which twenty-four men are kept busily employed. 

R4846 : page 198 

A by-product is a sweet syrup that may be used in preserving, 
cake-making, etc. 

Why not? By some process the cow changes the quality 
of grass, beets, etc., producing milk and cream, from 
which butter and cheese can be manufactured. What 
wonderful things the Lord evidently has in store for the 
world's comfort and nourishment during Messiah's Kingdom 
and subsequently! God is only now unlocking the 
mysteries of nature to mankind— now, because we are 
entering the day of His preparation. 



PRESENT-DAY NEEDS OF METHODISM 

The Rochester (N.Y.) Times says that "at a meeting 
of the Methodist ministers of this district, in the Parish 
House, of the First Methodist Church, Rev. S. J. Clarkson, 
of Middleport, made a sensational arraignment of the 
church, stating that Methodism was fast losing its reason 
for existing and that as a church it was making itself a 
laughing-stock for the world, inconsistent within itself in 
its teachings and preachings. He said that it was making 
itself foolish because one minister in one place would 
state that dancing and card playing were proper and not 
harmful, while another would pass upon them as the devices 
of the Devil. He said that the teachings of the 
ministers should either enforce Paragraph 248, respecting 
card playing and dancing, or should strike it from the book. 

"Methodism is fast losing her reason for existing, by 
the dropping of many things which have distinguished her 
from other denominations in the past. Methodism must 
retain her progressive character and still do that branch 
of work of evangelizing the world that only she seems 
fitted to do, or she will fail and cease to exist. 

PRAYER MEETING OBSOLETE 

"In the past, the prayer-meeting was the starting point 
of the revival. Today the average small church prayer-meeting 
is a waste of time, and a burden to the flesh and 
the revival is no more. Too many of our laymen have 
too much faith in the ability of their wives to do the praying 
for the household. 



MAKES CHURCH A JOKE 

"Methodism needs some settled policy on the question 
of amusements. Nothing better could have been invented 
to keep this church than Paragraph 248. I believe 
in being charitable, but the day is here when we 
need some young people ourselves. I am not discussing 
the right or wrong of dancing. But it sounds foolish 
for a Methodist minister to stand in his pulpit and say 
that dancing is right when the ban-book says that is one 
of the things for which a man can be tried for immoral 
conduct. It sounds just as foolish, and makes the church 
a joke, when the minister in Podunk declares that there 
is no harm in dancing. Then next Sunday the minister 
in Pig Valley declares that it's the Devil's best snare. If 
dancing is right in Buffalo it is right in Rochester. If 
it's wrong in Buffalo, it's wrong in Rochester. We need 
to be consistent. 

"Now when Methodism undertakes to tell people what 
is right and wrong in amusements it should first have 
some settled policy itself. Enforce Paragraph 248, or 
else have the courage to take it out of the Discipline. We 
stand before the world today in the attitude of the man 
who had the bear by the tail while it chased him around 
the tree. He was afraid to let go and afraid to hang on." 



R4846 : page 198 

DARWIN'S EVOLUTION THEORY FALLING 

THE FOLLOWING very interesting article is 
from the pen of William Hanna Thomson, 
M.D., prominently connected with 
many New York hospitals for years. According 
to this article the relationship between 
the various species of animal organism 
can be discerned with much greater 
certainty by blood tests than by merely outward 
shape. The Doctor's illustration of 
an elephant always elephanting from the 
smallest speck at the beginning to its largest development 
is a forceful one and well illustrates the distinctions of 
nature. His remarks respecting the bacilli or disease 
germs are also to the point. These germs, known for 
thousands of years and reproducing their kind with marvelous 
rapidity, yet without change, without Evolution, 
without development of any kind, are quite in opposition 
to the Evolution theory. 
The below extracts are from the New York Times:— 

THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES 

"As to the origin of different species, if Charles Darwin 



was after that he would have found in the microscopic 

world the most ancient, stable and specific living 

forms that exist on earth. Thus, we have known historically 

tuberculosis ever since Hippocrates described it 

2,300 years ago, and it is plainly alluded to in Eber's 

Egyptian papyrus, 1,700 years before Hippocrates. 

"Now, as the life cycle of the tubicle bacillus is only 
twenty or thirty minutes, instead of being three score 
years and ten, it follows that counting only venerable 
bacilli, half an hour old, we have 7,240,000 generations 
through which it has descended without once changing 
in its evil ways. 

AN ELEPHANT FIRST MICROSCOPIC 

"It would seem that according to the original plan all 
life must at first be microscopic, and so it is. Thus at one 
time in its individual existence an elephant is a barely 
perceptible microscopic dot. We cannot be at all sure that 
the real elephant is not as much smaller than that dot, 
as that in turn is smaller than the full-grown beast himself. 
Size or bulk has no necessary connection with life, 
however formidable it be. 

"The living agent which causes hydrophobia, or yellow 
fever, easily slips through the pores of a Berkfield filter, 
which stops the larger bodies in the virus of smallpox. 
They are too small to be seen by any microscope yet 
made. Prof. Simon Flexner doubts if the human eye is 
constructed to catch sight of them, however it be aided by 

R4847 : page 198 

a high-power microscope. Yet these little agents are 
more dangerous to man than either a lion or a rhinoceros, 
while each remains after its own kind. Yellow fever 
[bacilli] no more resembles hydrophobia [bacilli] than a 
horse resembles a fish. 

"Therefore the biologist, or student of life, finds himself 
in the realm of the inconceivably little. In that single 
cell with which the elephant has to begin his physical 
life there is a vast collection of necessary things. 

"First, every one of the millions of cells of his future 
body must develop from that first cell. They are all constructed 
on the elephant-cell pattern, and according to no 
other pattern. Each cell must contain an even, never an 
odd number, in its nucleus of those little bodies called 
chromosemes, and upon which heredity depends, because 
finally that first cell contains something which determines 
that it will grow into an elephant and not into a frog, 
according to its hereditary descent from the first elephant. 

"As a result, the absolute absurdity of the supposition 

R4847 : page 199 

of the spontaneous generation of life appears when we 
consider that it is not a living substance or thing which 



we are investigating, but a thing which can be a dot and 
then an animal, and then a dot again for any number of 
times. It would be easier to imagine a watch spontaneously 
generating itself than for an oak to become an 
acorn and then an oak again, and so on through all the 
years of its geological period. 

"Reproduction of like from like by means of an inconceivably 
complex series of connected changes is a characteristic 
of life only. It has not a single analogue in the 
non-living kingdom. There is no such thing as hereditary 
fire, though it may spread, any more than a hereditary 
glacier, however it may grow by accumulating snow and 
ice. 

"Inorganic chemistry, or that which deals with non-living 
substances, is simplicity itself by the side of organic 
life-originated chemistry. Thus one atom of hydrogen, 
one atom of chlorine, and one atom of sodium will 
make one molecule of sodium chloride or common salt. 
These three separate atoms might come together by 
chance— that only deity of the materialist— anywhere 
where these atoms exist, say in the planet Saturn. But for 
any animal on this earth with red blood it must, in order 
to live, have in its blood cells that definite substance called 
hemoglobin. 

HEREDITY IN THE BLOOD 

"Now a molecule of hemoglobin must contain the following 
number of different atoms in their due proportions, 
namely, of hydrogen atoms, 1,130; of carbon atoms, 712; 
of nitrogen, 214; of oxygen, 245; of sulphur, 2, and of 
Iron, 1, or 2,304 atoms in all. Moreover, if that one atom 
of iron, in its peculiar relation to the rest ("masked," as 
some physiologists say) were left out, the animal could 
neither absorb oxygen nor give off carbonic acid; in other 
words, it could not breathe. 

"I once asked a well-known physiological chemist, himself 
of German extraction and educated in Germany, how 
could those atoms in a molecule of hemoglobin thus come 
together by chance. His brief reply was, 'No chance.' 

"But the complexity of hemoglobin is thrown into the 
shade by those chemical substances which medical research 
has discovered in the investigation of the mechanism of 
immunity against infectious diseases. Thus some serious 
infectious diseases, such as smallpox, yellow fever, and 
typhoid fever, usually attack the same person only once. 
Hence he is said to be thereafter immune against them. 
With other infections, like pneumonia, the reverse is true, 
for the first attack often appears to predispose to subsequent 
attacks. Of four children exposed simultaneously to 
scarlet fever, one soon succumbs to a malignant development 
of the disease; the second is made very sick by it, 
but recovers; the third has it so lightly that it wants to 
play all the while, while the fourth escapes altogether. 
Now the medical profession very properly wishes to know 
the "how" of this varying susceptibility and immunity, 



because such knowledge would lead to an immense saving 
of life. 

"But this research now resembles exploring a strange 
world, to describe which a new language has to be invented 
which none but these scientific leaders can understand, 
while they speak of antigens, amboceptors, complements, 
enzymes, lysins, precipitins, agglutinins, toxins, 
anti-toxins, anti-antitoxins, etc. Nor are these at all fancy 
names, for they refer to subjects which already have 
been shown to have great practical bearing in the preservation 
of human beings from disease and death. 

"Modern science now finds that the problem of the 
origin of life becomes more and more inscrutable in proportion 
to the progress of investigations of the subject. 
One fact alone, among many others of like import, suffices 
to illustrate this statement, and that is the infinite complexity 
of the chemistry of any living thing or of anything 
which has been produced by vital agency compared with 
the chemistry of things with which life has nothing to do. 

"Thus, in the precipitins alone we encounter one of 
those biological marvels by which science has recently revealed 
the fact that the blood is the most hereditary thing 
about us, for its hereditary elements override everything in 
the makeup of the physical animal body, whether it be the 
shape of the skeleton, of the lungs, of the alimentary 
canal, or of the skin. It even overrides ancestral habits as 
to the great food question— Darwin's chief creator, which 
works by the strife in nature about how to eat or keep 
from being eaten. 

"This discovery of the hereditariness of the blood came 
about in this way: 

"Some of the most recondite investigations in the history 
of medicine have been about the mechanism of immunity, 
or why a single attack of certain infectious diseases 
renders a person immune from a second attack. It 
was through these investigations that some valuable antitoxins 
were discovered in the immunized blood serum, 
which raises hope that we may yet find the antitoxins for 
the worst forms of our deadly infections just as an anti-venom 
has been found for the cobra's poison, and another 
for that of the rattlesnake. But each of these antitoxins 
is specific in that it does not afford any protection except 
just against its own poison. This led Prof. Wasserman of 
Vienna to investigate whether the blood of each kind of 
animal did not contain some ingredients which would be 
specific to that animal, that is, not to be found in any other 
animal, a fact which, if found, might be of use in medico-legal 
cases. 

NATURES QUITE DISTINCT 

"His results made this so probable that Prof. George H. 
F. Nuttall, of the University of Cambridge, took the subject 
up, and has so extended its application that a single 
drop of blood from any animal now suffices not only to 
show by its peculiar chemical reactions what animal it 



comes from, but also how nearly related, or the opposite, 
an animal is by his blood to other animals. 

"It begins, therefore, to look as if the whole classification 
of zoology may have to be rearranged according 
to these blood tests. Thus, a drop of the blood of a walrus 
shows no relation with a drop of whale's blood, or of 
the blood of any other cetacean, such as seals or porpoises, 
which, like the walrus, are mammals that have 
taken to the sea. Instead of that, the blood of the walrus 
immediately reacts with the blood of horses, asses, 
and zebras, thus proving that he is an equine that no 
longer crops grass, but goes where he can live on an exclusively 
fish diet. Likewise, the hippopotamus is shown 
to be a modified pig. 

"Where blood relationship exists, but is distant, these 
reactions are proportionately faint, but where no reactions 
occur there is no relationship at all. Thus, geology 
indicates that birds are descended from reptiles, and, 
oddly enough, the blood of a bird shows a distinct, though 
very faint, reaction with the blood of a snake, but none 
whatever with that of a winged bat or the flying squirrel, 
for these are mammals. 

"These facts are quite sufficient to indicate how inconceivably 
complex the problems of life are. It may seem 
strange that we cannot know what life is until we also 
know what death is. Thus a stone never dies; but a 
flower, an insect, or a man dies simply because they once 
lived, and for no other reason." 

page 200-201 

[This is a two-page illustration.] 

BLIND GUIDES 

REPRODUCED FROM "LIFE," 
A SECULAR NEWSPAPER OF NEW YORK 

This illustration shows how the world in general views the 
attitude of the clergy of all denominations in respect to things 
present and things hereafter. It sees the clergy surrounded 
and entangled by the devouring influences of doubt respecting 
everything religious. We are in danger of still worse things, 
if possible, in the near future. It is a sad picture but, alas, 
a very true one! Ah, that we had power of tongue and pen to 
arouse Christendom, and especially The educated and the clergy, 
to a re-investigation of God's Word from the standpoint of the 
Divine Plan of the Ages. What Blessings it would bring them! 
What opening of the eyes of understanding ! What confidence in 
God and in the Bible! What fresh hope for themselves and for 
the world, especially in respect to the future life! 



R4847 : page 202 



$30,000,000 TO CONVERT THE WORLD 

IS THE PROPOSITION A JOKE? 

FOR A YEAR newspapers have been circulating 

reports re a Laymen's Missionary 

Movement for the conversion of the world. 

Like all modern propositions the financial 

end of this matter protruded first. It is 

proposed to raise thirty million dollars and 

to invest this and to use the accrued interest 

in telling the heathen that all of their 

forefathers have gone to eternal torment 

because they never heard of "the only 

Name given under heaven or amongst men whereby they 

must be saved"; and in telling them also that unless they 

become better Christians than are nine-tenths of so-called 

Christendom they also will spend eternity in torture. The 

heathen are expected to like this Message and to assent 

that it is "good tidings of great joy"! 

Perhaps the friends of the Movement will say, No, 
you misapprehend our intentions. We will send out up-to-date 

R4848 : page 202 

missionaries who will preach the same Message 
as in New York, namely, the Higher Criticism of the 
Bible, which repudiates its inspiration and classes it with 
Dickens and far below Shakespeare. We will teach them 
the Evolution theory that, instead of man's falling from 
the image of God downward into sin and degradation, 
he has been climbing upward. We will teach them that 
their fathers were monkeys and that they themselves are 
not much advanced over that condition and that they 
should copy us and learn how to make great dreadnought 
battleships, rapid-fire guns and other evidences of 
mental and moral superiority; we will teach them also 
of the necessity of love for God and for their fellowmen. 
We will give them clothing and teach them millinery 
styles and the use of various modern conveniences 
and will thus build up a trade with them and increase 
our national exports. 

Well, we wonder how much more happy the heathen 
will be after they shall have been converted to the same 
glorious civilization which prevails in America and 
Europe! And after thus converting them and increasing 
their discontent, what shall we do with them next? 

The next thing will be to treat them as we do the 
converted and civilized people at home— send them a number 
of duplicate copies of Billy Sunday to teach them 
how to use slang and to abuse everybody and everything 
and to tell them to their faces that their conversion has 
made them a set of rascals. And what then? Yes, 
what then? Nothing further will be left to be done and 
the interest on the thirty million dollars can after that 
be spent in helping the poor at home. 



GREAT MEN BEHIND IT 

And yet, how glad we would be to see so large a sum 
expended in telling the poor heathen the proper interpretation 
of God's Word and character— of His love and 
mercy and of the really "good tidings of great joy which 
shall be unto all people" when Messiah's Kingdom shall 
be established and bring order out of present confusion! — 
when the Spiritual Seed of Abraham shall be glorified 
in the First Resurrection and dispense God's blessings, 
through natural Israel, to all the families of the earth. 
There would be comfort and help and cheer in such a 
message; it would be sure to do good to many. And it 
would be worth the money because in presenting the true 
God and His exalted character one would be setting before 
the heathen a grand ideal. But we can have no 
sympathy with the scaring of the heathen with doctrines 
which those contributing the thirty million dollars do not 
for a moment believe. Nor can we have sympathy with 
the presentation of Evolution and Higher Criticism. 

The most astounding thing connected with this proposition 
is that it has behind it some good men, who are 
great, in some particulars at least. Our astonishment 
is that such men can delude themselves or be deluded by 
others into supporting such a foolish position, which 
even a child in mathematical calculation should be able 
to see through. Let us look into it, prejudiced in its 
favor because it has the support of such honorable men 
as Bishop Talbot, Bishop Greer, Mr. John R. Mott, Mr. 
Wm. J. Schieffelin, Mr. J. Campbell White and Mr. Evan 
E. Olcott. 

HEATHEN DOUBLE IN A CENTURY 

These talented men surely know that the Government 
statistics show that there are twice as many heathen in 
the world today as there were a century ago. One hundred 
years ago the heathen numbered six hundred millions. 
Today they number twelve hundred millions. The 
average man or woman has little conception of the numbers 
implied in the word million, and less of what a hundred 
millions would signify, and still less of what twelve 
hundred millions would mean; but the above-mentioned 
talented gentlemen surely can comprehend figures better 
than the average of mankind. They therefore have 
some conception of the immense work they propose to do 
in a few years and with the interest on thirty millions 
of dollars! 

The interest at four per cent, would amount to one 
million two hundred thousand dollars per year. How 
many would this convert? Let us look again at the statistics. 
We happen to have some just at hand from our 
Methodist brethren, and they surely are as wise and 
frugal as any denomination in the handling of their missionary 
work. Their report, according to the Toronto 



Telegram, shows that the cost of conversions among the 
heathen during the first seventeen years of their work 
reached one hundred thousand dollars each. According 
to this figure the fund proposed would convert exactly 
twelve heathen out of the twelve hundred millions! 
Here is the item: 

GIVE US ENOUGH MONEY AND WE WILL CONVERT THE WORLD. 

One hundred thousand dollars a convert was the price 
paid by the Methodist Episcopal Church in the foreign missionary 
fields in the seventeen years following its taking up 
of that work, according to figures given out at the Maine 
State Conference. The church entered the foreign missionary 
field in 1858, and in seventeen years expended in that 
direction $700,000. In that period there were seven conversions." 
—Toronto (Can.) Evening Telegram. 

APPRECIATE A GOD OF LOVE 

Missionaries going to foreign lands are surprised to 
find the heathen much more intelligent than they had supposed 
—much better reasoners. They find it difficult to 
explain the message which they carry because that message 
is so overloaded with error as to be inconsistent to 
all reasonable minds, unless the mind be so saturated 
with error from infancy that it has lost its proper acumen. 
We long to see the true Message and the rightful interpretation 
of God's Word sent to the heathen— and we 
long to see it more widely known in so-called 
Christendom. 

OUR MISSIONARY WORK IN INDIA 

From childhood the writer has had a broad sympathy 
for the heathen and an earnest desire for their uplift, 
which must include their knowledge of Christ. His intention 
was to be a missionary to the heathen until he 
discovered two things:— 

(1) That God has a future time for dealing with the 
whole world, including the heathen, under Messiah's 
Kingdom of glory, light and power, and that God's present 

R4848 : page 203 

work is the selection or election of the Church to be 
members of the Messianic Body, of which Christ is the 
Head— in all a "little flock," all saintly. 

(2) He discerned, in Divine providence, that although 
God is no respector of persons He has evidently designed 
the gathering of the majority of the "elect" from amongst 
the Semitic and the Aryan races of Europe and America. 
And, desiring to follow the leadings of Divine providence, 
and thus to be a co-worker with God, he turned 

his special attention to the gathering of "the elect" and 
has been using his energies chiefly where this "elect" 



class are mostly to be expected— in civilized lands. 

However, in God's providence, the writer, less than 
two years ago, became acquainted with a native of India, 
Mr. Devasahayam, through whose instrumentality a considerable 
work of grace is already under way in Travancore 
District, India. This is not the work of dishonoring 
the Divine Name by misrepresenting the Divine Character 
and Plan and telling the poor heathen that they have 
been foreordained and predestinated to eternal torture, 
except a lucky few; neither is it the message of Evolution 
and Higher Criticism and Humanitarianism. On the 
contrary, it is the telling of the sweet story of the old, 
old Book, rightly interpreted— the story of the Love of 
God, of the sacrifice of Jesus, of the election of the 
Church class to be joint-heirs with Christ in His Kingdom, 
and of the blessing that is yet to come to all nations 
as the result of the redemption and the Kingdom which 
Messiah will shortly establish, when the elect Church shall 
have been completed. 

IGNORANT FAITH-INFIDELITY-TRUE FAITH 

The story of Mr. Devasahayam and his work well 
illustrates the power of the Truth, in contrast with 
false doctrine and Higher Criticism. Mr. Devasahayam's 
father was a native missionary in Madras. The son, of 
religious mind, determined to follow his father's footsteps 
and be a missionary to his people. He appreciated 
the value of education and in the providence of God 
reached America and, under letters of introduction, entered 
the Methodist College at Delaware, Ohio. 

His father was attached to the Methodist Body and 
the son, also, gave to it his adherence. A four-years' 
course was sufficient to do for him what it does for 
nearly every young man who passes through any 
modern college in this, our day— it destroyed his faith in 
the Bible as the inspired Word of God. Thus set adrift 
from his original convictions he was too honest to accept 
the invitation of the Methodist Church to go to his home 
land and preach to his heathen countrymen what neither 
he nor the educated Methodist professors, ministers and 
missionaries believe. He declined the offer and took up 
lecturing in churches, describing the manners, customs, 
clothing, etc., in India. 

About this time Mr. Devasahayam came in contact 
with some whom he believed manifested not only a great 
deal of honesty in their discussion of the Bible, but also 
a great deal of knowledge respecting the precious Book. 
He cultivated their acquaintance, made inquiries respecting 
their views and was presented with six volumes of 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. The careful and prayerful 
reading of these six volumes converted Mr. Devasahayam 
from his Higher Critical Infidelity and Evolution theories 
back to the Bible— not, as before, in mysticism and 
superstition, mis-called faith, but to an intelligent, rational, 
logical understanding of the Divine Word. This 



was what his soul had been hungering and thirsting 
after. He gave himself wholly to the Lord and returned 

R4849 : page 203 

to his native land a representative of The International 
Bible Students Association. 

GREAT WORK IN TRAVANCORE 

Considering the entire circumstances to be a leading 
of Providence, we have co-operated with Mr. Devasahayam 
and are still co-operating. Our means are limited 
and our support of his work is necessarily limited. 
But so long as it seems to have the Divine blessing we 
wish to show no partiality as between India and Europe 
and America. 

The people of Travancore District are extremely poor 
and church missionary work amongst them has met with 
some success, partly in what the natives call rice-conversions. 
The poor are willing to be enrolled anywhere for 
the sake of having a certain regular supply of rice, which 
is the chief article of food. We forewarned Brother 
Devasahayam that money must not be spent in this manner 
—that the only ones who would receive any assistance 
must be such of the natives as would give evidence of 
thorough conversion and of intelligence and ability to 
present the true Gospel Message to their brethren. These 
native teachers are supplied a very small amount per 
month to meet their very simple necessities. Already, in 
less than a year, there are twelve large congregations in 
Travancore, with invitations and opportunities for as 
many more as soon as native instructors can be properly 
prepared for serving them with the Truth. 

The Message of the Love of God and the election of 
the Church now and the subsequent restitution blessings 
for the world appeals to the natives as it does to all intelligent, 
unprejudiced thinkers everywhere. Although we 
give no rice, the report is that many of the "rice-Christians" 
are leaving the missionaries who preach the bad 
tidings of great misery and are flocking to the true Gospel 
of the Love of God. The natives of this District seem 
to be childlike and need to be restrained from baptism, 
to make sure that they understand its real import as signifying 
a full burial or immersion of the will into the will 
of Christ— to be dead with Him to all earthly hopes, 
aims and objects. 

THE DARKNESS HATETH THE LIGHT 

It may surprise some of our readers to know that the 
missionaries who are a large expense to home societies 
misrepresenting the Divine character and the Divine 
Word and misrepresenting to the heathen their real belief 
are angry with Brother Devasahayam and his more 
successful work. His name has been published in Methodist 



journals with the suggestions that he is an enemy 

and should be opposed in every way that civilized laws 

will permit. 

Is it not peculiar that people who no longer believe the 
Bible and who in their colleges are teaching that it is 
not the Divine Word— people who do not believe in either 
eternal torment or purgatorial sufferings— people who do 
not believe that Adam fell from Divine likeness and 
needed to be redeemed that he might be restored thereto 
—that these people insist on misrepresenting themselves 
and God and the Bible and are angry and at war with 
those who do believe the Bible and who show clearly its 
teachings of the Love of God and His provision through 
Jesus for the blessing of all the families of the earth, with 
an opportunity to each individual to return to harmony 
with God? 

Somewhat similarly, in God's providence, a few years 
ago a little work was started in South Africa. 

THE GOOD TIDINGS IN AFRICA 

The readiness of the heathen to hear the Truth is in 
such sharp contrast with the unsuccess of the bad tidings 
amongst them as to be a lesson in itself. We cannot 
doubt that if the true Message of God's Word were 

R4849 : page 204 

understood by Christendom and promulgated in the spirit 
of the Gospel, millions would speedily be turned from 
sin to righteousness, from heathendom to Christianity. 
But we are not worrying ourselves about this matter. 
God is at the helm. As He opens the door in any direction 
we will seek to enter it, relying on His wisdom and 
providence. Where the door is closed in any manner 
we will not fret. The heathen are just as happy in their 
ignorance as the majority of Catholics and Protestants 
of Europe and America are in their ignorance. And the 
ignorance, so far as God and the Bible are concerned, 
is very nearly the same. Indeed, when the Truth shall 
come to be proclaimed under Messiah's Kingdom, to 
every creature, the heathen will have much less to unlearn 
and thus will have an advantage over many now supposed 
to be more highly favored. 

DOCTRINAL ERROR HARMFUL 

Darkness covers Christendom and gross darkness 
heathendom. Into very few hearts, comparatively, has 
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God penetrated. 
Let no one misunderstand us as being opposed to 
Christian missions. Nothing would please us more than 
to know of true Christian missions both in civilized and 
uncivilized lands. But since these missions have un-Christian 
and un-Biblical creeds and doctrines, we oppose that 
feature. Far better would it be to have missions without 



doctrines and denominational control— missions of civilization, 

which would undertake to truthfully instruct the 

heathen along lines of moral living, to provide them hospitals 

and schools, etc., and to teach them the Golden 

Rule— than to have missions whose creeds and doctrines 

slander and misrepresent God and His Word! To the 

extent that missions are doing such a humanitarian work 

they are doing good. To the extent that they are sowing 

doctrinal error they are harmful. 

The little work started in Africa, too, is progressing, 
although there also the opposition of the missionaries is 
intense. One of our native laborers was first thrown 
into prison and afterward deported from the country at 
the request of the missionaries of the Scotch Presbyterian 
Church, who were jealous of his success and alarmed 
to see the natives leaving their well-sustained missions for 
the simple truths preached by our native brother, Elliott 
Kamwana. However, in his stead, God seems to be raising 
up others, and perhaps some of the "very elect" may 
be found as samples for the Kingdom even in so unpropitious 
surroundings as are presented in Dark Africa. 

GOD'S WAYS NOT MAN'S WAYS 

Note the difference between God's ways and man's 
ways, as well as between the true Gospel of God's Word 
and the bad tidings of great misery, erroneously labeled 
Gospel. Man's thought is, Give us money enough and we 
will convert the world. And hundreds of apparently 
wise people are deluded into upholding such a proposition. 
How foolish to think that the conversion of the 
world has been delayed all these centuries for lack of 
thirty millions of dollars, if we believe that all the gold 
and silver are the Lord's and the cattle upon a thousand 
hills! 

A comparatively few dollars, which, in God's providence, 
come into the Treasury of the Watch Tower Bible 
& Tract Society are, under His blessing, accomplishing 
a considerable work in the enlightening of the saints of 
God and in the finding of these mainly throughout Christendom, 
and in the ripening of them for the garner, to 
which they will be transported shortly by a share in the 
First Resurrection. "Then shall the righteous shine 
forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father." Then 
Satan shall be bound for a thousand years. Then the 
Messianic Kingdom shall control the world. Then the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. Then 
the true light shall shine and the darkness flee away. Then 
all the blinded eyes of understanding shall be opened. 
Then every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to 
the glory of God, and the world, redeemed by the blood of 
Jesus, shall have fullest opportunity for obtaining the 
blessings of Restitution and an earthly Eden and everlasting 
joy. And then the wilful rejector and opposer 
shall be cut off in the Second Death, from which there 
will be no resurrection, no recovery— they will be taken 



and destroyed as brute beasts.— 2 Pet. 2:12. 



R4851 : page 204 

NO CROSS, NO CROWN 

Oh blessed crown of glory! 

Oh crown of righteousness! 
Oh crown of life immortal, 

How can I thee possess? 
In answer to my longing 

A voice said, soft and clear, 
"The crown is yours, beloved, 

If you the cross will bear." 

"What is the cross?" I questioned. 

Tis bearing every day 
The trials which the Father 

Permits along the way; 
'Tis sharing the reproaches 

Your Master meekly bore, 
While those who claim to love him 

Revile you, more and more. 

The world will look upon you 

With disapproving eye; 
And friends whom you love dearly 

Will coldly pass you by. 
They'll have no patience with you; 

Your good works they'll deride, 
And every righteous motive 

To you will be denied. 

And all the powers of evil 

Will gather to assail; 
They know your every weakness 

And where they might prevail. 
They'll try to overwhelm you 

By coming like a flood, 
You must with force oppose them, 

Resisting unto blood. 

The flesh will strive to win you, 

Exerting every power, 
'Twill be perpetual warfare 

Between you every hour— 
A fight that ceases only 

When one of you is dead. 
It is no easy pathway, 

Beloved, that you tread. 

And then I answered, "Master, 

I've counted all the cost; 
And deem it highest honor 



To bear with Thee the cross. 
And I will bear it gladly, 

Till it works out in me 
That blessed transformation 

Which proves me part of Thee. 

And when the cross grows heavy, 

By faith, I gaze upon 
The crown Thou art reserving 

For those who overcome— 
The crown of great rejoicing, 

The crown of righteousness, 
The crown of life immortal 

I'm striving to possess. 

-SISTER DONEY. 



R4849 : page 205 

THE LOVE REQUIRED OF THE NEW CREATION 

"If we love one another God dwelleth in us, 
and His love is perfected in us."— 1 John 4: 12. 

THERE IS a great difference between human 
or animal love, such as the members of a 
family have for one another, and that love 
to which this text refers. The love required 
of members of the Body of Christ 
is a love resulting from mutual relationship 
to the Lord, and comes from the Spirit of 
God dwelling in them— a God-like love, 
which marks them as of His Spirit, having 
been begotten to His disposition. There 
should be something about the character of the Lord's 
people which would demonstrate on all occasions that they 
possess true love for one another. If this is not the case 
the lack of love would be a reflection upon them all. 
As we learn to love one another the love of God is 
being perfected in us, the true, benevolent love which the 
Lord commands. The Lord said that we should love one 
another as He has loved us— to the extent of being willing 
to lay down our lives for one another. We are not 
to love some of the brethren some of the time, and some 
of the brethren all of the time; but we should love all of 
the brethren all of the time; and overlook their frailties and 
imperfections, taking that high standpoint from which 
God views them, forgiving one another, as God, for 
Christ's sake, overlooks our blemishes. We ought to forgive 
those who trespass against us as we hope and trust 

R4850 : page 205 

that God will forgive our trespasses. No one can be of 



the "elect" class unless this love be perfected in him. 
He may not gain so full a control of the flesh that he 
will never speak sharply, hastily, etc., but he must reach 
the place where he will be perfect in intention before 
he can be accepted as a member of the Kingdom. 

The Apostle Paul says that "Love worketh no ill to his 
neighbor; therefore, love is the fulfilling of the Law." 
(Rom. 13:10) The Divine Law which the Apostle had 
specially before his mind was the Law given to Israel— 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart 
and with all thy soul and with all thy might"; and, "Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." (Deut. 6:5; Lev. 19:18.) 
This Law of God fulfilled— filled full, completely 
met— requires that the heart shall be full of love. All the 
mind and soul and strength are required to fulfil this 
Law. "Love worketh no ill to his neighbor." Yet one 
might work ill through ignorance and superstition and 
misunderstanding, through imperfection of the flesh, 
while his heart intentions were good. Saul of Tarsus 
worked much ill to his neighbors. With good intention, 
doubtless, some of our Catholic friends and some of our 
Protestant friends have worked ill to their neighbors. 
We cannot say that because they worked ill to their neighbors 
they had no love, but that they did not have it to 
the degree required by the Law; for perfect love would 
work no ill to his neighbor. Whoever would work ill to 
his neighbor, with full knowledge, would not have love. 

GOES BEYOND THE JEWISH LAW 

There is a force in the word therefore in the text, 
"Love worketh no ill to his neighbor, therefore, love is 
the fulfilling of the Law." The Law was given to restrain 
wrong deeds, wrong words, wrong sentiments 
toward another. That Law was evidently not intended 
to enumerate all the things that should not be done, for it 
works no ill. One might, therefore, fulfil the Law of 
the Ten Commandments if he works no ill to his neighbor, 
but loves him as himself. The word therefore gives us 
the thought that the Apostle had in mind the Jewish Law 
and not the Law of the New Creation. Merely abstaining 
from evil and loving our neighbor as ourselves would 
not fulfil the Law as given to the New Creature by the 
Lord; but it would fill the Law of Justice given to the 
Jews. 

But our Lord magnified that Law and also gave us a 
new command. The Love that would be in His followers, 
His disciples, was shown in His words, "Love one another 
as I have loved you." (John 15:12.) To do this 
would be far more than to do no injury to another. It 
would be laying down our lives for one another. This is 
far beyond any requirement of the Law. Justice could 
not say, "You must go over and clean the snow from 
your neighbor's pavement"; but Justice would say, "You 
must not throw any snow upon your neighbor's pavement." 
But Love says more than this. The new Law 



that is given to us is the Law of Sacrifice. We who are 
in the Body of Christ must love one another as Jesus 
loved us, to the extent of sacrificing our interests, our 
comforts, our privileges, in the interest of others. 

He who does not find his heart in harmony with this 
Law of the New Creation— love, mercy, kindness, gentleness, 
goodness— lacks the evidence, or proof, that he 
is in any sense accepted of God as a joint-heir with 
Christ. If we have not love in our heart for the brethren, 
and the love of gentleness and benevolence toward 
all men, and even toward the brute creation, we have not 
the spirit which will carry us through in making the sacrifices 
necessary under present conditions. It will be 
only a question of time with such when the power of 
pride or vainglory holding them in the way of self-sacrifice 
will snap asunder and selfishness take full control. 
We are to keep the Law in our minds. But while our 
minds are perfect, we find imperfections of the flesh 
which hinder us from doing all that we wish to do. 
Hence, we need the sufficiency that is in Christ. We are 
trusting that God will accept the good intentions of the 
heart, of the mind, instead of counting against us the 
imperfections of our flesh. 

AN AGGRESSIVE AS WELL AS DEFENSIVE WARFARE 
NECESSARY 

God would have us watch for evidences of His will 
and profit by all the experiences which He permits to come 
to us in our every-day life, humbly accepting any discipline; 
and having this spirit we shall be led on from 
grace to grace and from victory unto victory. Merely 
to stand and battle on the defensive is very wearisome 
and gains no victory. To gain the victory we must not 
only put on the whole armor of God, but we must be 
heroes in the strife and wage an aggressive warfare upon 
the lusts of the eye and flesh and pride of life and all the 
foes of righteousness and purity. 

Love— love for the Lord, for the Truth and for righteousness 
—must inspire us or we shall never be victors. 
Love will keep us faithful even unto death and make us 
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light. Where 
fervent love rules in the heart it implies that the heart 
is fully submitted to the Lord, and that means that nine-tenths 
of the battle is already won. But even then, as 
the Apostle Jude says (Jude 21), we must keep ourselves 
in the love of God, in watchfulness and prayer and zeal; 
and grace will abound where love abounds. 

We keep ourselves in the love of God by striving to 
do always those things that are pleasing to Him. He 
can love only perfection; and it is impossible for us to 
be perfect. He perceives, however, that our weaknesses 
are not of the will but of the flesh, and He has provided 
an Advocate for us to whom we may come if we 
commit trespasses. Thus we keep ourselves in the love of 
God and walk in the footsteps of Jesus. Where our footsteps 



R4850 : page 206 

may deviate from the way we have the precious 
blood of Jesus to cleanse us. When we have our new 
bodies we shall be continually in His love and always 
pleasing to Him, because we shall have no bodily imperfection 
to mar the perfection of our will. 

LET US BEWARE OF SELFISHNESS 

Selfishness is the surest cause of separation from 
the love of God. When we made our consecration to 
the Lord and He accepted us as New Creatures in Christ 
and begat us with the Holy Spirit, it was because we 
surrendered self. If at any time we turn back to walk after 
the flesh, we are departing from our consecration. This 
might be manifest in many ways: in slackness instead 
of zeal; in carelessness instead of carefulness; in 
a selfish feeling of jealousy of spirit; or in anger, hatred, 
strife. All these are so much of the Old Creature- 
wrong conditions from which we thought we had escaped. 
In proportion as the Old Creature triumphs the New 
Creature will fall; and thus we will gradually cease to be 
in the love of God. These wrong conditions will hinder 
the keeping of ourselves in the love of God, which signifies 
the keeping of ourselves in the proper attitude toward God 
and Jesus. We are to press on and make our sacrifice, if 
possible, larger every way to the Lord and the brethren. 

Daily and hourly we may keep ourselves in the Lord's 
love by obedience to the principles of righteousness and 
faithfulness to our covenant and a growing love for 
these. We are to rejoice in every experience of life— its 
trials, difficulties, sorrows, disappointments, no less than 
in its pleasures, if by any or all of these means the Lord 
shall instruct us and give us clearer insight into our own 
deficiencies and a still clearer insight into that perfect 
law of liberty and love which He has established and to 
which He requires our full and loyal heart-submission. 

In such faithful obedience to the truth and earnest 
endeavor to conform to its principles, the way and the 
truth grow more and more precious and our willing feet 
with joy are led in the paths of righteousness and 
peace— into life everlasting. 



R4850 : page 206 

FINDING A LOST BIBLE 

-JULY 30.-2 CHRON. 34:14-33.- 

"Thy Word have I hid in mine heart that I 
might not sin against Thee."— Psa. 119:11. 



IN CONJUNCTION with Josiah's reformation 

and cleansing of the temple, a copy of 

the book of the Law was found. Presumably 

this book contained the Pentateuch, or 

five books of Moses. The long period of 

idolatry preceding Josiah's work of reformation 

had placed the Testimonies of the 

Lord at a discount, so that evidently the 

king had never seen, perhaps had never 

heard of the Divine Law up to this time. If 

this should seem strange to us for the moment, let us 

remember that today we have Bibles by the millions, 

whereas in olden times books were written laboriously 

with a pen, and were very expensive. A copy was provided 

for the king as well as one for the temple, but 

idolatrous kings would have no use for God's Word, and 

the royal copy was doubtless destroyed long before. 

The king caused the manuscript to be read in his 
hearing. It detailed what blessings would come upon 
the nation of Israel if obedient to God. It also portrayed 
the penalties which would be theirs if they 
neglected the service of the Almighty and His laws and 

R4851 : page 206 

became idolatrous. Deuteronomy 28 is a very clear statement 
of what appeared to be the penalty due Josiah's 
kingdom because of idolatry preceding his day. The 
king was astonished. Evidently Divine judgments were 
due. Why they waited he knew not. He reflected that 
possibly something might yet be done to offset the evil. 
He sent therefore to make inquiry on the subject. 

The inquiry came to Huldah, a prophetess of that 
time, who gave the Lord's answer, saying that all the 
woes foretold in the Law would surely come to pass because 
of the idolatrous course followed by the nation. 
But the message declared that this trouble, this chastisement, 
would be deferred and not come in King Josiah's 
day because of his earnest repentance and manifestation 
of sorrow in connection with the matter as soon as he 
learned about it. 

Nevertheless the king did all in his power to remedy 
the evil and to bring back the nation into accord with the 
Almighty. He proclaimed a general meeting at the 
temple and attended in person with the nobles and representatives 
of all the people. He caused the book of the 
Law to be read in the hearing of the people and pointed 
out their shortcomings and what must be expected. The 
work of purging from idolatry was still more thoroughly 
carried out and the work of reformation made yet more 
deep— all that the king knew how to do. 

THE BIBLE LOST TODAY 

It may amaze some when we say that to the masses 
of the people today God's Book is lost. What! do you 



say, Have we lost over a hundred million Bibles in Christendom, 

and are we not printing more than a million 

copies every year? How can you say that the Word of 

the Lord is lost today? 

Alas! Bibles we have, but to the majority of the 
specially cultured they are Bibles no longer— they are the 
inspired Word of the Almighty no longer! They are 
studied, believed and obeyed no longer. It is still fashionable 
to have Bibles; it is still customary to take texts 
from them— this is done even by ministers, who privately 
confess that they have no faith in the Bible— that they 
have no more faith in the Bible than in Shakespeare. 
And the number of religious teachers who have thus rejected 
the Word of God as the Divinely inspired Message 
is much greater than the majority of people surmise. 
Nearly all ministers graduated during the past twenty 
years from nearly all of the universities, colleges and 
seminaries of Christendom, in Great Britain, Germany, 
the United States and Canada, are really infidels, 
unbelievers. 

How did the Word of the Lord come to be thus lost? 

We answer that history shows a long period called 
the Dark Ages in which the Word of the Lord was set 
aside in favor of church councils and decrees. Then came 
the period of the Reformation. The Bible was translated 
by the Catholics into the English and styled the 
Douay Version. It was translated by the Protestants 
into English and styled the King James Version, and 
once more the Word of God began to exercise a transforming 
influence upon humanity. 

But alas! the errors, the darkness, the superstition of 
the Dark Ages already in the human mind gave to the 
Word of God peculiar distortions and made it appear, 
through the colored glasses of sectarianism, to mean 
things wholly irrational and inconceivable. 

With the progress of education thinking was resumed 
along the lines of religion as well as science. The thinkers, 

R4851 : page 207 

however, regarded the Bible only as they had seen 
it through their colored glasses; and in proportion as 
they discarded the superstitions of the darker past they 
discarded the Bible as a part of those superstitions, and 
supposedly their basis. As a result, school men, college 
professors, Doctors of Divinity, etc., have charged up 
against the Word of God various doctrines which it 
does not teach— amongst others Purgatory and eternal 
torment for all except the "very elect." 

Now, in due time, the Word of God is being found. 
The dust of the Dark Ages is being brushed aside. The 
Book is being investigated in the light of its own teachings. 
It is shining with wonderful brilliancy upon the 
path of the just. We are seeing fulfilled before us God's 
promise that the path of the just will "shine more and 
more unto the perfect day." Its bright shining at the 



present time betokens that the New Day, the New Era 
of Messiah's Kingdom is nigh. 



R4851 : page 207 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD" 

THE PROPHET DAVID wrote the 23d Psalm 
concerning himself; but in his words there 
is still deeper signification, namely, that 
Jehovah is the Shepherd of the antitypical 
David— The Christ, of which Jesus is the 
Head and the Church His Body. 

In proportion as any are in an attitude 
of mind in harmony with the Lord they 
are out of harmony with their present environment, 
in which the great Adversary 

is seeking their destruction, under conditions unfavorable 
for their spiritual development as the Lord's "sheep." 
Foxes, wolves, lions and even cattle have means of defense 
and offense; but the sheep has practically none. 
It seems to have no judgment; therefore, the sheep is 
dependent on the shepherd. In other words, it is out of its 
environment if away from the shepherd. God provided 

R4852 : page 207 

for man's protection, but by reason of sin the race got 
into the wilds and became exposed to various difficulties 
which otherwise would not have been man's lot. 

Those who are the "sheep" will come back into harmony 
with the Lord. As represented in our text, the 
Church class comes back in the present time. We all 
recognize, as the days go by, how necessary is the Divine 
care. As we come to see the Divine Plan, we see that 
"all who are of this fold," all those who will come into 
harmony with God, will have this care; and that eventually 
there shall be one Shepherd and one flock. 

Our Lord Jesus is the representative of the Father. 
Humanity, as the Lord's sheep, went astray. All of 
Adam's posterity are now astray. The Great Shepherd 
sent His Son for the lost sheep. He is seeking them and 
will ultimately find all who belong to this true flock. 
He is, therefore, in the highest sense of the word, the 
Bishop, or Shepherd of our souls, the Good Shepherd 
who laid down His life for the sheep. 



R4852 : page 207 

OUR NEW BIBLES 
Hereafter, to distinguish our own special edition, from 



other Bibles, we will refer to them as Berean Bibles. They 
are becoming more and more indispensable to all readers as 
they learn how to use them. The translation, of course, is 
not at all different from that of other Bibles of the Common 
Version. Our peculiar, distinctive feature is the Berean Helps 
at the back. These consist of: 

(1) Biblical Comments from Genesis to Revelation, with 
references to the SCRIPTURE STUDIES and other of our publications 
showing the page where the text is more fully discussed 

and elaborated. We can scarcely imagine anything more 
helpful than these for Bible study. It is so easy to turn to the 
reference and ascertain if the matter has been treated and 
where and how. It represents four hundred and eighty-one 
pages of matter. 

(2) The Instructor's Guide. This is a topical arrangement 
of Bible subjects specially convenient for those who have 
opportunity for teaching others the Divine Plan of the Ages. 
Its various topics are arranged under distinct headings and 
the various texts bearing upon the subject are collated. 
With this help a novice has at his command, well-furnished, 

"the Sword of the Spirit." It is in condensed form, very convenient, 
and consists of eighteen pages solid matter. 

(3) The Berean Topical Index, alphabetically arranged, 
presents a large variety of subjects showing references to the 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES and other of our publications treating 
the same. This feature is comprised in twenty-eight pages. 

(4) In this specially difficult texts are brought to the attention 
and references given showing where they are treated in 

our publications. Following this is a full list of various 
interpolations and spurious passages of the Scriptures not in 
the original MSS., as proven by the oldest Greek MSS.— 
fifteen pages. 

These four features, representing five hundred and forty-two 
pages, are not to be found in any other Bibles on earth 
and, in our opinion, they are of almost priceless value. One 
of our interested readers who could not procure another 
would not sell his copy for a hundred dollars— many of them, 
surely, would not take thousands for it. 

All of our Berean Bibles contain the above, and some of 
them, the numbers of which end with a nine, contain additionally 
Bagster's Bible Study Helps, including an alphabetical 
index of proper names and Bagster's Bible Concordance 
and Maps— a total of one hundred and eighty-six pages. 

We not only supply these Bibles at cost price, but, 
because of the large quantities ordered at a time, we are 
enabled to secure a cost price which is really phenomenal. 
We are safe in saying that, even aside from our Berean 
Helps, no Bibles are to be found in the world of such extraordinary 
values. The price is the same whether the order be 
for one copy or for more. To save danger of misunderstanding 
we below quote the prices, including postage. The 
very low prices must not lead you to think that these are 
manufactured in any slipshod manner. They are first class 
in every particular. The prices are, many of them, less than 
one-half what you pay for such books almost anywhere else. 

So great is the demand for these Berean Bibles that hereafter 



we purpose carrying no others in stock except pocket 

Bibles and large type Bibles for the aged. We will still, however, 

be pleased to serve anyone who desires other Bibles. 

We can procure for these wholesale rates, usually twenty-five 

per cent, off publishers' catalogue prices, plus postage. 

DESCRIPTION AND PRICES--BEREAN BIBLES 

Number 1918, price $1.65, is a beautiful book. It is small 
and light. Size 4-3/4 x 6-3/4 inches. It has minion type, red 
under gold edges, divinity circuit, French seal. Looks like 
the genuine seal skin, but it is in reality good sheepskin. 

Number 1919, price $1.75, postpaid; the same book, the 
same Bible; the same every way except the addition of Bagster 
Helps, Concordances, etc. 

Number 1928, price $2.65. This is the same book exactly 
as number 1918, except that it has genuine morocco binding; 
leather-lined. 

LITTLE LARGER, IONIC TYPE, SELF-PRONOUNCING 

Number 1939, price, $1.95, postage prepaid. This is the 
same book as 1919, the same binding and contents, but it has a 
coarser print and is a little larger book. Size, 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 
inches. 

Number 1959, price $3.65, postage prepaid. This is the 
same book as 1939 except that it has splendid morocco binding, 
is calf-lined and silk-sewed. Bibles similar in quality and 
finish are listed in many catalogues at $1 1 . 

The sale of these books is not restricted to WATCH TOWER 
readers. They are valuable aids in Bible study, excellent 
value in every way and open to the public. 

We have a good supply of these books in stock now ready 
for immediate shipment anywhere. Registered at 10c. Remit 
with order. We can secure such prices only by paying spot 
cash and must sell on the same terms. 

Anyone ordering patent index on any of these Bibles should 
so state and should add twenty-five cents to the price. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII JULY 15 No. 14 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Our Convention Tour— No. 1 21 1 

The Church's Share in the Sin-Offering 212 

Does the Church Add to the Sin-Offering? 213 

The Voices of the Three Signs 214 

The Voice of The First Sign 215 



The Voice of The Second Sign 216 

The Voice of The Third Sign 217 

Providing for One's Natural Household 218 

Retributive Discipline of the Millennium 219 

Prophesy Smooth Things 220 

Prophecy Against Jerusalem 220 

Destroying God's Word 221 

The Propriety of Fasting 222 

Holiness of the Heart Not a Mere Outward 
Form 222 

Abstemiousness Specially Helpful at 

Lenten Season 222 

Guided by God's Eye 223 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 223 

page 210 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C.T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



WINNIPEG, CAN., JULY 8, 9, 10 

The friends at Winnipeg advise that special railway rates 
for July 8, 9 and 10 have been arranged for on the C.P.R., 
C.N.R. and G.T.P.R. Friends may purchase a one-way 
single fare ticket to Winnipeg, asking their agent for a 
standard receipt certificate. The return fare will be free, one-third 
or two-thirds, according to the number attending. 
Your certificates will be required to be signed by the secretary, 
Brother W. H. Menery, at Winnipeg, for returning. 



TORONTO, ONT., JULY 15-17 

All services for the interested in Broadway Hall, 450 
Spadina avenue. On Sunday, July 16, Brother Russell will 
address the general public at 3 p.m., and again at 7:30 p.m. 
in Massey Hall, corner of Victor and Shuter streets. 

The Eastern Canadian Passenger Association, embracing 
the territory east of and including Port Arthur, Sault Ste. 
Marie and the St. Clair and Detroit Rivers, has granted a 
rate of one fare for the round trip plus 25c. on the certificate 
plan. 

Buy a single trip ticket to Toronto and secure a 
standard certificate showing that you have purchased a one-way 
full-fare ticket to Toronto. This certificate, plus 25c, 
will, if the required number attend the convention, entitle 
the holder to a return ticket free. Deposit your certificates 
with the proper party at the Convention Hall immediately 
after arrival. 

Inquire of Brother Wm. A. Sinclair, 193 Concord avenue, 
Toronto, as to rooms, sleeping accommodations, etc. 



ACCOMMODATIONS AT MT. LAKE PARK, MD. 

GENERAL CONVENTION-SEPTEMBER 1-11. 

All proposing to attend this Convention may, if they choose, 
avail themselves of arrangements now being made by our 
Entertainment Committee. This Committee is contracting 
for some of the best rooms at the Park, and is paying $1.00 
down, on account of board, to bind the contract. We have 
made arrangements for comfortable board and lodging for 
$7.00 per week, not less than two in a room, as the cottages 
and little hotels are numerous at the park. There is but 



one large hotel there; its terms are $2.00 per day and upward. 
We have secured some of the most desirable rooms 
in this hotel at a $2.00 rate, and some at $2.50 per day- 
board included. 

Such of our readers as desire us to definitely locate them 
there should write as soon as possible, sending $1.00 as 
advance payment to reimburse us. On receipt of letter with 
money there will be sent you a description of the room assigned 
to you, stating its location and approximate size. 
This will permit you to go immediately to your quarters on 
arrival at the Park, without delay or inconvenience. 

The Entertainment Committee will, of course, do all in 
its power to locate comfortably such as may not send their 
orders to us in advance. It will be to the advantage of 
all, however, to follow the course first suggested. 

Give this matter your immediate attention. Should anything 
occur to hinder your attendance after the assignment 
has been made, please advise the Committee at once. Rooms 
will not be held after Friday, September 1, the opening day, 
unless by special agreement. Address: 
Entertainment Committee, "I.B.S.A.," 
17 Hicks street, Brooklyn, New York. 

[CONTINUED ON LAST PAGE.] 

page 224 

ELMIRA, N.Y., JULY 23. 

Morning Rally and discourse for the interested at 10:30 
o'clock in Royal Arcanum Hall, 120 Lake street. Public discourse 
at 3 p.m., in the Lyceum Theater, Lake street. Topic: 
"Hereafter." 

GALESBURG, ILL., JULY 30. 

Brother Russell is the invited speaker at the Galesburg 
Chautauqua, Highland Park, Sunday, July 30. Morning Discourse 
at 11:15 o'clock and Public Address at 3 p.m. in the 
Auditorium, Highland Park, Galesburg, 111. Topic of the 
afternoon lecture: "Hereafter." 

BROOKLYN, NY., AUGUST 6. 

Praise, Prayer and Testimony meeting at 10:30 a.m. 
Discourse in the afternoon at 3 o'clock. Topic: "The All-Seeing 
Eye." Question meeting in the evening. All services 
will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks street. 
No meeting will be held in the Academy of Music on this 
date, as that building is closed for the summer. 

SHAMOKIN, PA., AUGUST 13. 

ST. JOHNS, N.B., AUGUST 20, 21, 22. 

RICHMOND, VA., AUGUST 27. 



R4852: page 211 

OUR CONVENTION TOUR--NO. 1 

HAVING reached Denver on our westward 

journey, we must give an account of the 

Lord's blessings and favors and our experiences; 

for we well know that the prayers 

and thoughts of many are with us. Although 

the blessing of the service keeps us 

busy continually, our thoughts and prayers 

go out to the Lord's dear flock collectively, 

and individually in many cases. "We share 

our mutual woes, our mutual burdens 

bear, and often for each other flows the sympathizing 

tear." 

Our first stop was at Cleveland, Ohio, where a meeting 
had been arranged by the Bible Students in the interest 
of the Jews. The topic was, "Zionism the Hope of 
the World." We will not even outline the discourse, 
because the interested will have the report from our San 
Francisco meeting. 

The meeting was successful in one sense of the word, 
in that the Lord always blesses those who seek to serve 
and praise Him; but it was not a success in respect to the 
number of Jews present. Two reasons contributed: (1) 
It was Friday night, the beginning of the Jewish Sabbath, 
the worst night in the week, as we subsequently learned; 
for the Orthodox Jews hold the Sabbath very sacred, 
and many of them would not even ride upon a street car 
on that day. (2) The prejudice awakened amongst the 
Jews by one or two of their journals calling us a "missionary" 
has not yet worn out. The audience altogether 
was probably a little over a thousand, and of these less 
than half, probably only three hundred, were Jews. The 
dear friends of the Cleveland Class felt a little disappointed 
that their efforts had not brought larger success. 
We encouraged them, however, with the thought that having 
done our best the results were entirely in the Lord's 
hands, and the credit that He would give them would be 
just as great as though five thousand had heard. 

THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION 

The night train carried us to Indianapolis, where a 
Convention was already in progress and continued also 
after our leaving. The attendance was excellent— about 
six hundred (three or four hundred from the surrounding 
district). The attendance at the public service to 
hear about the "Hereafter" was about a thousand. Excellent 

R4853 : page 211 



attention was given, but how much "wheat" was 
ripened we, of course, know not. By some oversight this 
three-days' Convention at Indianapolis was not properly 
announced in THE WATCH TOWER— merely our special 
services were mentioned. But it was a success and a 
blessing evidently to many in attendance. 

THE ST. LOUIS CONVENTION 

A night ride brought us to St. Louis early on Sunday, 
June 1 1th, where we were met by the Convention Party, 
organized by Brother L. W. Jones, M.D., of Chicago. 
On the route its number has varied from one hundred 
and fifty to two hundred, some joining and some leaving 
at one place and another. It was a very happy 
company, amongst whom the Spirit of the Lord is quite 
manifest. The train consists of eight cars, including one 
for baggage. They are sleeping cars, and are not only 
comfortable but economical in that they save hotel expenses 
and transfers. In the party are five doctors. 
Chicago is, of course, better represented than any other 
city. All have the spirit of helpfulness, the spirit of love 
for the brethren, and a desire to spend and be spent in 
the Master's service. The presence of so goodly a company 
in the various Conventions of this trip certainly 
adds, not only to the singing, but also to the general interest 
of the meetings. The brethren take part in the 
testimony meetings and symposiums, and in giving addresses. 
Our own time being fully occupied, except when 
on the platform, has hindered us from enjoying these 
and making a report of them. 

The Sunday afternoon meeting for the public on the 
topic of "Hereafter" was well attended, the audience 
numbering about fifteen hundred. The evening talk on 
"Zionism the Hope of the World" was not extensively 
advertised. The audience was estimated at about a thousand. 
Only a small proportion was Jewish— about one-third. 
On Monday our afternoon address to the interested 
and also our evening service (a Question Meeting) 
were well attended. The St. Louis Class seem to be in 
good spiritual condition so far as we can judge, earnestly 
pressing forward in love and devotion. Here, as elsewhere, 
we saw good evidence of the zeal of the friends 
in the circulation of the public announcements, and other 
necessary and expensive arrangements for the Convention 
services. 

THE KANSAS CITY CONVENTION 

Tuesday and Wednesday, June 13th and 14th, were 
devoted to Kansas City. There is quite a good sized class 
of Bible Students there, and their loving zeal was everywhere 
manifested. The meetings were all good. Brothers 
Ritchie, Swingle, Senor, Edgar, Jones and Wise participated 
in addresses on this occasion. "Convention Hall" 
had been secured for the public services, the first evening 



R4853 : page 212 

on "Hereafter," the following one on "Zionism the Hope 
of the World." The attendance was estimated at three 
thousand and one thousand respectively. 

Here again we experienced some disappointment respecting 
the numbers of Jews interested in hearing a 
subject of such vital importance to them. Incidentally 
we learned that the Rabbis are trying to keep the people 
from hearing. It was ever thus. The teachers take 
away the key of knowledge, and neither enter in themselves 
nor permit others to enter, if they can prevent it. 

The spirit of Judaism is marked today, as it was in 
the Master's day, by a subserviency to the elders and traditions 
—very much the same as with Christians. How 
much the overseers of the religious world will be obliged 
to answer for respecting the ignorance of the people and 
their estrangement from the truth! 

Prof. J. T. Read of the Chicago Class contributed 
greatly to the interest at all the meetings by leading the 
music, and also by singing solos while the audience gathered. 
At Kansas City Prof. Riggs and wife also assisted, 
adding much to the pleasure of the services. The total 
attendance of interested ones was about six hundred. 

Following one of these meetings, by request, we had a 
service for the consecration of children. A number of 
parents formally presented their children in consecration 
to the Lord. We made clear to all that there is no Scriptural 
command governing this matter. The basis of our 
innovation is the fact that the Jews in general were accustomed 
to consecrate their male children to the Lord 
by circumcision, and the parents of Samuel the Prophet 
made consecration of him to the Divine service. 

Many Protestants practise infant sprinkling, called 
baptism, not as a saving ordinance, nor as an induction 
into the church, but as an act of public consecration 
to the Lord. We reminded the friends also that 
when certain parents brought their children to Jesus, he 
said, "Permit little children to come unto me, and forbid 
them not, for of such like is the Kingdom." That is to 
say, those acceptable to the Lord as joint-heirs of Messiah's 
Kingdom will all be child-like, simple, trustful, 
obedient children of God. 

We suggested to the parents that such a formal offering 
to the Lord of the fruits of their bodies should, in 
after days, help them to accept whatever Divine providences 
might come to their children, with more loving 
submission. 

We suggested further that as the children grow to 
years of discernment, it may be helpful to them to know 
that their parents had thus devoted them to God and His 
service of righteousness. We recalled our own experience, 
that when about seven years of age our mother told 
us, "Charles, I want you to know that I gave you to the 
Lord, as Samuel's mother gave him. It is my hope and 



prayer that in God's providence you may become a minister 
of the Gospel." We recall the impression made upon 
us, and our reply at the time: "Ma, I think that when I 
grow up I shall prefer to be a missionary to the poor 
heathen. The people here have many preachers, have 
many churches, while the poor heathen have few." 

Our mother made no remark, but as we look at the 
matter now, her prayer is being fulfilled in our present 
opportunities for ministering to the "household of faith," 
and our own proposition to help the heathen will also 
have realization in the blessed Messianic Kingdom. 
About fifteen children were consecrated, by prayer, laying 
on of the hand and the invocation of Divine blessing. 
We made clear that none should think of this matter as 
an obligation, merely as an opportunity for such as desire 
to avail themselves of it. 

ONE DAY AT WICHITA 

We had a very enjoyable experience at Wichita. A 
goodly number had gathered from surrounding places, 
and with our own party made up an audience of about 
four hundred for the Thursday afternoon meeting, when 
we talked to the interested. Of course, we had a good 
season of spiritual fellowship. The attendance in the 
evening was estimated at one thousand. We had remarkable 
attention, and believe that surely some grains of 
wheat will be found as a result. Here also, following the 
afternoon discourse to the interested, a number of parents 
presented their children in consecration to the Lord 
--about 12. 

ONE DAY AT PUEBLO, COLO. 

Another night-ride brought us to Pueblo Friday, 
June 16. We had two good meetings here— one for the 
interested in the afternoon, at which about three hundred 
were present, and one for the public in the evening, 
the attendance being about a thousand. The resident 
class is a very small one, and the numbers from the outside 
were comparatively few, but all seemed to have the 
spirit of the Truth. The dear friends who arranged the 
meeting here manifested great zeal and courage, the Lord 
greatly blessing their efforts. The public meeting was 
attended by some very intelligent people, who seemed 
deeply interested in the things they heard respecting the 
better Hereafter— the two salvations. 

SATURDAY AT COLORADO SPRINGS 

We arrived here early and had a good day. In the 
morning a testimony meeting; in the afternoon a symposium, 
participated in by twelve brethren. Following 
this, by request, we had the service for the Consecration 
of children— about twenty participating. The public 
service in the evening was specially large for Saturday. 



The audience was estimated at from twelve to fifteen 
hundred. We had excellent attention. The close attention, 
the earnest faces and desire for free literature at the 
close of the service are hopeful indications as respects 
the Truth here. 



R4854: page 212 

THE CHURCH'S SHARE IN THE SIN-OFFERING 

THE MERIT of Christ consisted in His keeping 

of the Law and in His obedience to the 

Father in the laying down of His life. 

That life which He laid down was the 

price. It was placed in the hands of Justice 

when He died— "Father, into Thy hands 

I commit My Spirit." All passed into the 

hands of the Father and it remains in the 

hands of the Father— a Ransom-price. 

When God raised our Lord from the dead 

He did not raise Him a human being, but a spirit being of 

the highest order. 

As the Scriptures declare of the Church, so it is true of 
the Head of the Church, for we follow in His footsteps. 
Of the Church it is written, "It is sown in dishonor, 
it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised 
in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual 
body." (I Cor. 15:42-45.) Our Lord was raised a quickening, 
a life-giving spirit. (I Cor. 15:45; I Pet. 3:18.) 
It was a man who forfeited his life; it was a man also 
who gave Himself a price in offset. (I Cor. 15:21,22.) 
The sacrifice of our Lord's human nature remained a 
sacrifice on behalf of the world. Has He given it to the 
world yet? No. What has He done with it? Merely 

R4854 : page 213 

committed it to the Father. To whose credit is it now? 
To our Lord's credit. Where? In the hands of Divine 
Justice. For what object? That it may be applied. How 
applied? 

First of all, in an imputative sense, in this Gospel Age, 
it is applied to all those who come unto the Father 
through Him. He imputes it to these after they have 
turned to the Father in faith and have come to the point 
where they can say, "I present my body a living sacrifice"; 
"Here, Lord, I give myself away." There the 
great Advocate, the future Mediator for the world, imputes 
to them enough of His merit to make their sacrifice 
good. They, of themselves, have nothing to offer that God 
could accept; for, "There is none righteous; no, not one." 
-Rom. 3:10. 

Here the great Advocate applies, or imputes, a sufficiency 
of His merit, already in the hands of Justice, to 



make these perfect in the sight of Justice. Divine Justice 

can then accept the sacrifice; and the acceptance of 

the sacrifice is manifested by the impartation of the Holy 

R4855 : page 213 

Spirit, the begetting of the Spirit; and that which is begotten 
of the Spirit will, in the resurrection, be born of 
the Spirit, unless in the meantime there be something to 
paralyze, or vitiate, the condition. If one thus begotten 
of the Spirit lose the spirit, become dead to spiritual 
things, then he is indeed "twice dead," as the Apostle 
says.— Jude 12. 

DOES THE CHURCH SHARE IN THE SIN-OFFERING? 

But now, in the case of those who are thus accepted 
of Christ, what have they to do with the Sin-Off ering? 
We answer that we should not know what they have to 
do if God did not show us; but God first makes a picture 
of the matter in the Old Testament. He made, with the 
Jews, a typical Day of Atonement, which prefigured what 
will be done during this Gospel Age and during the period 
of Messiah's reign. What is this? It is the work of 
reconciliation between God and men. How did the type 
show this? The Day of Atonement had various features. 
It began with the offering of a bullock; and that bullock 
represented the offering of the Lord Jesus Christ on 
behalf of the Church. The blood of the bullock was 
sprinkled upon the Mercy Seat for the household of faith. 
The household of faith was represented in the two goats. 

These goats represented you and me and all of God's 
people who have offered their bodies living sacrifices, holy 
and acceptable. (Rom. 12:1,2; Heb. 13:11-13.) Only 
one of these goats became a follower of the bullock and 
had experiences exactly the same as the experiences of 
the bullock. This goat represents that class of believers 
who daily follow in the footsteps of Jesus and who are 
partakers with Him of His sufferings at the present time 
and will have a share with Him in the glory to follow. 

The other goat represents the class which does not 
go voluntarily to sacrifice, but which, without turning to 
sin, fails to make a willing sacrifice. Therefore this class 
is treated as the "scapegoat" and dealt with accordingly, 
being driven into the wilderness condition for tribulation. 
The Apostle seems to refer to this class when he says 
that some are thus dealt with "that their spirits may be 
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." (I Cor. 5:5.) These 
are not the Bride class, but a servant class. 

In the 45th Psalm we have the picture of the Heavenly 
Bridegroom and can see how He introduces His Bride 
to the Heavenly Father, the great King. Next follows 
the picture of the Bride, who is described as "all glorious 
within," and who is to be brought unto the Heavenly 
King in fine needlework and wrought gold. Then we 
have a third picture, "The virgins, her companions that 



follow her," and who also shall be brought unto the King. 
These represent the other class, the "scapegoat" class, 
who do not voluntarily go into death, into sacrifice, and 
who, consequently, cannot be counted in as members of 
the Bride. 

Because the Scriptures show this Sin-Offering, therefore, 
we believe in the Sin-Offering; and because the 
Scriptures tell us that we are to be sharers in this matter, 
therefore we believe it. Where does the Apostle so 
state? We answer that he says to us, addressing us as 
the "Lord's goat" class, "Let us go forth unto Him without 
the camp, bearing the reproach with Him." He also 
says that the bodies of those beasts whose blood was 
brought into the Most Holy to make atonement for sin, 
were all burned outside the camp. (Heb. 13:11-13.) 
What beasts were those? Only the two. The bullock and 
the Lord's goat were the only ones. The Apostle urges 
that we were represented by this goat. "Let us, therefore, 
go forth unto Him without the camp." All that was 
done with the bullock was done with the goat. Let us, 
then, if we would walk in His steps, share with Him in 
His sacrifice— "Go to Him without the camp, bearing His 
reproach with Him"; for "If we suffer with Him we shall 
also reign with Him"; we shall be glorified together.— 
2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

DOES THE CHURCH ADD TO THE SIN-OFFERING? 

The question may be asked, "What does the Church 
add to the Sin-Offering if the Lord gave the necessary 
per cent, of His merit to each to make his or her sacrifice 
possible?" We answer that it depends upon what thought 
is behind the expression "add to the Sin-Offering." THE 
SIN-OFFERING NEEDED NO ADDITION. The sinner was a 
man— Adam. Our Lord left His glory and became a man 
in order that He might redeem man. When a perfect 
man's life was given for the other perfect man who 
sinned, it constituted a sufficiency, or as the Scriptures 
express it, a Ransom-Price. 

This word "Ransom" (I Tim. 2:6), in the Greek (anti-lutron) 
signifies a price, as an equivalent; a satisfactory 
price. Consequently there is no addition needed to the 
Ransom which our Lord gave and nothing could be added 
to it, for we cannot add to that which is already complete. 
If the price of an article is $1 and you add $25 to it, you 
are not really adding anything to the price, for the price 
is only $1, and the other dollars added on neither affect 
the price nor are necessary, in any sense of the word. 

There is another sense, however, in which the Church 
has a share with her Lord; namely, Not only was our 
Lord Himself the Ransom-Price for the world, but in 
order that He might be highly exalted and receive the 
reward of the divine nature, it was necessary that He 
should die. So, then, the death of Christ effected two 
things; first, it was the Ransom-Price for mankind; second, 
it was the condition upon which He would obtain 



His glorious reward— the divine nature. If He had not 
been obedient even unto death, then He would not have 
been highly exalted. 

As the Apostle says, "And being found in fashion as 
a man, He humbled Himself and became obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore [on which 
account] God also hath highly exalted Him and given 
Him a Name which is above every name." (Phil. 2:8,9.) 
He could not, therefore, have been exalted to that high 
position except by obedience unto death— obedience to 
His covenant. Had He failed to carry out His covenant 
of sacrifice, He would have failed to gain His glorious 
reward, and also failed to be a satisfactory price for 

R4855 : page 214 

mankind. But He did not fail. He attained the prize of 
the "high calling" to the divine nature. 

There is, however, an arrangement in God's Plan that 
takes in the Church as well as Jesus, the Head of the 
Body, the Head of the Church; and so the Apostle says 
that God foreknew us also by Jesus. (Rom. 8:28-30; 
Eph. 1:4,9-12.) Not that he foreknew you and me as 
individuals, necessarily, but that He foreknew a Church, 
a class; He had fore-intended the gathering of such a 
class, or Church, from the beginning. It is just as much 
a part of the Divine Plan that the Church, the Body of 
Christ, should be called to walk in His steps, to be dead 
with Him, to present their bodies living sacrifices, as it 
was a part of the Divine Plan from the beginning that 
Jesus should do these things. The difference between 
Jesus and the Church is that He was perfect, holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners; and therefore, His 
death could be in the nature of a ransom-price— all that 
was necessary. We have no such perfection of our own; 
and therefore, in order to be permitted to sacrifice at all, 
we must first have His merit imputed to us, that we 
might be acceptable sacrifices on the Lord's altar. 

WHY MUST THE CHURCH SACRIFICE? 

Then the question comes up, What is the object of 
having any of these sacrifices on the altar? Why is the 
Church on the altar with her Lord, as expressed by the 
Apostle Paul (Romans 12:1), "I beseech you, therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, your 
reasonable service." Why does God invite us to be living 
sacrifices with Christ, since Christ is sufficient as a ransom-price 
for the sins of the whole world? The answer 
is that the Father invites us to come in and be partakers 
of the sufferings of Christ in order that we may also be 
sharers of His glory; for it is only "if we suffer with Him 
that we may reign with Him— if we be dead with Him, 
we shall live with Him." 

As our Lord was called to sacrifice, so the Church is 



also called. If He would be found worthy, if He would 
have the Father's highest approval, He must leave the 
glory which He had with the Father and must do all the 
Father might require of Him. And only by so doing 
would He gain the reward offered. During the Gospel 
Age the Church is invited to enter into that covenant 
with Him. We who are by nature sinners, "children of 
wrath, even as others," are justified through His merit 
in order to permit us to have a share in His suffering, in 
His sacrifice. 

What is the use of all this? Why should this be done? 
That is the only way that we could be with Him on the 
spirit plane. If we retain the human nature we can never 
get to heaven. None can ever go to heaven except those 
of the sacrificial class. Those not begotten from above 
will never get a share in the heavenly blessing, but will 
get an earthly blessing, if they get any. They will keep 
their earthly nature and will in due time be made perfect. 
But those who are now invited to become the Bride of 
Christ are invited to join with Him in sacrifice. Our 
Lord sacrificed the earthly nature and its rights. All 
those who wish to belong to this Bride class must sacrifice 
the flesh, the earthly nature, its rights, etc., that they 
may be sharers with Him in the Heavenly, the divine 
nature. 



R4853 : page 214 

THE VOICES OF THE THREE SIGNS 

[EXODUS 4:1-9.] 

[REPUBLISHED FROM THE WATCH TOWER OF 1901 BY REQUEST.] 

WHILE PREPARING the Sunday School lessons 

relating to Moses and his two presentations 

of himself to the Israelites, as their 

deliverer from Egyptian bondage, we noted 

the fact that "these things were written 

aforetime for our admonition upon whom 

the ends of the Ages are come." (I Cor. 10:11.) 

And, considering the matter from 

this standpoint, we perceived, as we had 

never done before, that the three signs by 

which the Israelites were convinced that God's deliverance 

of them was at hand, at Moses' second presentation, 

must have been intended to typify some corresponding 

three signs or testimonies at the second advent of Christ; 

testimonies which will be convincing to the true spiritual 

Israelites. In the type these three signs or testimonies 

preceded the plagues upon the Egyptians; and this in 

the antitype must mean that the three signs or testimonies 

to spiritual Israel respecting the second advent of our 

Lord and respecting the great deliverance which He is to 



accomplish, must precede the plagues, the great time of 
trouble, coming upon the world in general shortly. 

At first we were perplexed, and said to ourself: "The 
Scriptures clearly show us that we are now 'in the days 
of the Son of Man'; our journal has borne as its sub-title, 
'Herald of Christ's Presence,' since its institution in 1879; 
yet where are these three signs? Already twenty-seven 
years of the forty-year harvest have passed, and but 
thirteen remain, in the last four of which [which period we 
have already entered at the time of the reprinting of this 
article] we confidently expect the plagues upon the world 
— antitypical Egypt. Where are these signs or testimonies, 
which the type teaches us we should expect at this time, 
to convince all the true Israelites?" 

For a time we were inclined to look for miraculous 
tokens, but subsequently realized that this would be out 
of the Lord's order, as the antitype is always on a higher 
and grander scale than the type: as, for instance, the 
typical Passover lamb but feebly foreshadowed the Lamb 
of God, and the great things accomplished through His 
sacrifice. Feeling confident of the times in which we 
are living ("in the parousia of the Son of Man"), we 
concluded that in all probability these signs had already 
been given, or were in process of being given, at the 
present time. 

Still we could not recognize them, and feeling that 
the matter must now be to the Lord's household "meat 
in due season," we besought the Lord earnestly and repeatedly 
for light upon the subject, while continuing our 
studies. No light coming, we mentioned the matter to 
the Bible House family at the dinner table, requesting 
the prayers of all upon the subject, and that if any had 
suggestions to offer they would feel free to present them. 
Seemingly it was in line with the Divine purpose that we 
should thus come to the point of making confession of 
inability to solve the riddle, and that our reliance for 
wisdom was wholly upon the Lord; for within two hours 
after this acknowledgment the entire matter became clear 
and lucid to our mind, as we shall now endeavor to show. 

Our Lord declares Moses to have been, in some 
particulars, in some of his transactions, a type of Himself, 
saying, "Moses wrote of Me." Moses himself declared, 
"A Prophet [Teacher] shall the Lord your God 
raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me." Peter 

R4853 : page 215 

quotes this last expression in his sermon, and emphasizes 
it. (John 5:46; Deut. 18:15; Acts 3:22.) Moses did not 
typify Christ in all of his doings, however, nor was his 
life as a whole a type of the life of Christ. For instance, 
in his smiting of the rock, contrary to the Divine command, 
he became a type of those of Christ's followers 
who put Him to an open shame, and who, in consequence, 
will die the Second Death; and as a type of these Moses 
was not permitted to enter into the land of promise.— 



Num. 20:11; Deut. 32:51; Heb. 10:29. 

Moses typified Jehovah at times also; but in the 
present instance we are specially interested in considering 
his conduct with the Israelites in connection with their 
deliverance from the bondage of Egypt. In this type we 
see him distinctly as a representative of Christ Jesus. 
Moses was rich, a prince in high honor, learned in all 
the learning of his times, but for Israel's sake he renounced 
these, left them all, and they being bondmen, 
he took his place amongst them, to be their leader and 
deliverer. How like this is to the description given us 
in the Scriptures of our Lord's course! He left the glory 
of the heavenly condition and spiritual plane of being; 
He took a bondman's form and was found in fashion as 
a man. He came to deliver His brethren from bondage. 
--Phil. 2:6-8, Diaglott. 

When Moses came to his own people they rejected 
him, and he fled for his life to the land of Midian, from 
whence he came to them a second time. So Christ came 
to His own, and His own received Him not (John 1:11); 
and He went into a far country, even heaven itself, from 
whence He has now, a second time, come, and will deliver 
all who are "Israelites indeed" from the bondage 
of sin and death. 

Moses was forty years in coming to the point where 
he offered himself to Israel the first time; then he was 
absent from them an equal period of time, forty years, 
and came again and delivered them. There is a type or 
parallel in this time feature also; it illustrates the length 
of the Jewish and the Gospel Ages, as being equal. From 
the time of the beginning of typical Israel as a nation, 
waiting for the coming of Messiah, down to the time when 
Jesus actually presented Himself, was a period of 1,845 
years, and from that time, when He died and left them, 
until the period which the Scriptures show us marked 
His second coming (October, 1874) was a like period of 
1,845 years— corresponding exactly to the two periods at 
which Moses offered himself in the type.* 

THE VOICE OF THE FIRST SIGN 

At Moses' second presentation of himself to Israel he 
did not address them personally and directly, as at the 
first, God having said to him, "Aaron shall be thy prophet 
(or mouthpiece), and thou shalt be a god unto Aaron." 
This item of the type would seem to imply just what we 
see to be the fact of the case now, viz., that the Lord 
Jesus does not address Himself to the true Israelites in 
person now, as at the first advent, but through His agent, 
through a mouthpiece. Aaron, the mouthpiece or agent 
of the Lord, we understand to represent the Royal Priesthood 
—those of the Lord's consecrated people still in the 
flesh, still sacrificing— those who have not yet passed 
beyond the veil into glory. The type, then, seems to 
say that the signs or testimonies which will convince all 
true Israelites now living respecting the presence of the 



Lord and His mighty power to deliver, His ultimate victory 
over Satan, sin and death, will be of or from our 
present Lord, but by or through the living members 
of His Body, His brethren, represented in Aaron. 

The first of the signs or testimonies to Israel was the 
casting of the rod upon the ground, and its becoming a 
serpent, and the taking of the serpent by the tail, and its 
becoming a rod again in the hands of Aaron. It was 
Moses' rod, and Aaron was merely his representative in 
every act. The natural Israelite merely saw this as a 
miracle, and discerned in it no teaching; but the spiritual 
Israelite is not to expect a larger rod and a larger serpent, 
as the antitype, but should expect to comprehend 
the meaning of the rod and of the serpent as an antitypical 
instruction or testimony today. 

A rod symbolizes authority. Moses' rod was frequently 
used in connection with the plagues, as well as 
in connection with the signs, as signifying Divine authority. 
A serpent is a symbol of evil— of sin and all 
its consequences— evil in general. The lesson for the 
spiritual Israelite today is that he is now to understand 
that all the evil there is in the world is the result, directly 
or indirectly, of God's having let go of His rod or authority; 
and they are to understand further that it is 
God's intention or purpose, as it is also His promise, to 
take hold upon the present evil conditions, which have 
lasted now more than six thousand years, and to bring 
order out of confusion— to re-establish His authority in 
His own hand. 

These acts or signs are said to have "voices" or to 
be testimonies. (Exod. 4:8,9.) Hence our query must 
be, Is this sign or testimony now being given to God's 
people throughout the world? We answer, Yes. Has 
it been always recognized and presented thus? We answer, 
No. Was it ever thus presented before this Harvest 
time? We answer, No. Heretofore it has been a matter 
of speculation amongst peoples and theologians of all 
classes and shades of Christian belief, but a question 
without an answer— Why did God permit evil in the 
world? 

Some have blasphemously held that God has caused 
the evil, that good might follow; but this God Himself 
most emphatically denies, and everything pertaining to 
His character refutes it. He declares that every good 
and every perfect gift is of Him, with whom is no changeableness 
nor variableness. "His work is perfect." Others 
have claimed that a conflict is in operation between God 
and Satan, between good and evil, and that each side is 
doing its utmost to conquer the other— with evil and 
Satan predominant in the world, on account of which it 
is spoken of as "the present evil world," in which there 
is "none righteous, no, not one." 

But whatever the standpoint of view, it has been confusion 
only, until the Harvest time, when the true light 
upon the subject began to shine forth, showing that when 
sin entered the world God gave mankind over, let them 



take their course, let the rod of Divine authority drop, 
"rested from His own work," permitting sin and evil 
to flourish— not, however, intending that it should flourish 
forever as a serpent, but fully intending, predestinating, 
and even foretelling, that in due time He would set up 
His Kingdom in the person of the Messiah who should 
lay hold upon that old Serpent, the Devil and Satan, and 
restrain his power; showing, too, that He will ultimately 
bring all evil conditions back to subjection and harmony 
with the Divine authority and law— destroying the evil 
connected therewith. 

This teaching, then, is the sign whose "voice" or 
testimony was typified by Aaron's casting the rod upon 
the ground, its becoming a serpent, and his taking it 



♦STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II., Chap. VII. 

R4853 : page 216 

back into his hand again. How much grander the antitypical 
teaching than the typical sign! How much more 
forceful! Who of the true Israelites who has heard this 
testimony is any longer in doubt respecting the speedy 
deliverance of all of God's people from the power of 
Satan, sin and death? 

We would avoid personality as far as possible, but 
believe it to be in the interest of the truth and of the 
true Israelites that we point out that this sign has already 
been given. THE WATCH TOWER AND HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE was founded in 1879, and the "voice" therefrom, 
to the true Israel of God, announced that the 
second advent of our Lord, as the Deliverer of the world, 
had already taken place— that He was present but invisible, 
a Spirit Being not possible to be seen by any, 
even His Church, until they should be "changed" and 
made like Him in the First Resurrection. The message 
further declared that He is present for the purpose of 
establishing His Kingdom, and delivering His saints and 
the whole groaning creation from the bondage of corruption 
—as many as will obey Him. And it is very 
remarkable that very shortly a special number of this 
journal was issued, bearing the significant title, "Food 
for Thinking Christians— Why Evil Was Permitted." 

This voice or testimony was spread abroad amongst 
the spiritual Israelites in an extraordinary manner— over 
a million and a half copies being circulated through the 
mails and at church-doors in the United States, Canada 
and Great Britain. And the "voice" or testimony of this 
first sign, token, teaching, is still being repeated from one 
to another of the Lord's people throughout the world, 
and now in various languages. In that pamphlet, for the 
first time, so far as we know, was shown that the evil 
in the world, the bondage to sin and death, and the reign 
of iniquity and the various oppressions to which the whole 



groaning creation is subject, are the results of God's 
having let go His authority (rod), and not the result 
of His inability to hold the authority, nor in any sense 
the outworking of the authority in His hand. It showed 
also how complete will be the restraint of evil and its 
complete annihilation when again the Lord shall take 
unto Himself His great power and reign. 

Could there possibly be a greater or a grander antitype 
for the sign which Moses and Aaron presented to 
Israel through the rod and the serpent? Is not the truth 
on this subject much more convincing to the spiritual 
Israelite today than any natural signs or wonders or 
miracles could possibly be? Does not the knowledge now 
granted the Lord's people respecting "The Divine Plan 
of the Ages," and its purpose, and the result, satisfy our 
longings as nothing else could do, and assure our hearts 
that deliverance is nigh? 

THE VOICE OF THE SECOND SIGN 

The second of the signs to be given to the Israelites 
was that of the leprous hand. Hidden in the bosom, 
when revealed it was leprous; but when hidden again, 
and revealed a second time, it was whole. Again we 
say that the natural Israelite discerned nothing but the 
natural sign, but it was intended of God that the spiritual 
Israelite should discern a much grander lesson, and that 
a testimony through this grander lesson would be still 
more convincing to him than was the typical sign to the 
typical Israelite. A hand is a symbol of power. In this 
case the hand represented Divine power. Leprosy is 
a symbol of sin. The teaching, therefore, would seem to 
be that Divine power was first manifested without sin 
or imperfection or blemish; secondly, that the same 
Divine power, hidden for a time, was afterward manifest 
in sin and imperfection; and thirdly, that the same 
Divine power, hidden again for a time, will subsequently 
be manifest without sin. 

What teaching or testimony is this? We answer that 
it is in harmony with the previous teaching respecting 
the permission of evil, but does not apply to evil in general, 
but rather to sin in particular; does not apply to 
the world in general, but specially applies to the people 
of God— to those whom God uses as His agents or representatives, 
His hand, His power in the world. God's 
power originally was manifested unblemished. But during 
this Gospel Age He has been represented by His consecrated 
people, the members of the Body of Christ, who 
are His ambassadors and representatives; but they are 
leprous, actually imperfect, though reckonedly perfect in 
Christ. As the world sees them they are blemished, 
but from the Divine standpoint their blemishes are all 
hidden, covered with the merit of Christ's righteousness. 
Nevertheless, these have been the hand or power of God 
in the world for more than eighteen centuries; but by 
and by they are to be received into His bosom again, and 



"changed" in the First Resurrection, so that when manifest 
again in the future they will be without sin, "without 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing," and will again be used 
of the Lord as His Agent in stretching forth His rod 
and bringing the plagues upon Egypt, and delivering the 
residue of God's people from the bondage of sin and 
death. 

And is this also a sign or a testimony peculiar to this 
time in which we live, and was this subject never clearly 
seen before? We answer, it is peculiar to our day, and 
was never clearly seen before. In the past many have 
seen something of justification, something of sanctification, 
something of a coming Deliverer; but never before 
have these subjects been seen in the clear light in which 
they are now seen as related to each other. Never before 
was the relationship distinctly seen between justification 
and sanctification and deliverance; that justification is of 
Divine grace, accepted through faith; that sanctification 
implies works and sacrifice, based upon justification; and 
that to these justified and consecrated ones, who faithfully 
overcome, by the grace of God in Christ, shall be 
granted a share in the "glory, honor and immortality" 
of the divine nature in the First Resurrection. 

But has the voice or sign of this testimony gone forth 
in any particular channel, as did the preceding voice or 
testimony? We answer, Yes-in the SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
series of volumes, the first of which was published in 
1886. The united testimony of these relates to the 
Church, showing original sin, the first step out of it into 
justification, through faith in Christ, the second step of 
sanctification, and sacrifice, and the ultimate change, in 
the First Resurrection, to the divine nature, and glory 
and joint-heirship. These volumes deal specially with 
this subject from its various standpoints, the Ransom-Sacrifice 
of our Lord, on account of which the cleansing 
will come to us in due time, being everywhere prominently 
set forth; and also the fact that no absolute purity is to 
be expected until the Lord shall take us to Himself in 
our "change." 

Supplemental to the teaching of the STUDIES on this 
subject, and to assist in emphasizing their "voice" and 
making clear their testimony, the Pilgrim service has been 
instituted under which various brethren travel from place 
to place explaining and demonstrating the lesson taught 
by the leprous hand and its healing, and all of our readers, 
having heard the testimony, are daily giving it forth 
to others. 

R4853 : page 217 

THE VOICE OF THE THIRD SIGN 

Another sign was to be given, the Lord clearly 
intimating that it would be necessary, and that not all 
of His true people would hear or heed the "voice" of the 
first two testimonies. To natural Israel the third sign 



was the taking of the water from the river, and pouring 
it upon the earth, where it became blood. They saw 
merely the sign, the miracle; they read not its meaning, 
as the spiritual Israelite must seek to do. In explanation 
of the symbolical teaching of this type we suggest that 
water is here, as elsewhere, a symbol of the truth; and 
that the earth is here, as elsewhere, a symbol of society.* 

The pouring of the water upon the earth would ordinarily 
mean the refreshment of the earth, a blessing; and 
the pouring of the truth upon society would ordinarily be 
expected to mean a blessing to society; but in the symbol 
the water turned to blood, repulsive, abhorrent, symbolizing 
death; and this, in the antitype, would signify 
that in the present time the pouring out of the truth upon 
society will produce an effect contrary to what might 
ordinarily have been expected. Society, civilization, has 
been claiming, especially within the past century, to be 
searching high and low for the truth. But this type says 
that the time has come when these professed truthseekers 
(the word science signifies truth) will reject the 
truth, disdain it, and to them it will seem obnoxious, 
loathsome, intolerable. 

Readers of THE WATCH TOWER will here possibly 
call to mind our Lord's words respecting this present time, 
"The sun shall be darkened and the moon shall be turned 
into blood." We have elsewhere shown the significance 
of this:+ that the moon is the symbol of the Jewish Law, 
as the sun is the symbol of the Gospel message; and that 
the Gospel message will become darkness to the eyes of 
society in general, through the sophistries, Higher Criticism, 
Evolution theories, etc., of this boastful day; while 
the Law, represented by the moon, will be viewed as 
bloody— that its sacrifices will not be esteemed as types, 
nor appreciated as such, but be regarded as the work of 
misguided Jews, who slaughtered their animals by the 
thousands because of their ignorance and superstition, 
and that the commands which they obeyed were not of 
God, but of their own conjecture and of priestly connivance. 
The same thought attaches to this sign or testimony 
of the water of truth being poured upon the social 
earth. It will be resented, as bloody, instead of being 
absorbed as truth. 

Is there any thing corresponding to this sign now in 
progress in the world, that could be esteemed a sign or 
testimony to the true Israelites, such as never was before 
given? We answer, Yes, there is. A very remarkable 
movement has been in progress amongst us during the 
past ten years, during which the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society has supplied tracts and papers free in any 
quantity to those who would promise to use them judiciously. 
You have the annual reports, showing the 
millions of pages which have thus been circulated— the 
truth being thus poured upon the symbolical earth, society, 
liberally, in many lands and in many languages. But 
especially has this pouring out of the water, truth, progressed 
wonderfully during the past three years, under 



what we have designated the "volunteer" work, in which 

hundreds of the Lord's consecrated people have systematically, 

season after season, distributed to Christian 

people, papers and booklets which our Society has supplied 

freely— the donations covering the expense coming 

in without urging or even request. 

But what is the effect of this pouring out of the water 
upon the most enlightened peoples of the world, professed 
truth-seekers? Is it gladly received, joyfully 
absorbed? Only by the few— the vast majority seem to 
be angered, as the Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of 
Divinity at the first advent were angered when they perceived 
that the Lord and the Apostles were teaching the 
people, and that without money and without price. (Acts 4:2.) 
Nothing can be more evident than that the professed 
teachers of Christendom do not want to be taught 
themselves and do not want the people to be taught 
the truth. They bitterly oppose it, and persecute and 
speak evil of those who in this way are seeking to do 
good. More and more they are getting so changed from 
the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ to the theory of 
Evolution and Higher Criticism and sectarian pride and 
worldliness that the truth seems repulsive to them, undesirable, 
bloody. They not only view the typical sacrifices 
as bloody, but they resent the thought that the antitypical 
sacrifice for sins was the death of Christ— they 
resent the thought that Divine Justice required this sacrifice, 
and that "without the shedding of blood there is 
no remission of sins," as the Apostle declared. (Heb. 9:22.) 
It does not fit with their theories. 

According to their theories man was created next to 
the monkey, and has been evolving as a race grandly, up 
to the present time, and will continue to evolve and develop 
until he becomes a god, and hence needs only to be 
let alone; he needs no Savior, no Deliverer from the 
present condition of things, which are not seen to be 
evil. They put evil for good, and good for evil, darkness 
for light, and light for darkness. To these the Truth of 
God's Word respecting the fall, respecting the Ransom, 
respecting the coming deliverance and restitution blessings 
which God has provided in Christ, through the 
Millennial Kingdom for all the families of the earth— 
these are all objectionable, contradictory to their theories, 
hateful, bloody. 

As the "voice" of the third sign or testimony was to 
bring conviction to all of the true typical Israelites, so 
in the antitype this last testimony or evidence will ultimately 
bring conviction to all of the Lord's true people 
in the world today. They will discern that the systems 
and theologians in whom they have trusted are going 
farther and farther, day by day, away from the appreciation 
of the true Gospel— the truth as it is in Christ 
Jesus— into the outer darkness of the world. All who 
are loyal to the Lord, as they perceive this condition of 
things, as they recognize the cleavage between belief and 
unbelief, from the Scriptural standpoint, will thus be 



helped, convinced, and enabled to take their stand for 
the truth accordingly. 

It will be remembered that when Moses and Aaron 
presented themselves before Pharaoh they performed the 
first of these signs in his presence— the rod turned into 
a serpent, and being reclaimed was a rod. Pharaoh called 
for his magicians (types of theologians of today, whose 
minds, not morals, have become corrupted, and who are 
reprobates, not morally, but as respects the faith.— 2 Tim. 3:8). 
He explained to them that Moses and Aaron claimed 
that this sign was an evidence of Divine power and favor, 
and asked them if they could not show the same evidences. 
They replied, Yes, and cast their rods upon the 
ground, and their rods also became serpents; but Aaron's 
rod-serpent swallowed up all of these. What did this 
signify? It might mean that so far as the world is concerned 
the first sign or testimony which convinced the 
Hebrews will be claimed to be nothing new; it will be 
claimed that theologians all along have declared and 



♦STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. I, pp. 66-71. 
+STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. IV, pp. 590-594. 

R4853 : page 218 

thought that God blesses evil things, so that they result 
in good. But we answer that the view of this subject 
which God has now displayed to His people is so much 
more complete that it quite swallows up all these suggestions 
and theories of the past. What the Lord is now 
showing proves to His people conclusively, not only that 
some accidents are overruled of the Lord for good, but 
that all evil of every kind is the result of absence of 
Divine control, and that when the Lord shortly shall put 
forth His hand, and again take control of earth's affairs, 
its evil conditions will give place to conditions in accord 
with the Divine character and authority. 

It will be remembered, also, that the first plague which 
came upon the Egyptians was the turning of all the 
water of Egypt into blood— the river, ponds, etc.— so 
that the Egyptians could not drink of the water, but 
digged for themselves wells near the river. As the water 
represents truth, the thought here conveyed would be 
that from the worldly standpoint very soon all truth will 
become repulsive— every feature of truth connected with 
the Divine Plan, as represented in the Word of God, will 
become abhorrent; and the digging of wells would seem 
to imply that, rejecting the Word of God, the world 
(Christendom— Churchianity) will seek for truth in various 
ways of their own. 

WHAT SHALL WE SAY TO THESE THINGS? 

It should be a great encouragement to us all to find 



so clearly expressed in the type what we had vaguely and 

indistinctly hoped would be expressed, viz., that the 

Lord's people of the Royal Priesthood on this side the 

veil are being used of Him in various ways in the accomplishment 

of His purpose of separating the people of 

God from others— the wheat from the tares. It is 

remarkable in this connection that none but the consecrated 

have ever been successful in connection with the 

circulation of any of these testimonies. Of the more than 

a million copies of SCRIPTURE STUDIES now (1901 A.D.) 

in circulation remarkably few have been circulated by 

any but those who are believers in their testimony, and 

who have circulated them through a desire to be instruments 

and mouthpieces of the Lord in giving forth His 

Word— even as was Aaron to Moses. 

Let us, then, dear brethren and sisters, feel encouraged 
as, looking into the type, we see so clear a fulfilment 
in our day of the things written aforetime for our 
admonition. Let us with fresh courage show forth to all 
whom we have any reason to believe are "Israelites indeed" 
the secret of the Divine Plan— Why Evil Was 
Permitted. Let us prosecute also the work of showing 
them respecting the hand, the instrumentalities which 
God has used during this Gospel Age in this service; respecting 
the justification which covers, in God's sight, 
though it does not transform us in the sight of men, 
pointing out also the final victory of the consecrated. 
Let us persuade the First-Born of Israel to faithfulness 
until our "change" comes, when we shall be made like 
the Lord and fit to be His servants and representatives. 
Let us continue also to pour out the water of truth, 
whether others hear or whether they forbear. The 
Lord's assurance is that this sign, this testimony and its 
contrary results, ultimately shall influence all "Israelites 
indeed." Let us remember that the opposition of the 
worldly, even, will prove to be a co-operative influence, 
in deciding for the Israelites indeed that the Deliverer and 
the deliverance are at hand. And finally let us apply 
to ourselves the Lord's assurance to Moses respecting 
himself and Aaron, "Certainly I will be with thee." 



R4854 : page 218 

PROVIDING FOR ONE'S NATURAL HOUSEHOLD 

"If any provide not for his own, and especially those of his own 
house [margin, kindred], he hath denied the faith and is 
worse than an unbeliever."— 1 Tim. 5:8. 

THIS PASSAGE may be properly paraphrased 
thus: He who provides not for those dependent 
upon him, especially those of his 
own household, hath denied the faith and is 
worse than an unbeliever. 



This relates primarily to a Christian 
husband and his duty toward his wife 
and his children. If the husband should 
cease to provide for the wife, cease to 
cherish her and, on the contrary, should 
desert her, either in heart, in affection, or actually, it 
would imply that he had seriously departed from the 
Lord, from the guidance of the Spirit, and from "The 
wisdom that cometh from above, which is first pure, then 
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy 
and good fruits." 

Under these circumstances we could not consider 
such an one approved of the Lord as an "overcomer," 
until after reformation. Then, too, every parent owes it 
to his child to give him more of a start in life than 
merely the imperfect, dying little body born into the 
world. Having brought children into the world, it becomes 
the duty of parents to see to their reasonable establishment 
in it. This includes not only the dispensing 
of food and raiment during childhood and youth, but also 
the provision of intellectual and moral instructions, to 
which we have more than once referred; and all this 
means laying up, aside from personal consumption, in the 
interest of the children. 

Seeing the uncertainties of life, it would not be an 
unreasonable application of the Scriptural injunction for 
the parent to have something laid up for the necessities 
of his family in the event of his death before they had 
reached maturity. It is not our thought that the Apostle 
meant that parents should seek to lay up fortunes for 
their children to quarrel over and be injured by. The 
child fairly well born and who receives a reasonable education 
and guidance to maturity is well off and has a rich 
legacy in himself; and the parent who has made such 
provision for his children has every reason to feel that 
he has been ruled in the matter by a sound mind, the 
Holy Spirit, the disposition approved by the Lord, even 
though he leave no property to his family, or not more 
than a shelter or home. Such a man has discharged his 
stewardship; and such children will be sure in the end to 
appreciate his faithfulness. 

We should manifest an interest in those related to us 
by ties of blood more than in mankind in general. If 
the Spirit of the Lord leads us to be kind and gracious 
toward humanity in general, it would imply that our sentiments 
toward our relatives should be specially considered 
by us and be, to the extent of our opportunities, 
helpful. Nevertheless, it would not be wise, according 
to our judgment, nor in harmony with the instructions 
of the Scriptures, nor in accord with the examples which 
they set before us of our Lord's conduct and the conduct 
of the Apostles, for us to extend a very special fellowship 
to our earthly relatives; or to receive them and treat 
them better than, or even as well as, we would treat the 
household of faith. 



R4854 : page 219 

We here make an exception of such close relationships 
as would have a demand upon us in accord with the 
Apostle's words, "He that provideth not for his own, 
...hath denied the faith." In general— outside of the 
exceptions above— we are to apply the Apostle's words, 
"As we have opportunity let us do good unto all men, 
especially unto those who are of the household of faith." 
(Gal. 6:10.) Next to the household of faith should come 
our more distant relatives. 

Of course, from the standpoint of the New Creation, 
the new relationship, the members of the Body of Christ 
would be members of our own household, and their temporalities 
would be in some measure our responsibility. 
We are, however, living in a time not the same as that 
in which our Lord lived; now, there are public charities; 
for this reason this passage would not apply with the 
same force as when the Apostle spoke these words. One 
would be making proper provisions, sometimes, when he 
paid his share of the taxes toward the general weal; and 
it might, perhaps, be necessary to avail himself of a share 
in those benefits, either on his own account later, or on 
account of some of his own friends— members of his 
family. 

BUILDING ONE ANOTHER UP IN THE HOLY FAITH 

Christ is the Head of His own household. He does 
not intend that His people shall be unnecessarily burdensome 
to each other, but each should feel a responsibility 
in respect to others and gladly lend a helping hand 
to strengthen, encourage and bless, "building each other 
up in the most holy faith." It evidently was the intention 
of our Lord to draw together His followers as a new 
family, a new household, the "household of faith." 
Hence, we find the repeated injunction and encouragement 
for mutual fellowship, mutual helpfulness and regular 
association, with the promise that where two or three 
meet in the Lord's name He will be specially present with 
them to grant a blessing; and that His people should not 
forget the assembling of themselves together. 

Returning to our text we note that the Apostle says 
that one neglecting his obligations to his own family 
would be denying the faith. The faith that we profess is 
not merely a faith in certain things that we are getting, 
but it affects also matters of propriety, our character, all 
of life's affairs in general. We profess to love God more 
than others love Him. We profess to love our neighbor 
as ourselves. We profess to take this as our standard. 
If a man's responsibility to his neighbor is that he love 
him as himself, then this would bear in with double force 
as to his own family. If one is derelict there, he is misrepresenting 
the doctrines of Christ which he professes. 
To live contrary to the doctrines one professes would 
be to deny his faith. And so one who would live in 



violation of these recognized standards of life would be 
living below the world instead of above the world. 
As for denying the faith, the thought is that there 
would be a lack of love, of sympathy, regarding the interests 
of the ones neglected and, therefore, a denying of 
the faith to that extent. What a perfect example of unselfishness 
we have in our Master, who, when in the 
greatest of trouble and anguish, was thinking sympathetically 
of others! We notice His provision for the welfare 
of His mother, whom He consigned to the care of the loving 
John, thus showing our Lord's approval of the noble 
characteristics displayed by John in pressing near to his 
Master in this trying hour! 



R4856 : page 219 

RETRIBUTIVE DISCIPLINE OF THE MILLENNIUM 

SO FAR AS Divine Justice is concerned, God's 

provision is that all claims against mankind 

on the part of Justice shall be settled and 

closed in the end of this Gospel Age. This 

is represented in the typical sin-atonement, 

the satisfaction for sins. The antitypical 

Atonement Day witnesses the sacrifices of 

The Christ and the preparation of those 

worthy to become members of His Body. 

When Justice shall have accepted that satisfaction, 

it will clear the books and deliver Adam and all 

his race from all responsibility accruing from the violation 

of God's Law by the eating of the forbidden fruit. The 

death of Jesus is the satisfaction for the sins resulting 

from the original Adamic sin. 

But there have been other sins, flagrant wrongs, for 
which Justice would demand retribution, sins against the 
Holy Spirit, against light. All of these are sins against 
God, against righteousness. To illustrate, consider the 
Lord's experience: It may be that the rabble were not 
responsible for the crucifixion of our Lord; but there 
were individuals who had sufficiency of light to have done 
better. So from the days of Abel to the present time 
some have suffered gross injustice, and the cries of these 
violations of Justice appeal to God, just as the blood of 
Abel cried out. The Scriptures show us how satisfaction 
will be made also for these before the opening of the 
great Day of blessing, before the world is turned over 
fully into the hands of the Mediator of the Kingdom. 

The satisfaction for these wilful sins is shown in the 
picture of the scapegoat. There we see in type how the 
"great company" will be caused to pass through tribulation, 
which will have a good effect upon themselves and 
which will, at the same time, be the means of squaring 
up accounts for gross violations of Justice outside of 
Adamic sin. The putting of the hands of the high priest 



upon the head of the scapegoat pictures the placing of 
these sins upon the "great company" class and the sending 
of them into tribulation. These will pass through an 
experience similar to that which our Lord foretold would 
come upon the Jewish nation, and which was literally 
fulfilled. Our Lord states that those horrible sufferings 
at the end of the Jewish Age were to be a squaring up 
for sins against Divine Justice— for various misdeeds of 
previous times. (Luke 11:49-51.) This will leave the 
world at the opening of the Millennium without anything 
against them on the books of Justice. 

THE DISCIPLINES ACCORDING TO PREVIOUS 
CHARACTER-DEVELOPMENT 

Then Justice will transfer the whole world of mankind 
into the hands of Messiah, who will take them just as 
they are. They will be in various conditions. Some will 
be more depraved, others less depraved; some will be 
more seared in their consciences and some less; and these 
deficiencies of character will depend upon the way in 
which each one accepted or rejected light and opportunity 
in the present time. Those who knew not His will and 
did it not will receive few stripes; those who knew His 
will and did it not will receive many stripes, because of 
previous hardening of character. Everybody will be required, 
eventually, to come up to the full standard of 
Divine requirements. Those more depraved will have 
greater difficulty and those less depraved will have less 
difficulty and receive fewer stripes, in the coming up to 
Divine requirements. 

R4856 : page 220 

In other words, every wrong deed, every wrong principle 
acted upon, has an evil effect upon character, as 
all right doing brings blessing. So mankind, in proportion 
as they have in this life obeyed or disobeyed privilege 
or knowledge, enjoyed and understood, will be elevated 
or degraded in character when they enter the next Age. 

The Apostle says that God is not slack (slow) as 
men count slackness, but is long-suffering and patient 
(2 Pet. 3:9); and "He knows how to reserve the ungodly 
until the Day of Judgment to be punished." (2 Pet. 2:9.) 
Again we read, "Some men's sins are open, going beforehand 
to judgment, and others they follow after. (I Tim. 5:24.) 
That is to say, there are people who do wrong and 
receive promptly the punishment for their wrong course. 
Thus they have opportunity of improving upon the past. 

There are others who seem to do well, seem to prosper 
in earthly things; their eyes stand out with fatness; they 
seem to go unheeded in their wrong course, down to the 
very tomb. (Psa. 73:3-12.) Will these escape? We 
answer, "No." In the Day of Judgment they will get 
their lesson. In that Day of trial they will have much 
more difficulty than will those who have learned lessons 



from the tribulations of the present life. A man who 
has practised evil will require severe discipline before he 
will learn that the customs of the past will not be allowed. 
Since this New Order will be such that nothing will be 
allowed to hinder it, his course in this life, therefore, 
will then receive retribution, in the sense that it will 
be the result of his wrong condition. 

We all have noticed that some children have been born 
with a mark that is very humiliating to them; and many 
of these, by reason of having the lip of scorn turned 
toward them, have thereby been made humble-minded and 
beautiful characters. On the other hand, spoiled children 
who have had their own way have constituted saws and 
files in the world and have made trouble for others. 
These, not having learned lessons of self-control in the 
present life, will be proportionately disadvantaged in the 
future, and must then learn these lessons. 

The question has been asked, will the Decalogue be 
revived in the Messianic Kingdom? We see no reason 
why it should not be made the Law of the Kingdom. 
There was no fault to be found with the Law, but with 
the weakness, the inability of those who were under the 
Law. The Ten Commandments were not given to the 
Church, but the spirit of them is comprehended in the 
word Love, which is the Law of the New Creation. 
(Rom. 13:8-10.) It would be rather incongruous for the 
Lord to say to the Church, Thou shalt not steal, Thou 
shalt not kill; for they would have passed from every 
such condition of mind before they could become His. 

With the world, at the beginning of the New Age, it 
would be a Law quite over their heads to say, You shall 
love everybody. They would need to have some simple 
statements such as, Thou shalt have no other gods but 
Me; thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not murder; thou 
shalt not bear false witness. The Decalogue is the very 
best Law for the world of mankind. We cannot improve 
on the wisdom of the Law-Giver who gave this Law to 
Moses in the beginning. It will not surprise us, therefore, 
if the Ten Commandments will be put upon the 
whole world, just as they were upon the Jews; and that 
mankind will be shown that the spirit of the Law is 
Love; but that they will come gradually to the understanding 
of this principle; for at the beginning they 
would not have the proper appreciation of the matter. 



R4856 : page 220 

PROPHESY SMOOTH THINGS 

-JEREMIAH 26.-AUGUST 6.- 

"The Lord is my Light and my Salvation; 
whom shall I fear?"— Psa. 27:1. 



OUR LAST STUDY related to the time of 

King Josiah and his reformation. At 

about that time the Prophet Jeremiah began 

to speak in the name of the Lord. Josiah 

was succeeded by his son, who proved himself 

another bad son of a good father. 

And, by the way, we remark here that between 

the ages of twelve and eighteen 

would appear to be the time when the majority 

of boys reach some mental decision 

respecting the future which has much to do with their 

after lives. So far as we remember, the majority of 

notably great men have confessed to the reaching of 

decision of character during this period. Likewise it is 

said that the majority of criminals take their start in evil-doing 

at this early age. 

It has been remarked also that the disturbance in 
Russia leading up to the Douma was largely the work of 
young people, pupils in the higher schools, male and 
female. We urge again upon parents and guardians the 
importance of this period in human life and the wisdom 
of giving proper care and counsel that the blossoming 
manhood and womanhood may be directed in proper channels, 
that they may become a blessing to themselves and 
all with whom they come in contact. 

PROPHECY AGAINST JERUSALEM 

Under the evil rule of King Jehoiakim, Jeremiah, 
under the Lord's guidance, foretold the coming destruction 
of the city and temple. The effect of such a 
prophecy should have led the people to self-examination, 
prayer and fasting, and a full return to loyalty to God. 
But according to Jeremiah's account it was a time of 
great moral delinquency. He pictures a terrible condition 
of the people— a prevalence of dishonesty, of slander, 
murder, adultery, false swearing and open licentiousness. 

The priests led the people in an angry attack upon the 
Prophet. He was arrested, charged with speaking evil 

R4857 : page 220 

of his city, in declaring its forthcoming destruction. 
How foolish! Could merely the Prophet's declaration 
bring the thing to pass? And if he were the Lord's 
Prophet could their assault upon him turn aside the Divine 
intention? But the spirit of sin is not the spirit of a sound 
mind, as is the Spirit of the Lord. 

It is noteworthy that it was the priests and the false 
prophets who, on this occasion, called for the death of a 
true Prophet. And alas! this has not infrequently been 
the case. Nearly all the persecutions of Jesus and His 
Apostles and His followers throughout the Age have 
come from professed servants of God. What heart 
searching this should bring to everyone of us lest, peradventure, 
we should be similarly overtaken in a fault 



and "be found fighting against God," and should bring 
upon ourselves severe condemnation. No doubt these 
religious teachers twisted their reasoning faculties to such 
an extent that they considered their course a just one— 
possibly they even thought that it was love on their part 
for the people; or perhaps they persuaded themselves 
that they were moved in their persecution, not by hatred, 
envy, malice, but by love for God. At all events their 
course shows what an easy matter self-deception is, and 

R4857 : page 221 

their mistake bids us beware and scrutinize carefully 
our own conduct. 

As Jeremiah told them of the time of trouble nearing, 
so some of God's people today are declaring that the 
greatest time of trouble ever known in the world's history 
is probably but a few years off— that it will mean 
the most terrible anarchy, the only relief from which 
will be the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom in power 
and great glory. And there are some today so foolish 
as to think that the trouble can be put off or avoided 
altogether by silencing those who call attention to the 
Word of the Lord. (Daniel 12:1.) Let us not be found 
fighting against God. He is mighty and will prevail, and 
all of His purposes, He assures us, will surely be 
accomplished. 

Jeremiah impressed the jurors— the princes of his 
people. He reaffirmed every word that he had uttered 
and declared himself ready to die if need be; but he 
urged reformation. The princes, more just than the 
priests and false prophets, acquitted Jeremiah, although 
his words condemned them. So it has been at various 
times in the history of the truth. If it had not been for 
the moderation of the civil power many a reformer would 
have been put to death. Note, for instance, Martin 
Luther's protection by the Landgrave of Hesse. 

REFORMER ANTHONY COMSTOCK 

So today. For years Mr. Anthony Comstock has been 
fighting valiantly, almost single handed, along the lines 
of social purity. Realizing to what an extent vice is 
spread by vile pictures and by vile literature, this man 
has given much of his life to their suppression. How 
much good he has accomplished no one in this life may 
ever know; how many boys and girls have been shielded 
no one may know; but all the same a noble man has 
fought a noble fight against impurity. Of course, such a 
man, or any man who stands for truth and righteousness, 
is sure to have enemies and malicious slanderers 
who would gladly see him dead. It is said that Mr. Comstock 
has effected the destruction of many hundred pounds 
of vile, moral-poisoning literature and many thousand 
pounds of electro-plate matter prepared to print more. 

All cannot be reformers and prophets of righteousness 



to the same extent as Jeremiah, Luther and Comstock. 
Every child of God, however, faithful to his consecration, 
is a servant of righteousness and, proportionately, 
should be a foe to sin in its every form. Such 
must be prepared for the finger of scorn and the lip of 
sarcasm and slander. Such may take to themselves our 
text and rejoice saying, "The Lord is my Light and my 
Salvation; whom shall I fear!" 



R4857 : page 221 

DESTROYING GOD'S WORD 
--AUGUST 13. -JEREMIAH 36.- 

"The Word of our God shall stand forever."— Isa. 40:8. 

THE PROPHET JEREMIAH was shut up in 

prison. The disaster upon the kingdom had, 

to some extent, awakened the people to a 

slight repentance, in which the king joined, 

yet it was a repentance from fear rather 

than heart repentance. The king had enmity 

against Jeremiah because the Divine 

Message came through him. He seems to 

have hoped to restrain the Prophet from 

further proclamation of the coming trouble through fear. 

However, the Lord directed the Prophet to write out all 

of his prophecies on a scroll, after the ancient style, in 

columns. Jeremiah dictated and Baruch served him as 

amanuensis. 

By the Lord's direction this book of Jeremiah was to 
be read to all the people at the temple on the occasion of 
a general gathering for worship and repentance. Since 
the Prophet himself could not go, he directed Baruch, who 
took the scroll and read it in the hearing of the people. 
Its prophecies of dire disaster made a deep impression. 
One of the princes of the people was present and heard 
the reading and reported to others of the king's counselors. 
They sent for Baruch and had him read it before 
them all. They, also, were deeply impressed and concluded 
that it should be brought before the king. But, 
meantime, Baruch and Jeremiah were hidden, the probability 
of the king's displeasure being great. 

Hearing of the manuscript the king was anxious to 
have it read before him by a scribe. During the reading, 
as two or three columns of the manuscript were read, the 
king cut them off with a pen-knife and threw them into 
the fire, until the entire manuscript was read and destroyed. 
By the Lord's direction Jeremiah dictated his 
prophecies afresh, Baruch again acting as amanuensis, 
and this edition was made still more complete than the 
former. Amongst other things it included the Divine 
edict that none of Jehoiakim's posterity should ever sit 



upon the throne of David. 

GOD'S WORD INDESTRUCTIBLE 

Thomas Paine, Voltaire and Ingersoll imagined that 
they had made the Word of God to appear so ridiculous 
that it would never more have influence amongst men. 
Robert Ingersoll is quoted as having said: "In ten years 
the Bible will not be read." How little the poor man 
knew on the subject! 

The frontispiece of a well-known Wyckliffe Bible pictures 
Satan and others, religious and irreligious, blowing 
with all their might to put out a light. In proportion as 
they exhausted their energy the light burned the more 
brightly. 

The story is told respecting the Tyndale Bible which 
illustrates the point we are making, namely the impossibility 
of extinguishing God's Word. Tyndale, while at the 
University of Cambridge, England, devoted much of his 
life energy to the translation of the Bible. He remarked 
to an opponent: "If God spare my life, ere many years I 
shall cause a boy that driveth the plow to know more of 
the Scriptures than thou dost." 

Tyndale's project of publishing the Bible in the English 
language was so seriously opposed in England that 
he removed to German cities, and in the year 1525 A.D. 
his translation of the New Testament was issued. Copies 
of it poured into England. The Bishop of London was 
so opposed that he collected and burned as many copies as 
he could at St. Paul's Cross in London. Yet more copies 
came. He could not destroy them. The Bishop collected 
monies wherewith to buy up the whole edition. The purchase 
was entrusted to a merchant named Parkington, 
who went to Germany and purchased the books. 

Addressing Tyndale he said: "William, I know thou 
art a poor man and hast an heap of New Testaments and 
books by thee, and I have now gotten a merchant which 
with ready money will buy all thou hast." Tyndale inquired, 
"Who is this merchant?" Mr. Parkington answered, 
"The Bishop of London." "Oh!" said Tyndale, 
"that is because he will burn them." "Yes, he will," said 

R4857 : page 222 

Parkington. Tyndale was glad, because thus he could get 
out of debt, and he said: "The world will cry out against 
the burning of God's Word." The money from the same 
enabled Tyndale to get out a new edition with errors corrected 
and much better than the one that was burned. 

BETTER INTERPRETATIONS OPPOSED 

Although we have passed the day when any would attempt 
to destroy the Bible, we have not passed the day 
of opposition to the Truth. Satan would fain have the 
people of God worship the Book rather than study and 



appreciate its contents. In consequence, not a few are 
opposing the light that is now shining from the Word of 
God, disclosing to us the fact that much that came down 
to us from the Dark Ages is as contrary to the Bible as to 
reason. Many of the professed teachers of the Church 

R4858 : page 222 

are heartily opposed to Bible study, although their opposition 
is advanced as cautiously as possible "for fear of 
the people"— for "fear of the Jews." 

The Scriptures from first to last give us to understand 
that God's Word is to shine more and more brightly 
down to the very end of this Gospel Age. St. Peter declares 
it to be the "more sure Word of prophecy to which 
we do well that we take heed as to a light shining in a 
dark place until the day dawn."— 2 Peter 1:19. 

The Bishop of England opposed the Tyndale translation 
because the practices of the time were not in harmony 
with the Scriptures. Similarly today there are doctrines, 
traditions, creeds from the Dark Ages, still reverenced, 
and which a better understanding of the Bible 
would correct and put to shame. Hence the opposition to 
the better understanding of God's Word. Nevertheless, 
the Word of God shall stand forever, and the spirit of 
the Truth shall make free indeed all the children of the 
Truth. 

"Truth, crushed to earth, shall rise again; 
The eternal years of God are hers." 



R4858 : page 222 

THE PROPRIETY OF FASTING 

"When ye fast be not as the hypocrites, 
of a sad countenance."— Matt. 6:16. 

IN OUR TEXT our Lord is not expressing 

any disapprobation of fasting; quite to the 

contrary; He is endorsing it as a propriety. 

Undoubtedly it is better for the 

health to fast somewhat at times rather 

than to eat to satisfaction. The Master's 

comment, according to the context, seems 

to be based upon the improper conduct of 

the Pharisees. The fasting was supposed 

to be good not only for physical health, but 

also for mental and spiritual health. The Pharisees, 

professing to be very holy, made manifest their holiness 

by fasting, subordinating the flesh that they might be 

spiritually strengthened. 

Our Lord does not dispute the propriety of such a 
course, but it was the wrong spirit that He condemned. 



For when the Pharisees fasted, many of them did it to 
be seen of men, in order to seem holy and given over to 
spiritual things. Hence our Lord's suggestion that when 
His disciples fast they should not be as the hypocrites, 
whose fasting and long faces were to show men their 
piety. In the same connection our Lord proceeds to say 
that when His disciples fast they should do the very 
reverse; that they should anoint their heads and be as 
cheerful as possible. 

We can see the philosophy of this course. If their 
fasting had brought them nearer to the Heavenly Father 
it should have made them more gracious and luminous. 
It should have had a happifying effect, which would have 
shown itself in the countenance. The thing reprimanded, 
then, was the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, who assumed a 
sadness of countenance to be seen of men. They delighted 
to have people say, "What a holy man! He has 
fasted so much! He is always thinking about holy 
things and, in order to do this, he is even denying himself 
the necessities of life. He is a very holy man!" 

The followers of the Lord are to practise such fasting 
as will be seen of the Lord and not of men. The 
Father, who knows the heart, will appreciate our efforts 
to draw near to Him and will grant our desire. But these 
things should be hidden to the outside world and known 
only to God; and the joy of the Lord should be manifest 
in the countenance. 

HOLINESS OF THE HEART NOT A MERE OUTWARD FORM 

Our Lord's frequent reference to the Pharisees, no 
doubt, was in part owing to the fact that the Pharisees 
were a very large and influential class; and in part because 
their name signified that they were the holy people. 
Hence, when our Lord was teaching special obedience 
to God, the question in the minds of the people would be, 
"Is He not a Pharisee, and do not the Pharisees teach 
all these things?" 

So it became necessary for our Lord Jesus to show 
wherein some of these things that the Pharisees practised 
were not proofs of their special nearness to God, 
and that they were not leaders to holiness, but that 
it was very evident that many of the Pharisees were 
hypocritical. Their holiness had become a mere form; 
it had degenerated into a custom— as the Scriptures say, 
a "Drawing near to the Lord with their lips, while their 
hearts were far from Him," and thinking merely of the 
general attitude they had toward the world, the people 
in general. 

We remember that there were some very noble Pharisees— 
Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea, who buried 
our Lord, and St. Paul, who tells us that he was a 
Pharisee. But evidently the greater part of them had 
made broad their phylacteries and were more anxious 
in respect to what men would think of them than what 
the Lord would think of them. Perhaps some of the 



hypocrisies of the Pharisees have been practised since 
by some in the Monastic Order, where they wished to 
show their special separation from the world by the wearing 
of a peculiar garb, by a special cut of the hair, by 
seclusion, etc. There is danger along this line in the 
observance of the Lenten season by some of the Catholics, 
Episcopalians, Lutherans. But it may not be hypocritical 
with all. 

ABSTEMIOUSNESS SPECIALLY HELPFUL DURING LENT 

In many respects it would be a very good thing 
for all the Lord's people to follow the Lenten custom of 
fasting, doing so with as little outward demonstration as 
possible, practising it as unto the Lord, without considering 
it a thing to be mentioned, without attracting attention, 
but merely as a privilege. The Lenten season comes 
at a time when abstemiousness in food seems particularly 
appropriate. As the cold of winter sharpens the appetite, 
in order to the resistance of the lower temperature of 
that season, so, in the spring, less carbon is needed, as 
there is not so much cold to resist; hence it would seem 
advantageous to practise fasting, more or less, in the 
Lenten season. 

R4858 : page 223 

We have in mind the fact that the Lenten season 
represents the forty-day period of our Lord's experiences 
just preceding the crucifixion. We might enter sympathetically 
into this matter and think of the trying experiences 
that were upon the Master when He knew that He 
was drawing near to the time of His death. As we try 
to think of Him it will enable us better to realize what 
a privilege it is to endure hardship as good soldiers for 
the sake of His Message. 

Fasting is specially commendable to the Lord's people 
at times when they find themselves lacking in spirituality 
and exposed to severe temptations from the world, the 
flesh and the Devil; for, by impoverishing the physical 
force and vitality, it may assist the full-blooded and impulsive 
to self-control in every direction. We may believe 
that a majority of Christians would be helped by 
occasional fasting— by a very plain diet, if not total abstinence, 
for a season. But fastings to be seen and known 
of men, or to be esteemed in our own minds as marks 
of piety on our part, would be injurious indeed and would 
lead to spiritual pride and hypocrisy, which would far 
outweigh any advantage to us in the way of self-restraint. 



R4858 : page 223 

GUIDED BY GOD'S EYE 



"I will guide thee with Mine eye."— Psa. 32:8. 

THE EYE is one of the most important organs 

of the body with which to give expression 

to the feelings. Either anger or pleasure 

are usually expressed by this means. One 

thought which we may take from the text 

is that one may be so desirous of doing the 

Divine will that he will be continually on 

the alert to please, just as a dutiful child, 

being on the alert to do the will of the 

parent, would look at the parent's eye, not 

waiting for the rod. So all of God's dear children of 

the Church should be looking unto Jesus for the expression 

of the Father's will concerning them. They 

look to Jesus as the Author of their faith and the One 

who shall be the Finisher of it. They look to Him as 

the great Counselor and Guide of life. As we sometimes 

sing: 

"Oh, let no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide Thee from Thy servant's eyes!" 
Another thought is that as the eye is the symbol of 
wisdom, so God guides all things in wisdom. He sees to 
it that His children receive the necessary counsel, the 
necessary aid. Since He is the All-Wise One, nothing 
can escape His attention. Still another thought is that 
as we recognize the Divine purpose, the Divine will, the 
Divine outworking of that will, we see that in the present 
time God is not trying to save the world, but only "the 
called," "the elect," who are obedient in sacrifice. All 
who are of the First-Borns should seek to follow the 
same course as God, to be co-workers with Him. They 

page 223 

should have no will of their own, but do the Father's will. 

R4859 : page 223 

One of the most important lessons for the spiritual 
Israelite to learn is to look to the Lord for leading in all 
of life's affairs— never to attempt any undertaking, either 
temporal or spiritual, without seeking to note the will of 
the Lord concerning it. We are marching toward the 
antitypical Canaan and know that other experiences are 
due us and must be undergone ere we can inherit the 
promises. The lesson for us is prompt and thorough 
obedience to the Lord's leadings without murmurings— 
with joyfulness; and this can be expected only on the 
part of those who have learned the lessons previously 
given them, and above all, the lesson of faith— confidence 
in the Lord's power and goodness and faithfulness. 



page 223 



BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study VI.— Order and Discipline in the New Creation. 
AUGUST 6 
TEACHERS IN THE CHURCH. 

(104) What is the special Scriptural significance of "aptness 
to teach"? P. 255. 

(105) How may we distinguish between teaching and 
preaching? P. 256, par. 1. 

(106) What is the work of an evangelist? and how have 
present-day conditions changed the method of evangelization? 
P. 256, par. 2; P. 257. 

MANY SHOULD BE ABLE TO TEACH. 

(107) What Scripture implies that in a general sense all 
the members of the New Creation should be able to teach, 
and that teaching is not limited to a clerical class? 

P. 257, par. 2. 

AUGUST 13 
"BE NOT MANY OF YOU TEACHERS, BRETHREN?" 

(108) Does James 3:1 mean that none of the Church 
should become teachers? If not, what does it mean? 
P. 258, par. 1. 

(109) Explain Matt. 5:19 in this connection. P. 258, par. 2. 

"YE NEED NOT THAT ANY MAN TEACH YOU." 

(1 10) In view of other Scriptures and the experiences of 
life, is the accepted translation of 1 John 2:27,20 correct? 
P. 259, par. 1. 

(111) What thoughts are suggested by the context, beginning 
with verse 18? P. 259, par. 2. 

(112) What is evidently the Apostle's thought with respect 
to verse 27? P. 260, par. 1,2. 

(113) What is the special significance of the word 
"unction" in verse 20? and how was this typified? P. 261, par. 1. 

AUGUST 20 

(114) Of what is this unction an evidence to ourselves and 
to others? P. 261, par. 2. 

(115) What is therefore the conclusion with respect to 
the necessity for teachers? P. 262, par. 1,2. 

"HIM THAT IS TAUGHT, AND HIM THAT TEACHETH." 

(116) Do the Scriptures teach a machine-like faith and 
acceptance of every doctrine? P. 263, par. 1. 



(1 17) On the other hand, does the Word of God encourage 
a combative, fault-finding or debating spirit? 

P. 263, par. 2. 

(118) What does the word "communicate" signify in 
Gal. 6:6? P. 264, par. 1. 

AUGUST 27 

WOMAN'S PROVINCE IN THE CHURCH. 

(1 19) Is there any sex-discrimination with respect to 
eligibility for membership in the New Creation? Support 
your reply with Scripture quotations. P. 264, par. 3, first half. 

(120) In view of explicit limitations placed upon woman's 
service in the Church, how shall we harmonize this with the 
preceding statement? P. 265, top. 

(121) Do the Scriptures indicate a lack of love on the 
part of our Lord, or of education or ability on their part, 
that such restrictions were placed upon women in the early 
Church? P. 265, par. 1. 

(122) How does woman appear to have been used by the 
Adversary in misleading mankind? P. 265, par. 2. 

(123) What natural endowment of woman may reasonably 
seem to unfit her for public service? P. 266, par. 1,2. 

(124) How does this quality of approbativeness become a 
snare to woman when exercised toward the public? P. 267, 
par. 1, first part. 

(125) How is ambition to appear wiser than others a 
danger that besets man as well as woman? and what are the 
Apostle's warnings? P. 267, par. 1; Z. '08-24. 



page 225 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 227 

"Unto the Third and Fourth Generation" 227 

Insanity Threatens Race, Says Dr. Wiley 228 

We're a Nation of Wrecks, Says University 

Head 229 

Denver to Portland and Homeward 

Conventions 230 

The Church Not a Part of the Ransom 233 

The Work of the Scapegoat Class 234 

Blessed are the Persecuted 235 

Dark Prophecies Fulfilled 236 

"Overturned Until He Come" 237 

Interesting Questions 238 

Ancient Worthies Not Represented in 
Court 238 

"Offering" Used in Two Senses 238 

The Two Altars Contrasted 238 

Incense Abode in Most Holy 239 

Both Had to Do With Justice 239 

I.B.S.A. Convention Railroad Rates 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 



not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



MOUNTAIN LAKE PARK CONVENTION 

September first to eleventh on the mountain top will surely 
be quite cool; and as Mountain Lake Park is a "Camp Meeting" 
village the houses are not so tight as your homes. For 
these reasons plenty of warm clothing will be needed, especially 
for evenings. Remember this ! 

The various other Conventions this year will probably 
leave us a smaller crowd here than the General Convention 
last year at Celoron. But neither are the possibilities for 
lodging so good. All, therefore, desiring board and lodging 
should apply at once at $1, or at hotels at $1.25, $1.50, 
$1.75, $2 up. None should count on less than $1.25 daily 
expense. We have contracted for all the board and lodging 
available and desirable. Large rooms must accommodate 
three or four persons, small ones at least two, even to accommodate 
the smaller crowd we are expecting. We are even 
arranging for cots in temporary shelters. Surely, then, when 
you decide to come, send us one dollar, each person, which we 
will pay over to secure your space. It will apply on your 
board bill. 

Give full particulars re your party— which prefer to room 
together, when you will arrive and when depart, etc. We 
will gladly do our best for all. 

Particulars re railroad rates on another page. 

COLPORTEURS AT THE CONVENTION 

A "Brother" has remembered the Colporteurs and proffers, 
under the following restrictions, one-half the railway fare to 
such as need the aid to get to the Mt. Lake Park Convention: 
(1) The half-fare shall not exceed five dollars. (2) The 
Colporteur shall have paid the Society at least twenty-five 
dollars for SCRIPTURE STUDIES during this year. 

The Society has arranged for the free entertainment of 
said Colporteurs on a very economical basis. It will supply 
cots in two large buildings and will supply food which these 
dear friends can prepare for their own use, as many of them 
are accustomed to doing. 

Our Society regards the Colporteur service as one of the 
most important branches of the "harvest" work— if not, indeed, 



the most important. We trust that the above arrangement 
may assist a considerable number of Colporteurs to 
attend. It is our hope that the day devoted to Colporteur 
Instruction may start some on better methods and to greater 
success than in the past. We will do all in our power to 
further the usefulness of all desiring to co-operate in this 
branch of the service. 



R4866 : page 226 

MIRACLE WHEAT IN DEMAND 

The notice in THE WATCH TOWER of June 15 that Brother 
Bohnet has "miracle wheat" in abundance now, and that he 
will sell it at $ 1 per pound and donate the entire proceeds to 
our Tract Fund, has brought in many orders. These will be 
filled between August 15 and September 1. No limit as to 
supply has been noted. Sent by Express, prepaid, the price 
will be twenty-two pounds for $20; fifty-five pounds for $50; 
larger quantities at the latter rate. The merits of this wheat 
over the common variety have been mentioned in previous 
issues of THE WATCH TOWER. 

page 226 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for August follow: (1) 145; (2) 
299; (3) 99; (4) 108; (5) 110; (6) 270; (7) 41; (8) 
293; (9) 12; (10) 230; (11) 170; (12) 114; (13) 95; 
(14) 307; (15) Vow; (16) 123; (17) 176; (18) 109; 
(19) 273; (20) 333; (21) 222; (22) 160; (23) 152; 
(24) 137; (25) 312; (26) 267; (27) 9; (28) 7; (29) 
259; (30) 281; (31) 46. 



R4859 : page 227 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"UNTO THE THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION" 



Exodus 20:5; 34:7; Numbers 14:18; Deuteronomy 5:9. 

RADICAL CHANGE IN THE VIEWS OF SCIENTISTS CAUSED BY 
MENDEL'S EXPERIMENTS. 



WHY is it that a man of genius will not infrequently 

become the father or grandfather 

of perfect dunces? Why do a fair-haired 

husband and a fair-haired wife sometimes 

beget a dark-haired baby? Why are 

there such differences in size, appearance 

or intelligence between the children of the 

same, identical mates? 

"If we observe the so-called 'vagaries 
of Nature' in the plant and the animal 
world, we observe that the dwarf pea, sprung from tall 
ancestors, breeds true to dwarfness; that the progeny of 
a black and a white rabbit are in one case all black and 
in another all the wild gray color; that two white peas 
being crossed may give a purple flower; that two hairless 
plants may revert to the hairy form. 

"We used to call such phenomena 'curious reversions.' 
We believed first that through slow evolution certain 
characteristics of certain types had either become over-developed 
or obliterated, like the lizard's third eye, the 
bat's wings, the tadpole's tail. 

"We also believed that acquired characteristics, a love 
for music, a taste for strong beverages, would be transmitted 
to all of one's descendants. 

"Now come the Mendelian experiments, proving apparently 
that heredity and evolution are mere dreams, 
that species are immutable and that Nature's vagaries are 
merely Nature's logical efforts to extricate the original 
type from the tangle of cross-breeds due to man's 
tampering. 

"Even should the far-famed 'missing link' show up 
in the wilds of Oceania, where it is strongly suspected of 
keeping itself in the strictest incog., we would no longer 
have to deplore our descent from a simian ancestor. 

"The man who gave a concrete form to such theories 
was an Austrian monk by the name of Mendel, born in 
1822. The result of his biological experiments were embodied 
in a modest paper read before the natural history 
society of a little Austrian town, Brunn. He also wrote 
a few letters on the subject to the botanist Naegeli. 

"Unfortunately, pamphlet and letters were written at 
a time when Darwin's theories, as to the origin of species, 
had become the scientific fad of the day. And what 
chance had the modest old monk of being even noticed? 
He died inglorious in 1884. 

"Not until a few years ago did R. C. Punnett, an English 
scientist with an inquisitive turn of mind, look over 
Mendel's records of experiments. So appalled was he 
by their importance that he published a book, christening 
the new theory 'Mendelism.' 

"The world lent an indifferent ear to the new leitmotive; 
but by and by the Englishman dinned Mendelism 
into the consciousness of the scientific world. At the present 
day there is a big English magazine devoted to the 
new science and called 'Mendelism.' 



"Let us now turn to Mendel's own account of his experiments 
on plants and on animals. In one series of experiments 
he concentrated his attention on the height of 
certain plants. He first made crosses between giant peas 
and dwarf peas. It mattered not which was the pollen-producing 
and which the seed-bearing plant; in all cases 
tall peas resulted from the cross. For this reason Mendel 
called the tall pea 'dominant,' and the dwarf 'recessive.' 

"The next step was to collect seeds of the new plant 
and to sow them in the following year. When this was 
done it was found that both tall and dwarf plants appeared 
in the offspring. Each individual was either 
frankly tall or frankly dwarf, and no intermediate appeared, 
the proportion of tall to dwarf being three to one. 
The following year seed from the dwarf peas gave only 
dwarfs; seed from the tall gave a large proportion of tall 
and a few dwarfs. 

"In the following year tall seed brought forth tall 
plants only, dwarf seed dwarf plants only. The reversion 
to the prototype was complete. In the process, however, 
the tall plant, the dominant, appeared three times as frequently 
as the recessive. 

"The experiment was tried with various animals, and 
it was found, first, that after several generations the individual 
reverted to the pure type of either the male or 
female ancestors, and, secondly, that one type was dominant 
—that is, produced many more individuals than the 
recessive type. 

"Crossing colored and white mice produced in the long 
run pure colored and pure white, with a majority of colored; 
the Angora fur of some rabbits was found recessive 
to the normal short fur; the rose comb which occurs 
in certain breeds of poultry, such as Hamburgs or 
Wyandottes, behaves as a dominant to the high serrated 
single comb of the Leghorns. 

"Freakish cases in which one of the parents was in 
a markedly abnormal condition were considered. Japanese 
waltzing mice were crossed with normal mice. The 
'waltzers' are driven to circle round sometimes for hours 

R4859 : page 228 

by a painful malformation of the labyrinth of the ear. 
After a couple of generations the crosses bred true to 
either the normal mouse or to the 'waltzer,' the latter 
being recessive to the former. 

"Interesting experiments were made to ascertain 
whether crossing increased or diminished the resistance to 
disease. 

"Some varieties of wheat are susceptible to the attacks 
of a fungus that causes 'rust,' some are immune. 
When 'susceptible' and 'immune' were crossed, every 
hybrid was susceptible to 'rust.' The following year the 
hybrid became differentiated, the 'rusty' and 'immune' 
plants being in the apparently universal ratio of three 
to one. 



"We have, then, the explanation of facts which Darwin 
refused to consider as very important. He held that 
'freakish variations' in the production of species would 
rapidly become swamped by intercrossing with the normal 
form. He considered that species had been and were being 
built up by the process of natural selection. As a matter 
of fact, no species is being built up, and deviations 
from the prototype are corrected in the course of three 
generations. 

"Before experiments can be made on human beings 
the Mendelian discovery can be applied practically to 
the improvement of animal breeds. We know for sure 
that in most cases a cross means greatly increased vigor 
for the progeny. Breeders, however, are very shy in 
making crosses for fear of breaking up and losing the 
desirable combination of characters found in the original 
strains. 

"Mendel's discovery may reassure them on this point. 
In three generations breeders can reproduce the parental 
types with all the increased vigor resulting from a cross. 
We must also revise our conception of a 'pure breed.' 
Until recently we said that the criterion by which we could 
judge the purity of breed was the pedigree of the individual. 
Today we know that a plant or an animal can be 
pure breed, not only owing to its ancestry, but in spite of 
its ancestry. 

"Where the problem becomes fascinating, however, is 
where it touches the mooted question of heredity, and here 
again it upsets absolutely our previous notions. Man 
being the slowest breeding animal, observations are difficult, 
and only imperfect statistics can be relied upon at 

R4860 : page 228 

the present day to supply evidence. 

"The study of certain diseases, however, in the course 
of several centuries fortunately enabled scientists to establish 
heredity tables. One of the most interesting cases 
observed is that of the transmission of 'brachydactily.' 
In people affected with this malformation the joints of 
the fingers and toes are two instead of three, and the 
whole body presents a stunted appearance. 

"It has been shown that this condition is unfortunately 
dominant to the normal state, which means that 'brachydactily' 
in one of the parents will affect the progeny in the 
proportion of three abnormal to one normal descendant. 
The normal descendants will, however, breed true to 
normal, while the abnormal children will give birth to 
both abnormal and normal children in the proportion of 
three to one. 

"Another interesting case is that of the eye color. All 
colored eyes have pigment at the back of the iris. In addition 
to this there is frequently some yellow-brownish 
pigment on the front of the iris. Where it is absent the 
color of the eyes is blue, gray or violet. Highly pigmented 
eyes are dominant to those in which pigment is 



absent. When one of the mates has dark eyes and the 
other blue eyes, the proportion of dark-eyed and blue-eyed 
descendants will be three to one, the dark-eyed hybrid 
begetting only dark-eyed, the blue-eyed hybrid begetting 
three 'dark-eyed' to one 'blue-eyed.' 

"While Mendel's theories throw no light upon the 
origin of species, at least they seem to prove against Darwin 
the immutability and the lasting individuality of 
species. We may have to believe in a distinct act of creation 
for each and every species, but we can no longer assume 
that the difference between species arose from the 
accumulation of minute and almost imperceptible differences. 
Neither can we believe that a drop of tainted 
blood will taint the family blood for generations. 
We know who will bear the taint and who will not." 
--N.Y. Times. 

THE BIBLE PROVED TRUE 

The heading to this article with the references are 
ours. The Monk Mendel and those who are now exploiting 
his findings and theories of course never thought of 
the Bible supporting their teaching. But let us put the 
matter the other way about and say that these scientific 
gentlemen are supporting the Bible and proving it true. 
Their experiments, they tell us, show that special peculiarities, 
virus in the blood, etc., will work itself out in the 
third generation; the Bible says the third or the fourth. 
We shall stick to the Bible. 

Let those who prefer take Darwin and boast of their 
monkey parentage of gradual development. We prefer 
the Bible statement, that by nature we were children of 
God, created in His image and likeness, from which we 
fell through disobedience and to which the willing and 
obedient will be privileged to return "in due time" through 
the merit of the redemption-sacrifice finished at Calvary. 
Let us rejoice in the special invitation now ours of becoming 
members of the Body of the great Messiah, who 
provides both the redemption and the restitution of Adam 
and his race, and who will destroy in the Second Death all 
who shall wilfully and intelligently spurn Divine favor. 



INSANITY THREATENS RACE, SAYS DR. WILEY 

Alienists the country over are sounding a solemn note 
of warning to the American people over the alarming 
rush in which we live. According to Dr. Harvey W. 
Wiley, federal pure food and drugs expert, nearly every 
man and woman at some time in their lives border on 
insanity. That view is also indorsed by the famous Dr. 
William A. White, head of the United States government 
hospital for the insane, who backs up the stand taken recently 
by Dr. Owen Copp, new head of the Pennsylvania 
Hospital for the Insane. They also commend Dr. Copp's 



view that extremely few families survive three or four 
generations without the outcropping of insanity. 

Surprise was expressed by Dr. Wiley that more people 
do not become completely insane. Because of the terrible 
ravages of drink and drugs, particularly in the United 
States, thousands of people are rendered so extremely 
nervous that they are always on the verge of going crazy, 
he says. The rush and worry of modern life, the chase 
after money and pleasure, he gives as the causes for 
threatened insanity. "Yes, it is certainly true that there 
are very few people who have not been on the verge of 
going crazy," he stated. "Many have to be sent to asylums, 
but thousands of others save themselves in time. 
There are moments in practically every person's life when 
he feels that one more worry will snap the strings of his 
mental balance."— Woman's National Daily. 



Not only are we today living under a greater strain 
than anything known by our forefathers, but additionally 

R4860 : page 229 

the majority of mankind lack the necessary help in bearing 
the strain. At the very time when help Divine is a 
four-fold need, faith in God and in His Divine supervision 
of human affairs is being lost. In the smaller worries 
of a less busy time there usually was at least one in 
a family who had respect for religion and for God, and 
who would speak a word of comfort to the others. But 
now in humanity's time of greatest stress, verging on insanity, 
many families are without God and without hope. 
Faith has been broken down from two great causes:— 

(1) The so-called Higher Critics have destroyed the 
faith of the learned in the Bible as the Word of God and 
have substituted a theory of Evolution. The learned, in 
turn, although they have not ventured to give their unbelief 
unstintedly to the lower classes, have nevertheless 

left them without the consolation of the Scriptures and 
its guidance. They have taught Evolution and other 
things contrary to the Bible. As a consequence, few today 
think of going to the Word of God for the assistance 
which they can gain from no other quarter. 

(2) The other difficulty contributing to this unbelief 
is the horrible nightmare of error handed down to us 
from the "Dark Ages" through all of our Church creeds. 
Those monstrosities are too horrible for sensible people 
to believe and have caused a revulsion of feeling— they 
have driven thinking people away from the Bible, as well 
as away from the creeds. They have prepared them for 
the inoculation of unbelief, as expressed by the Higher 
Critics, Evolution theories, etc. The people have discarded 
the Bible also, believing that its teachings were 

fairly reflected in the creeds which they can no longer 
accept. 



The remedy for all this is to get the only proper view 
of the Bible consistent with itself. This necessitates a 
study of the Bible along new and independent lines, wholly 
free from the bias and coloring of the creeds of the past. 
The Bible must be allowed to interpret itself. It must be 
recognized as being partly literal and partly symbolical in 
its statements. Above all we must recognize that the 
understanding of it and interpretation of it to others is 
not committed to any special cult nor by any peculiar laying 
on of hands. It can be understood only by those who 
are in full harmony with God and guided by His Spirit— 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that reverence Him, 
and He will show them His Covenant." 



WE'RE A NATION OF WRECKS, SAYS UNIVERSITY HEAD 

The restless, moving life we lead will drive us all to 
neuresthenia. Leading the pace that kills, not so much as 
regards vice, but the desire to be always on the move, has 
ruined our schools and colleges and has attacked the 
mental and moral fiber of the American brain. 

These are some of the signals of danger set up in the 
roadway of American life by the Rev. John Cavanaugh, 
president of Notre Dame University, in an attack on modern 
living as compared with ancient customs and development, 
in which the latter in no way suffer. Three passions, 
he says, amazingly developed in the American 
people, are tearing at the foundations of our characters 
and home lives. These are the passion for travel from 
place to place, the passion for public spectacles, whether 
they be good or bad, and the passion for gregariousness 
as against home life. 

Father Cavanaugh said: "It is often disputed upon 
good grounds whether there has been any real progress 
of the human race within the time of recorded history. 
In my mind the old poems are the best poems; the old 
philosophy the best philosophy; the old sculpture, paintings 
and architecture are still the models. Demosthenes 
and Cicero still hold their prominence. In every important 
phase of expression modern life has made no development. 

"Within my lifetime I have seen three passions developed 
in the American people— the passion for travel from 
place to place; the passion for public spectacles and entertainment, 
and the passion for gregariousness as against 
home life. In the poorest parts of the country, in the 
hardest times, among the people least favorably conditioned 
financially, I find the railroad trains and the street 
cars crowded with all sorts of people darting here and 
there on errands of pleasure. The theaters are crowded, 
the dance hall and the public garden are more frequented 
than ever, and a new and horrible form of popular entertainment 
has been found in the 5 -cent theater. 

FAMILY HEARTH IS OBSOLETE 



"Steam heat and the modern methods of living have 
driven out the old family hearth in the literal sense; and 
the passion for living in crowds or among strangers has 
killed off the old family hearth in the poetic and social 
sense as well. An evening that a young woman spends 
with her family alone is dull, flat and unprofitable; a night 

R4861 : page 229 

that a young man spends with his mother and father at 
home is a lost night. In a cartoon a doting father is pictured 
as trying to catch a glimpse of his pet boy home 
from college for the Christmas holidays. The time the 
old man has darting in and out around the home is amusing 
in the picture, but not in life. That college boy is 
legion. 

"Obviously, what the country needs is chloroform or 
locomotor ataxia. The effect of this restless, moving, unreposeful 
life will be national neurasthenia. Its effect on 
the mentality of the people is already seen in the thin, 
pale courses of our high schools, and in the fact that our 
colleges are deep in social things and shallow in intellectual 
things. 

MODERN FICTION A NARCOTIC 

"I know an eminent neurologist who is treating a dipsomaniac 
at the present time, and one of the prescriptions 
he has laid down with most earnestness is that the patient 
shall abstain from reading popular fiction and from frequentation 
of the play. The old tragedies scourged the 
moral power into action; so did the old books. Modern 
fiction and modern drama are narcotics to the will. They 
are developing a tribe of maudlin weaklings. 

"But in scoring the modern life for negative developments 
surely something may be said for science, however, 
and very much may be said for the things that 
make for comfort and convenience in life. To some of 
us the railroad train, the steamship and the automobile 
appeal as conveniences, but to the greater number of Americans 
such inventions and fruits of the few great brains 
are merely instruments of their desire to lead the pace 
that kills."— St. Louis Post-Dispatch. 



OPPOSITION TO THE ZIONIST MOVEMENT 

The Missionary Review reports that "the Zionist 
movement has suffered a setback through opposition recently 
expressed in the Turkish parliament. The Grand 
Vizier in particular has spoken with contempt of Zionism 
and its expectations."— The Outlook. 



FOR THE STUDY OF SPIRITUALISM 

A brother of the late Senator Stanford, of California, 
has given $50,000 to Stanford University to found a department 
for the investigation of occult phenomena, 
chiefly the manifestations of spiritualism, in which Mr. 
Stanford has for years been a believer.— The Outlook. 



R4861 : page 230 

DENVER TO PORTLAND AND HOMEWARD CONVENTIONS 

GOD'S BLESSING has surely been richly 

with us on this second division of our Convention 

Tour. The Bible Students in the 

various stopping places had been working 

hard for success, and they were full of enthusiasm. 

The touring party, nearly two 

hundred in number, are full of fervor, adding 

to the spirit of the various occasions. 

We rejoiced together as we rehearsed 

Divine providences, blessings, favors, and 

united in praise and testimony, and in public presentations 

of the Truth. The profit and interest of the Conventions 

were augmented by occasional symposiums, 

participated in by nearly all of the brethren of the party. 

Some of these had been accustomed to public speaking 

and some had not, but all were quite conversant with the 

Truth. These impromptu addresses seemed to encourage 

the speakers and their audiences. 

Sunday, June 18, at 3 o'clock, we gave a public discourse 
on the "Hereafter" in the Auditorium at Denver. 
The attendance was estimated at four thousand, of which 
about four hundred (men) were on the platform. We had 
excellent attention, and feel sure that many left the place 
with very changed conceptions of the "Hereafter" and of 
our Heavenly Father and His great Plan of the Ages. 

The evening subject, "Zionism, the Hope of the World," 
had not been so widely advertised, and, as was expected, 
the audience was considerably less— less than one-half. 
A considerable number of Jews attended. We had closest 
attention, and at the close many expressions of appreciation 
were made. 

The following day we took an excursion into the 
mountain wilds, where we had very enjoyable services, in 
the nature of praise, prayer and testimony. The evening 
meeting was held in the auditorium of the Woman's Club, 
where an excellent address was given by Brother Barton. 

The following day was spent in the mountains of Colorado 
and Utah, journeying to Salt Lake City over the 
Denver and Rio Grande Railway. The scenery was very 
beautiful, picturesque and interesting. The convulsions 
of nature which threw up those great mountain ranges 



spoke to us of a Power Divine, while beautiful mountain 
flowers told of the same Divine Power exercised in a 
more pacific manner. It was a day of rest from oral 
preaching, affording us an opportunity for preparing sermons 
for future use. Our faithful stenographer, Brother 
Rutherford, Jr., materially assisted in the work. 

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH 

Our one-day stop here, Wednesday, June 21, was an 
interesting and profitable one. The city is very beautiful 
and prosperous looking. Our morning services (a rally 
and testimony meeting) adjourned in time for us to attend 
the organ recital in the Mormon Tabernacle, an immense 
structure with a seating capacity of five thousand. 
The organ and recital interested us greatly; the music 
was very fine. 

Our afternoon meeting was a symposium on the fruits 
and graces of the Holy Spirit. Several participated, our 
own part being the conclusion. The evening meeting at 
Salt Lake Theater was crowded, nearly two thousand being 
present. The interest was great. Close attention 
was given by the mixed audience of all denominations. 
It is our opinion that Mormons are as honest as others- 
more honest than many. We understand that their institution, 
while financially strong, is theologically weakened; 
that is to say, the original doctrine of Mormonism is being 
called in question by newer elements, differently educated 
than their fathers. We trust that some good fruitage 
may result from the meetings. The class of Bible 
Students there is quite small. 

AT LOS ANGELES, CAL. 

Here the class of Truth friends number about one 
hundred and twenty-five. It is a zealous class in many 
respects. They had all worked hard for the convention, 
and the Divine blessing made it a great success. Those 
in attendance at the meetings of the interested numbered 
nearly six hundred, and included friends from nearby 
places as well as our touring party. The forenoon was 
given to testimonies, our own being the concluding one of 
about half an hour. In the afternoon, by request, we had 
a meeting for the consecration of children; about thirty-five 
children were presented. A Question meeting followed. 
The questions were good and were answered to 
the best of our ability. 

The evening meeting for the public was in the Auditorium, 
our topic being "The Great Hereafter." About 
three thousand people were present, including those on 
the platform. An overflow meeting was held in another 
room in the same building. It was addressed by Brother 
Sexton. At the conclusion of our discourse in the main 
auditorium, we gave a further half-hour talk to the overflow 
meeting, the conclusion of the service being at nearly 
11 o'clock. Here again the people heard with great earnestness, 



as though they were hungry. Again we had 

proof of the Word of the Lord to the effect that there is 

a famine in the land; not a famine for bread nor for 

water, but a famine for the hearing of the Word of the 

Lord. 

SANTA CRUZ, CAL. 

About sixty Los Angeles friends journeyed with us to 
Santa Cruz, and the following day to San Francisco; 
some even accompanied us as far as Sacramento, contributing 
to our pleasure and to the success of the meetings. 

Our train was delayed in reaching Santa Cruz, where 
there is but a small class of Bible Students. We had a 
very enjoyable time, however. Our afternoon meeting 
was held in the Casino Theater, at the beach, where the 
friends rested meanwhile. At the hour appointed for the 
public service, we discussed "The Hereafter" to a very 
intelligent audience, numbering about a thousand. Close 
attention was given for two hours, and we hope the interest 
will prove abiding. Following the service, the speaker 
was escorted by some local friends in an automobile to a 
park of big trees, where some pictures were taken and a 
bountiful supper enjoyed. A delightful ride returned us 
to Santa Cruz, where we had a meeting for the interested, 
which concluded the day. 

SAN FRANCISCO, CAL. 

Sunday, June 25, was an interesting day for the Truth 
friends at San Francisco. The Bible Students here are 
very energetic and surely worked hard for the attainment 
of the good results achieved. The afternoon service for 
the public at 3 o'clock was splendidly attended by about 
four thousand, our topic being "Hereafter." We had close 
attention. The evening service on "Zionism, the Hope of 
the World," was less advertised, but there was a good attendance 
also, about one-half that of the afternoon service. 
Those present in the afternoon (kept late and filled 
full) had little time or inclination to hear further the 
same day. 

At the evening meeting it was estimated that about 
five hundred Jews were present. They heard very coldly 
and cautiously until we were about half through, when 
their interest seemed to grow. When they heard things 
respecting their nation and its history, and the outworking 

R4862 : page 23 1 

of prophetic promises, they were apparently greatly interested. 

We feel here like reminding our readers 

afresh that we are not to expect any considerable number 

of Jews to manifest interest in Present Truth now. 

We hope for them that the message they are now hearing 

will direct their hearts and minds and prayers toward 

God and the Holy Scriptures, and thus prepare them for 



further glorious experiences in the midst of troubles in 

the near future. We remind you afresh that it is our expectation 

that the interest of the Jews will really come in 

the midst of the time of trouble, and that the Great Company 

will have the opportunity and honor of leading 

them to a fuller appreciation of the Divine Program, 

with the Messianic Seed of Abraham on the spirit plane, 

and the Jews in conjunction with Abraham, Isaac and 

Jacob and the Prophets on the earthly plane, to bless the 

world of mankind. 

AT OAKLAND, CAL. 

Monday was given to Oakland, which lies just across 
the bay from San Francisco. In many respects, the two 
classes are one— their interests at least co-operated happily 
with our program for the day. Our first meeting was 
with the Elders and Deacons of the two classes, numbering 
about thirty. It was a pleasant experience and lasted 
for nearly two hours. We talked of the local interests of 
the work and the best methods of promoting them. At 
10 o'clock there was a general rally and testimony meeting 
which we could not attend. The First Baptist Church 
was at our disposal for the entire day. Its capacity is 
estimated at fifteen hundred. 

At 2 p.m. we gave a talk on the propriety of parents 
consecrating their children to the Lord. We reminded our 
hearers of how the Jewish parents had a custom of consecrating 
their male children to the Lord by a circumcision 
ceremony. We reminded them that many Christian 
denominations practice infant sprinkling with really 
the significance of consecration. We pointed out the unscripturalness 
of infant sprinkling, because it is understood 
to mean baptism and to be performed instead of it, 
baptism being prescribed in the Bible only for the consecrated 
believers. We reminded our hearers of how the 
parents of Samuel had specially presented him to the 
Lord for service. We called their attention to how Jewish 
mothers brought their children to our Lord, desiring 
them to be blessed. 

We explained that there is nothing in the nature of a 
command in connection with such consecration of children 
—at very most it is a privilege, an opportunity to 
such as may desire to avail themselves of it without the 
slightest reflection against those who might think and act 
differently. We recommended that it be considered applicable 
only to children who have not reached maturity of 
judgment so as to have a will of their own in such a matter. 
We suggested that, later in life, children coming to 
know that they have been devoted to the Lord in infancy 
might to some extent gain a measure of blessing in this 
connection. We suggested to the parents that we hoped 
that the consecration of their children formally to the 
Lord would help to impress upon them their responsibility 
toward their children and toward the Lord— furthermore, 
from this standpoint they might be helped to a 



fuller acknowledgment of the Divine will in respect to 

the child— for sickness or health, for life or death, for 

interests great and small. Approximately forty-two participated 

in the Consecration and its prayer for Divine 

blessing. 

Next came a discourse on Baptism, which was followed 
by the symbolical immersion of forty-three. We 
learned afterward that three Baptist Ministers were in 
the audience and that one of them in particular was very 
angry because we had intimated that water baptism was 
the door into the Baptist church, so that none were permitted 
to partake of the Lord's Supper or be classed as 
members of the Church of Christ unless immersed in 
water. Thus we intimated also that their theory is that 
all others, not immersed, not being members of the Church 
of Christ, cannot be partakers of His blessings— one of 
which is the heavenly estate, and that all unimmersed, 
therefore, are lost, by which Baptists in general must 
mean that Episcopalians, Congregationalists, Methodists, 
Lutherans and others, not immersed, will spend eternity in 
torment. We certainly had no unkind intentions, but on 
the contrary endeavored to choose such words as would 
express the Truth in the least offensive form. One member 
of the church thanked us, rejoicing that her daughter 
had been led by the discourse to give her heart to the 
Lord. 

The church was crowded for the night service, and 
approximately two hundred of the friends of the Truth 
gave place to strangers and constituted an overflow meeting, 
which was held in a Disciple Church nearby. 

AT SACRAMENTO, CAL. 

Tuesday, June 27, found our party at Sacramento, 
where the class of Bible Students numbers about twenty. 
The first session of the morning was a Testimony Meeting. 
This was followed by a talk on Baptism by Brother 
Swingle, three being immersed later in the day. In the 
afternoon we had a symposium, participated in by twelve 
brethren, our own talk in conclusion being based upon a 
colloquy between Moses and the Lord: "If thou go not 
up with us send us not up hence"; and the Lord's reply: 
"My presence shall go with you, and I will give you 
peace." The evening meeting, topic "Hereafter," was 
held in Clunie Theater. A splendid audience of about a 
thousand was present, and the closeness of the attention 
could scarcely be exceeded. We will hope for some good 
results and some encouraging reports. At all events the 
dear friends at Sacramento, ourself and touring party 
may well rest contented that, having done what we could, 
the matter is in the Lord's hands, for His over-ruling according 
to His own will. 

We are writing this report on the day following the 
Sacramento meetings, as we are en route for Portland. 
Mt. Shasta has been in sight for several hours, its snowy 
peak rising fourteen thousand four hundred feet above 



the sea level. Our train stopped for a few minutes at 
Shasta Springs, allowing us to drink of the effervescent 
waters. We anticipated the pleasure of meeting a company 
of friends assembled on the railway platform at 
Ashland, Oregon, but our special arrived nearly two hours 
ahead of schedule, so we missed all but two. One dear 
brother met us at another station. He had ridden nearly 
seven miles on a bicycle. We would have had but a few 
minutes with them, but would have been glad to greet 
them and to receive their greetings in return. We spelled 
our disappointment with an h instead of a d. How wonderful 
the Spirit of the Lord, in His people of every nation, 
kindred, tongue and place— manifesting love for the 
Lord, the Truth and the brethren! 

PORTLAND AND HOMEWARD CONVENTIONS 

We had a fine time at Portland. All along the Pacific 
coast the weather was cool and bracing. The attendance 
at the meetings for the interested in Portland averaged 
about four hundred, while the public service at the Auditorium 
on Thursday night had about fifteen hundred in 

R4862 : page 232 

attendance. Friday night was a question meeting with 
an attendance of about seven hundred. Their questions 
were unusually good, and the entire audience seemed 
deeply interested in the answers. The meeting lasted 
for two hours, some remaining with other questions. 
Brother Bohnet was to follow us the following Sunday. 
We feel sure that the work in Portland is making considerable 
progress. 

TACOMA, WASH. 

Saturday, July 1, was devoted to Tacoma. Nowhere 
have we had more interesting meetings. The Tacoma 
Theatre was crowded, a remarkable thing for a religious 
meeting on Saturday night. About two thousand were 
present. The meetings for the interested were precious 
ones, and attended by about three hundred and fifty. The 
city seemed to have been greatly stirred. 

SEATTLE, WASH. 

We were warmly welcomed here, also. About five 
hundred attended the meetings for the interested. Some 
of these came with our party from Portland and Tacoma. 
Others came to meet us from Victoria and Vancouver. 
We had a splendid season of spiritual fellowship and refreshment, 
which concluded Monday night with a love 
feast, although the convention was carried over a day 
after our leaving. Two of our party remained to give 
addresses. About twenty-five children were presented in 
consecration to the Lord, and eighteen adults were immersed. 



Here again Brother Morton Edgar gave a discourse 
on the Pyramid. Brother Swingle preached the 
baptism sermon, and Brother Ritchie gave the address 
preceding the love feast. 

The Sunday service consisted of a rally and testimony 
meeting, participated in by many. Then followed 
our Sunday morning discourse, which already has been 
published in the newspapers, topic, "The Two Babylons." 
The afternoon meeting for the public drew a crowded 
house, estimated at twenty-two hundred. We had excellent 
attention for two hours. The evening service in the 
same place was for questions, about a thousand being 
present. Questions were good, the interest was excellent, 
many hearing for the first time some of the things of 
the Word of the Lord explained. 

VICTORIA, B.C., CAN. 

Wednesday morning, July 4, we proceeded by steamer 
to Victoria. The ride was a very enjoyable one, cool and 
bracing, and our hearts were full of love for the Lord 

R4863 : page 232 

and for each other, and with a strong, sympathetic love 
for neighbors and enemies. We were thus prepared to 
enjoy all the experiences which came to us in the Lord's 
providence. 

Our arrival at Victoria was in time to enjoy an afternoon 
service with the interested, and to give an evening 
address to the public, on "Hereafter." Our topic to the 
interested was, "We know that we have passed from 
death unto life, because we love the brethren." (I John 3:14.) 
We pointed out that a true loyalty to God includes 
a love for all those whom He has recognized by the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit, and is a part of our 
loyalty to Him and to the Captain of our Salvation. 
We pointed out, also, that the brethren are not always 
lovable, so that the loving of them all implies a considerable 
growth in grace. We noticed that such a growth in 
grace implies frequent polishings and much instruction in 
the School of Christ, and in the fruits and graces of the 
Holy Spirit. We noticed that it is more difficult, sometimes, 
to exercise meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, the fruits and graces of the 
Holy Spirit, toward the brethren than toward others. 
We found from our text that such a development of character, 
in the heart, at least in the will, is essential, and 
that without it we lack a strong proof of our acceptance 
of the Lord as New Creatures in Christ. 

Meetings for the interested numbered about two hundred 
and thirty-five. The address to the public was heard 
with deep interest by about seven hundred and fifty. 

VANCOUVER, B.C., CAN. 



A night's ride on the boat brought us to our next 
convention stop. Here, also, we were warmly and cordially 
greeted by the friends. The class here numbers 
about seventy; about a hundred were in attendance from 
outlying districts, besides about one hundred and seventy 
of our excursion party, making a total of about three 
hundred and fifty. We had a blessed season of fellowship 
together, very interesting testimony meetings, etc. 

The service for the public in the evening had been 
thoroughly advertised, and was held in the city's largest 
auditorium. The numbers present were estimated at 
between three thousand and four thousand. The interest 
was good, notwithstanding the slight interruption by a 
socialist, who wanted his good things right away instead 
of waiting for the Lord's "times of restitution." His disregard 
for the rights of others brought upon him the 
police, who arrested him. We declined, however, to give 
any information against him, so that probably he lost 
his liberty for the one night only. The audience in general 
manifested deep interest in the "Hereafter," as 
presented. We trust that much studying of the Bible and 
prayer will be the result. 

ONE DAY AT CALGARY, ALTA., CAN. 

This is one of the new, booming cities of the Northwest. 
Although nearly everybody there is overcharged 
with a love for money and a desire to make it quickly, in 
real estate, we had an excellent meeting with about a 
thousand in attendance— an excellent showing, under all 
circumstances. We had a very attentive hearing, and we 
trust that good was accomplished. The class here numbers 
about twenty. We had a very interesting, and we 
trust profitable fellowship with the interested. 

UNEXPECTEDLY AT REGINA, SASK., CAN. 

Our train made an unexpected stop at Regina, the 
capital of the Province of Saskatchewan. We arrived 
at 3 p.m. and left at 8:30. The brethren of our party 
were equal to the emergency, and we had a public meeting, 
beginning at 6:45. They engaged the City Hall, had 
bills printed and circulated them far and wide. The result 
was a splendid audience for the little city, and under 
the circumstances. About four hundred and fifty were 
in attendance. The editor of one of the local papers 
introduced us and we had a splendid hearing, from which 
we trust some fruitage will result. The entire matter 
seemed to be of Divine providence. A local minister of 
the Presbyterian church was with us on the platform and 
expressed himself as deeply interested; said that he was 
reading the sermons in the newspapers, and that he had 
read four volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. He 
expressed great satisfaction with what he heard. One 
of our audience came to the platform to shake hands, 
after the service. To our surprise it was the pastor of 



one of the principal Baptist churches of London, England, 
located near the London Tabernacle. It seems remarkable 
that we should meet as we did five thousand miles 
distant from where we both sat on the platform at the 
Guild Hall meeting, held by the Lord Mayor of London 
for the endorsement of President Taft's suggestion of the 

R4863 : page 233 

peace pact between the United States and Great Britain. 

WINNIPEG, MAN., CAN. 

We visited Winnipeg a year and a half ago, and were 
pleased to re-visit it. The class there has grown considerably, 
notwithstanding it has lost numerous of its members 
by removal. It now numbers about thirty-five. 
Meetings for the interested were attended by about four 
hundred, and we believe they were very profitable. About 
thirty were baptized and about twenty-five children presented 
in consecration. The evening meeting for the 
public was a success every way. A good theater had 
been obtained; thorough advertising had been done; a 
large audience of about two thousand was present, and 
we had closest attention to our discourse on "Hereafter." 
In the evening we had a question meeting which had not 
been previously announced. A thousand were in attendance. 
The questions were excellent. At ten o'clock we 
left it to the audience to express themselves by raising 
the hand whether or not they desired the service to be 
continued. About six hundred hands went up, and we 
continued the service until about twenty minutes to 
eleven, we trust with good results. 

AT DULUTH, MINNESOTA 

Tuesday, July 1 1, was spent in Duluth. We were hospitably 
entertained, as usual. The class here numbers 
about twenty; about sixty were present from various 
parts. We missed our trainload of helpers who stopped, 
instead, at Minneapolis, and went from thence to the 
conclusion of their journey, Chicago. At Duluth we had 
a baptism service at which eighteen were immersed. 
Our subject for the occasion was: "If ye then be risen 
with Christ, seek those things which are above, where 
Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection 
on things above, not on things on the earth."— 
Col. 3:1. 

The meeting for the public was a success. The advertising 
had been well and thoroughly done. The audience 
numbered about seven hundred, which for a week night, 
in the summer time, was certainly extraordinary. 

PORT HURON, MICHIGAN 

This stop was not scheduled, but we found that we 



could make it and still be able to keep our appointment 
at Toronto— reaching there on Sunday morning. Although 
the friends at Port Huron had but a brief notice 
of our coming, we received a warm welcome. 

A good crowd was in attendance, some coming from 
Detroit. We had an interesting session in the afternoon 
with the interested, considering the text, "If ye, then, be 
risen with Christ seek those things which are above." 
In the evening the public was fairly well represented— 
about three hundred being present. We considered this 
excellent for a Saturday night meeting that had an 
unfavorable announcement. 

FINALE AT TORONTO 

Our last stop was at Toronto. The convention had 
already been in session a day before we arrived. The 
attendance was nearly six hundred, from all parts of Canada. 
Some said it was the very best convention of their 
lives. The Sunday afternoon session for the public had 
been thoroughly advertised, and the largest auditorium in 
the city had been secured— Massey Hall. It was jammed 
with about four thousand people, and they said that nearly 
two thousand were turned from the doors. Unfortunately, 
the acoustics of the building are not the best, and 
some, unable to hear satisfactorily, in going out disturbed 
others. Nevertheless the meeting, we believe, 
was a grand success. Some testimonies which reached 
our ears implied that the Truth had struck home in some 
instances. The newspapers gave good reports also. 

By special invitation we addressed some Jews at their 
synagogue, where the birth of Dr. Herzl was commemorated 
with Zionist speeches. We addressed them briefly 
along the lines of their meeting. 

The evening meeting was largely Jewish, and the 
attendance was estimated at nearly two thousand. We 
had excellent attention to our subject, "Zionism, the 
Hope of the World." Some brethren, circulating among 
the interested ones, took subscriptions for THE WATCH 
TOWER, and orders for STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES from 
some who had heard for the first time. 

Monday forenoon we gave an address on "Baptism, 
and the New Life." Sixty-three symbolized their consecration 
to the Lord, even unto death. 

We arrived home early July 18. We met the Bethel 
family at noon. Some special flowers had been arranged, 
and as we entered the room all arose and joined in singing, 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian 
love." We gave thanks to the Lord, related briefly our 
experiences, and proceeded with dinner. We expressed 
ourselves as pleased with the trip and also pleased to be 
back again at the Central Depot of the Harvest Work. 



R4864 : page 233 



THE CHURCH NOT A PART OF THE RANSOM 

IN THE SCRIPTURES the word ransom is 

used in two different senses. The one is 

illustrated in the statement, "The man 

Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom 

for all" (I Tim. 2:6); the other in the 

text which says, "I will ransom them from 

the power of the grave." (Hosea 13:14.) 

The Church is not a part of the ransom-price, 

and is not referred to in I Tim. 2:6. 

The ransom-price is one man, our Lord 

Jesus, who laid down that price during the three and a 

half years between His consecration at Jordan and His 

death at Calvary. After He had ascended on high, He 

did not apply the ransom-price for the whole world, nor 

has He yet so applied it. Later, however, He will apply 

it for the whole world. 

But He is now imputing this merit to a little class, so 
that this class may be made acceptable to the Father, to 
participate in the sufferings of Christ and to have fellowship 
with Him also, in His glory, in His great Office as 
Mediator between God and men. Thus the Church becomes 
a part of the Sin-Off ering. This does not imply, 
however, that she has a share in the ransom; for one 
man— not many men— was the ransom-price. The Church's 
share, therefore, as part of the Sin-Offering, is not to be 
confounded with our Lord's ransom-price. Even in the 
sin-offering, the Church does not offer (sacrifice) the 
Sin-Off ering. In the typical picture the high priest offered 
(sacrificed) both the bullock and the goat. It is 
not that the high priest offered the bullock and the underpriests 
offered the goat— as though we offer ourselves. 
The utmost that we can do is to consecrate ourselves to 
be willing sacrifices. It then remains for the High Priest 
to come forth and impute a sufficiency of His merit to 
make an acceptable sacrifice of this class represented by 
the goat. 

Thus it is seen that we do not share in the Sin-Offering 
in the same sense as did our Lord. His offering was of 
two parts, the bullock and the goat— representing His own 
person and the persons of His followers. Where, then, 

R4864 : page 234 

does the Church appear? We answer that, not the Church, 
but the human beings which have offered (presented) 
themselves are represented in the goat. When our sacrifice 
takes place, the personal offering of the High Priest 
having been accepted, we are counted in as a part of His 
sacrifice, and are accepted as His members and His 
Under-Priests. From that time on, as His members, we 
have participation with Him in everything, sacrificially 
and otherwise. But we have no personal identity in the 
Holy. The New Creature that is in the Holy is a member 



of the Body of the High Priest, under His robe, 
under His merit, in the Divine arrangement. 

OUR LORD'S WORK AND THAT OF THE CHURCH 

Nowhere in the Scriptures is the thought presented 
that we, the Church, will follow our Lord into the Most 
Holy, as under-priests, and there sprinkle our blood in the 
Most Holy, as the typical high priest sprinkled the blood 
of the bullock. On the contrary, the high priest alone 
sprinkled, first, the blood of the bullock and, later, the 
blood of the goat. Consequently, we, as individuals, have 
nothing to do with the antitypical sprinkling of the blood. 
Our individuality, as human beings, is lost as we become 
members of the great High Priest and take His Name. 
But we do not mean to say that we shall have no individuality 
beyond the veil; for the Scriptures assure us 
that we shall be like Him. (I John 3:2.) The thought is 
that we shall have no individuality in respect to the glorious 
Office. There is but the one Melchizedek Priest. All 
others are lost sight of. There will be not only a Priestly, 
but also a Kingly Office, both of which we shall share in our 
relationship to Him. But any association that we have in 
the work of Sin-Offering, from the Divine standpoint, is 
all accredited to Christ and included in the work of 
Christ; and we are members of Him. It is to be remembered 
that the participation of the Church in the Sin-Offering 
is not, in any sense of the word, a necessity for 
the satisfaction of Justice, but because the Divine Plan 
has been so arranged as to permit us to share with Christ 
His glorious, higher nature and work. The participation 
in the suffering is purely a favor to the Church and is 
entirely unnecessary. It is, therefore, a wonderful favor 
bestowed upon us, that we might be privileged to be associated 
with Christ. His death and His alone was necessary 
for the satisfaction of Divine Justice. 

It is important that we have clearly in mind the difference 
between the work of presenting our bodies as 
living sacrifices, and our Lord's work, as the great High 
Priest, in offering us sacrificially. The two acts seem to 
be distinctly separate, as shown in the type. There the 
goat was brought and presented at the door of the Tabernacle 
and tied, picturing the Covenant of Sacrifice 
which we make. (Psa. 50:5; 1 18:27.) But the goat had 
not yet been offered, and no one but the high priest was 
qualified to make the offering. The work of the high 
priest in killing the goat was the only offering, in the 
Scriptural sense of the word. 

Even after we have presented ourselves acceptably to 
the Father, and after we have become New Creatures, 
living members of Christ's Body and members of the 
Royal Priesthood, there is a continuous work going on— 
the presenting of ourselves daily. So the Lord Jesus has 
continued the offering all through the Gospel Age. At 
the end of this Age, He will finally complete the offering, 
which will all be considered as one; and the New 



Creatures will all be admitted to the Most Holy as members 

of His Body. It is important that we keep in mind 

that the sacrifice which God has accepted must continue 

to be presented. If ever our Lord, through our unfaithfulness, 

should abandon the sacrifice and let go of us, we 

would fail utterly. The sacrifice would be incomplete. 

THE WORK OF THE SCAPEGOAT CLASS 

If it be true that the Church has no merit and that the 
Church's sacrifice does not enter meritoriously into the 
matter of the satisfaction of Justice, that it is merely the 
merit of Christ that does so, and that we disappear, as individuals, 
after consecrating ourselves, what shall we say 
in respect to the Great Company and the fact that the 
iniquities and trespasses of the people were laid upon the 
scapegoat, which typifies that class? Is there more efficacy 
and merit in the scapegoat than in the Lord's goat? 

We answer, the atonement for sin was accomplished 
by the sacrifices of the Day of Atonement, and these sacrifices 
were only the two— the bullock and the Lord's goat. 
With the blood of these two animals atonement was made 
for the sins of the priests and the Levites and all the 
people. 

When the two Sin-Offerings were accepted, the atonement 
for sin was finished. In the antitype, this will mean 
that the life of the man Adam and his race is purchased 
back from condemnation. The "great company" class had 
neither part nor lot in the Sin-Off ering. They had the 
opportunity, but they failed to go on until the sacrifice 
was completed; therefore, they failed to be of the priesthood. 
Those sins of the people that were not atoned for 
by the high priest, with the blood of the bullock and of the 
goat, were not Adamic sin. The question, then, is, What 
sins were they? We answer that the sin not atoned for 
was conduct that was reprehensible, sins that had been 
committed with more or less intelligence or responsibility, 
as, for instance, the killing of the Prophets and the crucifixion 
of our Lord. Although there was a certain amount 
of ignorance, nevertheless the Jews and their leaders 
were largely responsible for the death of the Prophets and 
of our Lord. So there have been many similar instances 
of violence against the Lord's saints, down through this 
Gospel Age; and in proportion to the intelligence of the 
guilty, the world has been more or less responsible for all 
these violations of Justice. Thus no one is released from 
responsibility who does anything against any of these 
"little ones," as the Lord calls them. 

In the Lord's arrangement these sins of the world, the 
sins outside of sins of ignorance, sins against the Lord's 
people, must be settled for and cancelled in the "great time 
of trouble" upon the world. The Lord's arrangement is 
that the "great company" class shall have a special trial 
and testing and shall be forced forward in the time of 
trouble, inasmuch as they did not carry out their covenant 
of sacrifice willingly. Hence the Divine provision that 



their flesh must be destroyed in this manner. Apparently 
the Lord would say, "We will allow this 'great company' 
class to participate in this time of trouble and suffering 
upon the world, so that the world will have that much 
less to suffer later." This principle would apply to the 
"great company" class all down through the Age. All 
must have had their flesh destroyed by suffering. But 
we know that they have been few in number in the past 
as compared with the number in the end of this Age. 

We must remember that the types of the Law Covenant 
were arranged to represent matters as they would 
be seen by us in the conclusion of the antitypical Day of 
Atonement, and not to represent the things as they would 
be seen while they were in progress. In the type, first, 
the Levites were chosen, and afterward some were 
selected to be priests. Just so with us. Today we might 
be of the priestly class; and later we might lose our standing 
and become merely Levites, of the servant class. We 

R4864 : page 235 

might, for a time, be of the "Lord's goat" class, and, 
through carelessness in performing our sacrifices, lose 
our place in the sacrificial class. Some one might take 
our crown and we might be thus relegated to the "great 
company." So these things represent the results as they 
will be in the end of this Age. There will be a "great 
company" class, which will bear certain iniquities. 

WE DO NOT ENTER THE "HOLY" AS INDIVIDUALS 

In the type the under priests were representatives of 
the high priest in that they were his sons, his family, his 
body. When he had finished his sacrifice of the bullock, 

R4865 : page 235 

he went into the "Most Holy," typically representing 
the ascension of our Lord and the Father's manifested 
acceptance of the Church sacrificed at Pentecost 
and since. When the sacrifice of those who are of 
the consecrated class is accepted of the Lord, then it is 
true of this class, "Ye are dead." The life of the antitypical 
goat is ended. "Your [new] life is hid in Christ 
by God."-Col. 3:3. 

We have not entered the Holy as individuals. The 
privileges and blessings which we enjoy are ours as members 
of the Body of Christ. Whenever the Scripture 
speaks of the Priest, it refers to but one Priest. The 
others were privileged to assist, but neither to go into the 
Tabernacle, individually, on the Day of Atonement, nor 
to sprinkle the blood nor to offer the Sin-Off ering. 

We have seen that those who are of the "little flock," 
the Royal Priesthood, might, through failure to live up 
to the terms of their consecration, be rejected from the 
priesthood and become merely of the servant class, ordinary 



Levites. The question might arise, Could these, 

after being relegated to the "great company" class, be reinstated 

and accepted to the priestly class again? Our 

answer is, No. This picture of the Atonement Day shows 

the matter as it will be in the conclusion of the antitypical 

Day of Atonement. God, who knows the heart, never 

relegates any one to the "servant" class until that person 

shows that he has not the proper spirit to be a true "overcomer." 

The decision being once given, the Divine wisdom, 

foreknowing and foreseeing, would not reverse it. 

He could not err in His judgment that the person would 

not be fit for a place in the Bride class. 

LET US NOT JUDGE ONE ANOTHER 

Those who are of the sacrificing class should know 
that they are sacrificing and what is their relationship to 
the Lord. While they cannot be so positive about others, 
yet they ought to know about themselves. Concerning 
those who will be of the "great company" class they may 
not be able to judge. It would seem, however, that there 
would be certain evidences by which we might have some 
measure of judgment on the subject; as, for instance, in 
Revelation 19, it is shown that there are those who are 
disposed to remain in Babylon after having heard the call 
to "come out of her." We may infer that any brother or 
sister in Babylon who understands the call of God should 
obey. It is the duty of all those who appreciate the light 
of present Truth to do this. Any of these who, under 
these circumstances, should continue in Babylon indefinitely, 
would be there probably because of their failure to 
have sufficient courage to be sacrificed, because desiring 
the approval of men, or family, or whatever. These things 
would stand in their way and hinder them from attaining 
the glory, honor and immortality with their Lord. Such 
will not be permitted to enter into the Kingdom glory, 
for they have not a sufficiency of the spirit of overcomers. 
They have some of this spirit, but not sufficient; they 
are lukewarm. 

It is very improper, however, for the Lord's people to 
give time and attention to specially judging people. If we 
know of a dear brother or sister in the nominal church, 
we could wish that he or she would come out. But we 
are to remember that we are not sufficiently able to judge 
to say that he or she is of the "great company" class. 
Some persons who have been quite awhile under just such 
conditions have stepped out suddenly and shown wonderful 
courage thereafter. 



R4865 : page 235 

BLESSED ARE THE PERSECUTED 
--JEREMIAH 37.-AUGUST 20.- 



"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for My 
sake. "--Matt. 5:11. 

PERSECUTION implies that the person or 
thing persecuted possessed some qualities or 
powers that are feared. When the persecution 
is for religion it proves that the 
persecutor realizes his own weakness to 
meet the arguments in a more rational way. 
It implies either that the persecutors are 
weak, or that the arguments of the persecuted 
are strong. 

There have been persecutions from the 
earliest dawn of history. Cain persecuted his brother Abel 
to the death because the latter was right and the persecutor 
was wrong. It is safe to say that the persecutors 
are always wrong even if we cannot say that the persecuted 
are always right. The principle of persecution is a 
wrong one. Whoever, therefore, finds himself disposed 
to persecute another, either with physical torture or by 
harassings of slander and epithets should immediately inquire 
respecting his own heart condition, for there is 
surely something wrong. Whoever witnesses persecution, 
either physical or slanderous, should immediately decide 
that the persecutor is in error and should give his sympathy 
to the persecuted if he be able to do no more. He 
will thus be cultivating in his own mind a principle of 
justice— righteousness— which will make for his own 
character-development. 

FAITHFUL JEREMIAH PERSECUTED 

Today's study draws our attention to the persecutions 
endured by one of the Lord's faithful Prophets. He was 
a patriot in the highest sense of the word, namely, in that 
he looked for the highest good of his nation along the 
lines of Divine wisdom. His principle was "God First," 
and he knew that only this procedure could bring Divine 
blessings to his nation. He was of course misunderstood 
by the king and his counsellors. They did not like him 
because he told the truth, and that fearlessly— they preferred 
prophets who would tell them of their own wisdom, 
greatness and the success of their policies. 

At the time of this study Zedekiah was on the throne. 
He was a vassal to Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Chaldeans, 
whose seat of empire was to the north. Hoping 
for assistance from Egypt on the south, Judah revolted, 
contrary to the warning of the Lord through Jeremiah. 
The Chaldeans laid siege, and the Egyptian army started 
for their deliverance. 

The siege was temporarily raised and the hopes of 

R4865 : page 236 



Judah rose. Nevertheless, Jeremiah persisted in declaring 
as at first that the end of the kingdom was near, that they 
would be swallowed up in Babylon. 

Selfwilled, the king and his princes esteemed Jeremiah 
as a traitor to the nation, and their opponent. Alas! they 
should have realized that the nation was God's and that 
Jeremiah alone was standing faithfully with the great 
King. 

When the Chaldean army had withdrawn from the 
siege, Jeremiah concluded to cast in his lot with some of 
the nation living outside the city walls— in the portion of 
the tribe of Benjamin. Attempting to carry out this 
program, he was arrested on the charge of disloyalty, that 
he had given himself over to co-work with the Chaldeans 
against the interests of his own land. Although he denied 
the charge he was put into prison. 

Jerusalem was honeycombed with underground cisterns 
and vaults, arched overhead, and these were called 
"cabins." They were designed to be reservoirs for water 
in time of drouth or in time of siege. The bottoms of 
these "cabins," or cisterns, after the removal of the water, 
were frequently deep with mud and slime. The next 
chapter tells us of the terrible condition of the dungeon 
into which Jeremiah was put. We read, "They let down 
Jeremiah with cords, and in the dungeon there was no 
water but mire; so Jeremiah sank in the mire." When 
finally they drew him out, we read they took "old cast-off 
clouts and rotten rags and let them down by cords into 
the dungeon to Jeremiah," who put them under his arms 
and was drawn up. In this dungeon the Prophet remained 
"many days." 

FEAR OF SUFFERING DID NOT DETER THE PROPHET 

Not from sympathy, not from righteousness, but from 
a desire to inquire of the Prophet respecting the future, 
the king had him taken out of the dungeon. However 
much the king despised Jeremiah and refused to recognize 
his words, he, nevertheless, in his heart, realized 
that he was a servant of Jehovah, and he feared that his 
message was true. 

The Prophet's courage in answering the king's question 
is very praiseworthy. He altered not a word of 
what he had previously told. In a kind way he urged the 
king not to heed the contrary prophecies, stating that his 
own dire statements must be true because they were the 
Word of the Lord. 

At his entreaty he was no longer put down into the 
mud bottom of the cistern, but was allowed to remain a 
prisoner in the court of the prison, and was granted daily 
a loaf of bread for his sustenance. 

When thinking of prisons and of their forms of persecution, 
physical and mental, it is well that we remember 

R4866 : page 236 



that the mental attitude of the one persecuted has much 
to do with the amount of the sufferings. As, for instance, 
Jeremiah in his dungeon, with all those unhappy surroundings, 
had a mind at peace with God, whereas the very 
king who caused him to be put in prison, a little later, 
captured by the Chaldeans, had his sight destroyed and 
was put into a dungeon. Poor man! Disappointed in 
everything, with no human sympathy and no fellowship 
with the Almighty, his must have been a terrible dungeon 
experience. 

THE GRACE OF GOD GIVES POWER 

We are reminded of others who were put into prison 
for righteousness' sake— Saints Peter and John, Saints 
Paul and Silas. The world can never understand the 
power which, operating in these men, enabled them to rejoice 
in persecutions. With their backs bleeding from 
the whips of torture and hands and feet fast in the stocks, 
most uncomfortable, they were yet able to sing praise to 
God for the privilege they enjoyed of suffering with 
Christ, suffering for righteousness' sake, and thus filling 
up a share of the sufferings of Christ. Such characters 
we are to emulate. We are to understand that such joy 
and peace in the midst of sorrow and persecution can 
come only from the Lord. 

The Master's words in our text apply yesterday, today 
and tomorrow— so long as the reign of evil is permitted 
—"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and 
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you 
falsely, for My sake." But to be worthy of this blessing, 
and to receive it means to develop and possess a character 
which the enemies of righteousness would deem worthy 
of persecution. The Scriptures declare that persecution 
will be the portion of the faithful people of God throughout 
this Age— until the establishment of the Kingdom of 
Messiah. Under the new regime suffering for righteousness 
will not be possible. Mark the Apostle's words, 
"Whosoever will live godly in this present time shall suffer 
persecution." To live godly means, not merely to abstain 
from vicious and overt sin, but to be a hero in the 
strife, a defender of the right and an opposer of the 
wrong— a servant of righteousness, a soldier of the cross. 



R4866 : page 236 

DARK PROPHECIES FULFILLED 
-JEREMIAH 39.-AUGUST 27.- 

"Be sure your sin will find you out."— Num. 32:23. 

THE DARK PROPHECIES which the Lord 
sent through Jeremiah the Prophet finally 



reached fulfillment. The besieging army of 

the Chaldeans, after a year and a half of 

siege, finally, with battering rams, succeeded 

in making a breach in the wall 

through which an entrance was effected 

and the city forced to capitulate. King 

Zedekiah and his small army escaped toward 

the south, going in the direction of the Jordan, 

but they were soon overtaken by the Chaldeans. 

Nebuchadnezzar, in person, was some miles distant from 

Jerusalem, at Riblah, and thither Zedekiah, the royal prisoner, 

was taken for sentence— to be punished for having 

violated the contract with Nebuchadnezzar, who really 

placed him upon the throne. 

The punishment was after the manner of the time, illustrated 
on some of the victory tablets which still remain. 
The king's eyes were put out and, a blind prisoner, he was 
taken to Babylon. Thus were fulfilled two very striking 
prophecies which, until fulfilled, seemed quite contradictory. 
In this we get a lesson of how carefully we should 
study Divine prophecy, and how faithfully we should trust 
its every detail if we would receive light instead of 
darkness. 

One of these prophecies respecting Zedekiah is found 
in Ezekiel 12:10-13. The other is found in Jeremiah 32:3-5. 
Ezekiel declared that king Zedekiah would 
be taken to Babylon a captive, and that there he 
would live and there die, and yet again declared that he 
would never see the city, apparently a contradiction. Jeremiah 
predicted the downfall of Jerusalem, declaring that 

R4866 : page 237 

Zedekiah would speak with Nebuchadnezzar mouth to 
mouth and see his eyes. This seemed to contradict 
Ezekiel's statement, for if he would speak with the king 
mouth to mouth and see him eye to eye, how would it be 
possible that he would not see the city of Babylon? 

The fulfillment met all the requirements. King 
Zedekiah saw Nebuchadnezzar and spoke to him at Riblah 
in Palestine. His sight was there taken from him and he 
was taken a prisoner to Babylon. He lived and died in 
Babylon but saw it not. 

"With repentance his only companion he lay, 
And a dismal companion was he." 

CRUELTIES OF THE PAST 

"In the Bas Reliefs, representing the capture of Lachish 
by Sennacherib, the prisoners are represented, some 
pegged down to the ground to be flayed alive— others having 
their eyes put out. In one of the sculptures at Khossabad, 
Sargon represents himself in person holding a 
prisoner by a thong attached to a ring passed through his 
under lip. The victim kneels before him, while with a 



spear he pierces his eyes. Others are chained and, with 
hooks through their lips, are held awaiting their turn. In 
other cases the king slays the prisoner with his own 
spear. In another an executioner flays a captive chained 
to a wall. It was especially in Persia that the cruel practice 
of blinding prisoners prevailed, and it is mentioned 
by most Greek historians. In Turkey it was formerly 
the custom for a Sultan on his accession either to slaughter 
or blind his half brothers that he might have no rivals 
or dangerous ones near his throne. In modern Persia the 
Shahs have invariably, even up to the present century, put 
out the eyes of all their brothers who did not escape in 
time to distant provinces."— Canon Tristran. 

Our forefathers were once savage and presumably as 
cruel and as heartless as those described by the Canon. 
Thank God for a civilization which to a large extent has 
lifted "Christendom" to a higher plane of civilization— to 
greater moderation in dealing with foes— to a greater degree 
of human sympathy! Thank God that the prisons of 
today are reformatories instead of dungeons! Thank 
God that we are gradually realizing that as a race we 
were born in sin and shapen in iniquity! (Psa. 51:5.) 
The realization of this is helping to make us sympathetic 
to the depraved and degraded— not to the extent of approving 
their wrong, but to the extent of attempting to 
intelligently assist them to better mental views and to 
better self-control. 

TO WHAT SHOULD THE CREDIT BE GIVEN? 

To what, therefore, shall we give the credit of our 
progress and civilization? We cannot give the credit to 
any church, sect or party. We must honestly acknowledge 
that every sect, in its turn, has displayed more or less 
of bitterness, bigotry, superstition and persecution— contrary 
even to its own standards. In the last analysis we 
must admit that the great influence which has moulded 
the civilization of our day has come to us from the words 
and example of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:6.) 
The great Truths which He uttered have come echoing 
down the centuries, speaking righteousness, peace and 
love, even for our enemies. Everywhere His "Wonderful 
Words of Life" have made an impression, and here 
and there have effected the transformation of character. 

We should more and more feel our obligation to the 
great truths which come to us from the Bible, and less 
and less obligation to the sects and parties which have 
quarrelled and battled over those Words of Life. 

Thus, gradually, we will come to discern the truth of 
the Bible declaration, namely, that there is but one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, and one 
Church of the living God, the Church of the First-Borns, 
whose names are written in heaven. These, found 
scattered in all the denominations and outside of all, constitute 
the saintly few who have the promise of the First 



Resurrection, as joint-heirs with the Messiah in His glorious 
Kingdom which will soon be established in the earth 
and enforce righteousness. 



R4867 : page 237 

"OVERTURNED UNTIL HE COME" 

--EZEKIEL 21:25-27-SEPT. 3D.- 

"Depart from evil and do good; seek 
peace and pursue it."— Psalm 34:14. 

AT THE GIVING of the Law God plainly told 

the nation of Israel the terms and conditions 

upon which they were received as 

His people. If they would be obedient to 

the Divine requirements all things would 

work well with them. They would be rich, 

prosperous, the blessed nation of the Lord. 

But if, on the contrary, they should neglect 

the Divine Statutes and become idolatrous, 

the Lord would oppose them and would 

deliver them into the hand of their enemies for chastisement, 

and "seven times" would pass over them.— 

Lev. 26:18,21,24,28. 

God of course knew the end from the beginning. 
Nevertheless, Divine patience was manifested throughout 
the experiences of the nation leading up to the overthrow 
of Zedekiah's government— he being the last king of the 
line of David to sit on the throne. We have seen how 
evil followed good, in the kings and in the practices of 
the nation; and how Divine providence chastened the 
people, yet repeatedly brought them back from idolatry. 
Now had come the time for the complete overthrow of 
the national polity, for a period of "seven times," or 
seven years, as foretold by Moses. In this case, however, 
the years must have been symbolic, because frequently 
they had captivities of more than seven years. Accepting, 
then, as a fact, that these seven years or "times" were 
symbolic years, how long a period would they indicate? 

It is an accepted fact that in Bible symbolism each 
day represents a year; and the Jewish year had twelve 
months of thirty days each. Thus each year represented, 
symbolically, three hundred and sixty years; and the seven 
years of chastisement represented 7 x 360 = 2,520 years. 

When, therefore, we read that the kingdom would be 
"overturned, overturned," until Messiah should come, we 
are to understand that the period of the overturned condition, 
as a whole, would be 2,520 years, beginning with 
the time the crown was taken from Zedekiah— in 606 
B.C. (70 years prior to the proclamation of Cyrus permitting 
the people to return— 536 B.C.). 



A LOOK AT THE FACTS 

It is always interesting and profitable to the students 
of the Bible to note the fulfilment of Divine predictions. 
It establishes faith, it makes all of God's promises more 
real; it assures us of Divine supervision in respect to 

R4867 : page 238 

Israel's affairs, and thus gives ground for confidence also 
in the supervision of the affairs of Spiritual Israel— the 
Church. 

As we look back along the aisles of history we see the 
fulfilment of the declaration that the nation of Israel 
would be overturned and overturned. After its restoration 
by Cyrus, B.C. 536, it continued to have a sort of 
national existence for 600 years; yet in all that time it had 
not a king of the line of David, the line of Divine promise, 
and it was ruled over by the various adjoining nations; 
as it is written, "Jerusalem shall be trodden down 
of the Gentiles until the times (years) of the Gentiles be 
filled full." Some may point to the Maccabean kings. We 
answer that they were not Divinely appointed nor of the 
royal family. Does some one else remind us of the reign 
of Herod at the time of Jesus, at the beginning of Anno 
Domini? We reply that the Herods were not of the line 
of David— they were Edomites, or of the Esau branch, 
who ruled over the children of Israel as the representatives 
of the great Roman Empire. 

THE TIMES OF THE GENTILES 

When God removed the typical kingdom of Israel and 
His typical throne in the world, as represented by David's 
family, he gave over the earthly dominion to the Gentiles; 
and this lease of power, as represented in Daniel's prophecy, 
was to continue for "seven times"— 2,520 years. In 
other words, during the same period that Israel would 
be having "seven times" of tribulation and subjection, the 
Gentiles would be having "seven times" of prosperity, and 
both will terminate at the same time— in 2,520 years from 
B.C. 606-October, A.D. 1914, the close of the Gentile 
Times. If any be disposed to dispute the exactness of these 
figures we need have no quarrel, but simply say that any 
difference in the calculation must of necessity be but 
small— possibly one year, possibly twenty years— but in so 
long a period how trifling would be such a variation. 

What we are specially interested in is the facts of the 
case, and what will occur when this long period terminates. 

(1) The facts are as already noted in Israel's case, 
a national subserviency for nearly seven hundred years, 
and a national destruction for more than 1,800 years; and 
so far as the Gentiles are concerned, a prosperity for 
2,520 years, as follows:— for (a) Babylon, the first Universal 
Empire; (b) Medo-Persia, the second Universal 
Empire; (c) Grecia, the third Universal Empire, and (d) 



Rome, the fourth Universal Empire. According to the 
Scriptural view of the matter this fourth Universal Empire 
is still represented in the Papacy and the various so-called 
Christian governments of the world. These have 
practiced and prospered during this long period of Israel's 
subjection and the overturned condition of God's typical 
kingdom. 

(2) The next thing in order, following the expiration 
of the "seven times" (2,520 years, to 1915 A.D.), 
will be the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom and its 
recognition by the children of Israel, and the blessing of 
all the families of the earth. 

The date, October, 1914, and the setting up of Christ's 
Kingdom, let us remember, have nothing whatever to do 
with the burning of the world, as some surmise. On the 
contrary, they have to do with the blessing of the world; 
they mark the beginning of what St. Peter styles "The 
times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken 
by the mouth of all His Holy Prophets since the world 
began. "--Acts 3:19-23. 



R4867 : page 238 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

ANCIENT WORTHIES NOT REPRESENTED IN COURT 

QUESTION. -Were the Ancient Worthies in 
the condition represented by the Court of 
the Tabernacle? 

Answer.— In their day the antitypical 
Priest had not come and the antitypical 
Tabernacle and Court had not been established; 
hence, they could not be in it. 
But according to their hearts, as expressed 
in their conduct, they must have been members 
of the household of faith. It is our 
understanding that, ultimately, they may be granted a 
place with, and as a part of, the Great Company, the antitypical 
Levites of the antitypical Court condition. 



"OFFERING" USED IN TWO DIFFERENT SENSES 

Question.— "For the bodies of those beasts, whose 
blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for 
sin, are burned without the camp." (Heb. 13:11.) Would 
this show that the Sin-Offering is made in the antitypical 
Most Holy? 

Answer.— In general those who have translated 
anything in the Bible respecting the Tabernacle have 
seemingly been very careless in the use of the terms 
Holy, Most Holy, Holy place, etc. They did not discern 



that these terms were used in different senses by the Jews, 

in connection with different portions of the Tabernacle. 

Correctly translated, our text reads: "The bodies of those 

beasts, whose blood is taken into the Most Holy as an 

offering for sin, are burned without the camp." We must 

remember that the word "offering" is Scripturally used in 

two different senses. In one sense of the word, our Lord 

offered himself at baptism, when He gave Himself to do 

the Father's will. That was His offering of Himself, His 

gift, when He presented Himself at Jordan. He finished 

the offering of His gift when He laid down His life on 

Calvary; and that life, laid down on Calvary, is an appropriate 

Sin-Offering. But it remained for the High 

Priest to ascend up on high, there to appear in the presence 

of God for us, to make application of the Sin-Offering. 

The sprinkling of the blood on the Mercy Seat was 

done in the Most Holy. But the presentation of that Sin-Offering 

was made at Jordan— or, in the type, when the 

bullock was slain. 



THE TWO ALTARS CONTRASTED 

Question.— "We have an altar whereof they have 
no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle." (Heb. 13:10.) 
What is meant by this passage? 

Answer.— In this passage the Apostle is contrasting 
the Levitical priesthood, their services in the Tabernacle, 
and the table in the Holy at which they ate the shew 
bread, with the antitypical Tabernacle and its better table. 
In this connection he points out that, so far as the priesthood 
of Aaron was concerned, not only could the Church 
not be priests, but our Lord Jesus could not be; for this 
priesthood sprang from Levi, and Jesus was from another 
tribe, Judah. Therefore, if Jesus was on earth he could 
not be a priest. But now God had intended another order 
of Priests, namely, the Melchizedek Order, saying to 
David, "The Lord hath sworn and will not repent: Thou 
art a priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek." 
(Psa. 1 10:4; Heb. 5:6.) It is evident, then, that if Christ 
was to be a Priest after the Order of Melchizedek, He 
would not be a Priest after the order of Aaron. 

When the Apostle has proved that we, as priests, have 

R4868 : page 239 

no right to intrude into the typical Holy or Most Holy, he 
then shows that they, of the house of Aaron, have no 
right to our place. They have no right to come into this 
antitypical Holy, which we enter. If they become members 
of the Royal Priesthood, they may enter; but their 
standing as members of the Aaronic priesthood does not 
give them the privilege. Thus he shows a discrimination 
between these two priesthoods, the Aaronic and the 
Melchizedek. We have the "better sacrifices"; we have 



the better services. We have, on the higher plane, everything 
that they had, typically, on the lower plane. 



INCENSE ABODE IN THE MOST HOLY 

Question.— Was it necessary that the incense should 
precede the high priest into the Most Holy when he went 
in to offer the blood of the goat? 

Answer.— The offering of the incense originally on 
the Day of Atonement by the high priest gained for him 
recognition by the Almighty, and manifested his worthiness 
to appear in the presence of God. Therefore, there 
was no need of his offering any other sacrifice than this. 
All the work of Atonement was divided into two parts. 
If the type had shown the under-priests as going into the 
Most Holy, then it would seem to have been necessary for 
each to stop and offer incense before entering. 

We are represented, not individually, but as members 
of the Body of Christ. So it would not be necessary for 
the incense to be offered more than the one time. It 
would seem, however, that the incense abode in the Holy 
and Most Holy. The sacrifice is still appreciated by the 
Heavenly Father, and always will be. 



BOTH HAD TO DO WITH JUSTICE 

Question.— In the type, was the incense that which 
satisfied Divine Justice? If not, how is the satisfaction 
of Justice accomplished, and why was incense burned? 

Answer.— Both the incense and the blood had to 
do with the satisfaction of Justice. We read that the incense 
must cover the Mercy-Seat. (Lev. 16:13.) In 
other words, unless the incense had gone forth the high 
priest would not have lived. This shows that unless our 
Lord had rendered up His human life satisfactorily He 
would have forfeited His right to life. In consecration 
He had agreed to this and had surrendered His earthly 
life-rights. If He proved faithful to His engagement, He 
would receive a higher life beyond the veil. So the satisfaction 
of Justice, represented in type by the incense preceding 
the high priest beyond the veil, would be a satisfaction 
for Himself and would testify that He had faithfully 
fulfilled the required conditions. 

But as for the satisfaction of the sins of the Church 
and of the world, this is accomplished subsequently, not by 
the incense, but by the blood. 



page 239 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTION 



MOUNTAIN LAKE PARK, MD„ SEPT. 1 TO 11, 1911 

ROUND TRIP RAILROAD RATES GRANTED 

Mt. Lake Park, Md., is a well-known Summer Resort 
where Camp Meetings, Bible Conferences, etc., are frequently 
held. It is located in the top of the Allegheny Mountains, on 
the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad. Naturally the B.&O.R.R. 
offer the best rates, consequently visitors do best in purchasing 
the round-trip tickets via this road. Fortunately it is an 
extensive system, extending from Philadelphia in the East to 
St. Louis, Chicago and Cleveland in the West, and passing 
through many important cities. We quote below the special 
rates granted by the B.&O.R.R. Those residing at other 
points should consider the advisability of buying regular 
tickets to B.&O.R.R. stations, and there purchasing 
"I.B.S.A." Excursion tickets. Should your ticket agent 
not know of the special rates quoted below, ask him to inquire 
of his General Passenger Agent at his earliest possible convenience:- 

DELAWARE Laurel 7.10 

Newark $9.10 Mt. Airy 6.10 

Wilmington 9.45 Relay 7.10 

Rockville 6.10 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Rohersville 5.05 

Washington 6.60 Sykesville 6.40 

Washington Grove 5.95 

ILLINOIS Washington Junction 5.05 

Chicago 15.50 

NEW YORK 
INDIANA New York City 

Auburn Junction 13.05 (Through us) 12.90 

Aurora 11.85 

Garrett 13.10 OHIO 

Jeffersonville 14.35 Akron 8.15 

Lawrenceburg 1 1.75 Athens 6.40 

New Albany 14.35 Barnesville 5.95 

Seymour 13.65 Bellaire 4.87 

Wellsboro 15.10 Blanchester 9.95 

Cambridge 6.65 

KENTUCKY Canal Dover 7.05 

Louisville 14.35 Canton 8.15 

Chicago Junction 9.40 

MARYLAND Chillicothe 8.20 

Aberdeen 8.30 Cincinnati 11.10 

Annapolis 7.60 Cleveland 9.00 

Baltimore 7.40 Columbus 8.75 

Barnesville 5.60 Cuyahoga Falls 8.15 

Bradshaw 7.90 Defiance 11.95 

Brunswick 4.90 Deshler 11.20 

Cumberland 1.80 Dundas 7.20 

Ellicott City 6.95 Elyria 9.25 

Frederick 5.50 Fostoria 10.50 

Gaithersburg 5.95 Gallipolis 7.95 

Germantown 5.80 Girard 8.15 



Hagerstown 5.50 

Havre de Grace 8.30 

Hyattsville 6.80 

Keedysville 5.20 

page 239 

Jackson 7.70 

Kent 8.15 

Lorain 9.45 

Loveland 10.40 

Mansfield 9.40 

Marietta 5.30 

Massillon 7.55 

Medina 8.60 

Midland City 9.80 

Monroeville 9.75 

Mount Sterling 9.15 

Mount Vernon 8.90 

Newark 8.15 

New Philadelphia 7.05 

Portsmouth 9.00 

Ravenna 8.15 

Sabina 9.45 

Sandusky 10.20 

Shelby 9.40 

Sterling 8.25 

Tiffin 10.15 

Uhrichsville 6.75 

Warren 8.15 

Warwick 7.90 

Washington C.H 9.15 

Wellston 7.40 

West Farmington 8.55 

Wilmington 9.80 

Youngstown 8.15 

Zanesville 7.40 



Grafton 9.00 

Greenfield 8.90 

Hamden 7.35 

Hillsboro 10.55 



Foxburg 8.90 

Hyndman 2.20 

Johnstown 4.60 

McKeesport 5.85 

Meyersville 2.90 

New Castle 7.65 

Philadelphia 10.20 

Pittsburg 6.30 

Scott Haven 5.35 

Uniontown 4.25 

Washington 5.70 

West Newton 5.40 

VIRGINIA 

Norfolk 10.60 

Old Point Comfort 10.60 

Portsmouth 10.60 

Strasburg Junction 6.35 

Winchester 5.75 



PENNSYLVANIA 

Berlin 3.30 

Braddock 6.00 

Butler 7.55 

Chester 9.85 

Connellsville 4.65 

EllwoodCity 7.65 



WEST VIRGINIA 

Berkeley Springs 3.75 

Cameron 3.90 

Charlestown 5.05 

Clarksburg 2.40 

Fairmont 2.45 

Grafton 1.75 

Harpers Ferry 4.70 

Huntington 8.80 

Kenova 9.05 

Mannington 2.95 

Martinsburg 4.15 

Morgantown 3.30 

Moundsville 4.40 

Parkersburg 4.85 

Point Pleasant 7.50 

Shenandoah Junction 4.45 

Wheeling 4.75 



Other railroads have granted our Convention round-trip 
tickets for one fare and a half. These tickets are straight and 
require no validation or stamping at destination. Some railroads 
grant a "Summer Tourist Excursion" rate to Mt. Lake 
Park from distant points, such as California, Texas, etc. 
Inquire fully before purchasing tickets. 

Chicago friends expect to have a special train. There will 
quite probably be a special car from St. Louis, Mo., and other 
large cities— Pittsburg, Cleveland, etc. Boston friends expect 
to come to New York by boat, here to join New York City 



Delegation on a special train, due to leave New York City 
Thursday morning, August 31. Bring with you plenty of 
warm clothing. 

For particulars re board and lodging see second page. 

B.&O.R.R. folders, with Convention Program, we will 
supply on request. 

Address all communications to "Entertainment Committee, 
I.B.S.A.," 17 Hicks St., Brooklyn, N.Y. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Mountain Lake Park (Md.) Convention 338 

How the New Creature Fulfils the Law 339 

The Jews Under a Second Condemnation 339 

"Who Shall Deliver Me?" 340 

Keeping Our Garments White 341 

The Precious Blood Alone Can Cleanse 342 

How to Locate Ourselves 342 

Evidences of Our Acceptance by the Father 343 

Evidences of Backward Leanings 343 

The Christian's Attitude in the Duties of Life. ...344 

"The Wisdom From Above" 345 

The Fiery Furnace 346 

Disloyalty! Ingratitude! Treason! 346 

In a Den of Lions 347 

Who Were Typified by the Levites? 348 

Covetous Conversation 349 

Interesting Questions 350 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 351 

Brother Russell in Great Britain 351 

page 338 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



MOUNTAIN LAKE PARK, MD., CONVENTION 

It is not often necessary to urge people to stay away 
from a Convention of Bible Students. However, we must 
do this very thing. By the time this reaches you every 
reasonably proper accommodation at Mt. Lake Park and at 
Oakland, will probably have been assigned. We have even 
put in cots for 600 and expect that these will soon all be 
engaged. The full capacity is only about 2,500. We supposed 
this would be ample for our needs this year, because 
of the Convention Tour. There are still plenty of accommodations 
at $1.75 and $2 and $2.50 and $3 per day inclusive, 
but not many can afford these prices. 

All future communications respecting Convention accommodations, 
please address to I.B.S.A. Convention Committee, 
Mt. Lake Park, Md. 



BEREAN STUDY QUESTIONS 

We now have prepared pamphlets giving questions on 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS and on STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
Vol. I and Vol. V. Questions on the other volumes are in 
preparation and will be announced later. These little pamphlets 
are priced at five cents each— fifty cents per dozen, any 
kind, any assortment. Indeed all our paper-bound pamphlets, 
previously sold at ten cents, will hereafter be supplied 
at the uniform price of five cents each, fifty cents per 
dozen, including postage. This lower price, averaged up in 
the pamphlets thick and thin, will about cover the cost, and 
will permit many more of them to go into circulation. 

The Class-Extension has already started many new Berean 
Classes. All such new Classes, desiring to take up the study 
of Vol. I, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, are offered one copy 
each person of the question pamphlet free— a donation from 
the Society. This offer stands good until Oct. 1. We made donations 
of this character to about a dozen new Classes started 
in the vicinity of Brooklyn and, wishing to be impartial, 
we throw the opportunity open to all. Order only for the 
present number of the classes, please. 



CROSS AND CROWN PINS 

No. 1. Cross and Crown design in ten-karat gold, five-eighths 
inch in diameter. The crown is burnished. The surrounding 
wreath is rustic in design— brilliant gold. The cross 
is of dark red enamel, with only the outlines showing gold. 
The pin has a patent fastening. Price, $1.15. 

No. 2. This is exactly the same as No. 1, except that instead 
of the pin it has a screw clamp at the back, making it 
more desirable for men's wear. Price, $1.15. 

No. 3. Exactly the same as No. 2, except that it is three-eighths 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 4. Exactly the same as No. 1, except that it is three-eighths 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 5. Like No. 1, except that it is of silver instead of 
gold and wreath is washed in green. Price, 35c. 

These prices all include postage. 



WHEN VISITING New York or London, surely our friends 
will call at the Society's headquarters. Send mail in our care. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for September follow: (1) 165; 
(2) 204; (3) 99; (4) 145; (5) 299; (6) 293; (7) 87; 
(8) 95; (9) 325; (10) 20; (11) 333; (12) 307; (13) 
78; (14) 208; (15) 152; (16) 135; (17) 318; (18) 107; 
(19) 35; (20) 191; (21) 113; (22) 273; (23) 291; (24) 
7; (25) 218; (26) 312; (27) 8; (28) 129; (29) 229; 
(30) 286. 



Very Special Convention Rates Have Just Been Granted 
us by the South Eastern Railways Association 



R4868 : page 339 

HOW THE NEW CREATURE FULFILS THE LAW 

IN HIS LETTER to the Romans St. Paul 
goes very far back in his reasoning and 
brings the subject of Sin Atonement down 
in logical order to the Christian's standpoint. 
In the first and second chapters he 



shows how sin entered into the world and 
why some are more blemished than others. 
Yet the greater degradation of some does 
not prove that man originated with the 
monkey, but that some of the race went 
down more rapidly in their evil ways than did others. 
Then the Apostle goes on, "Art thou a Jew and makest 
thou a boast of the Law?" God gave this Law to the 
Jews and not to the Gentiles; therefore, only the Jew could 
get its blessing or its curse. But the Jew thought that the 
Law was the thing by which he could be justified. In 
this way he stumbled. The Apostle wished the Jew to 
know that by the deeds of the Law no flesh could be 
justified in God's sight. The Jews were seeking for 
eternal life. The Law Covenant proffered them that 
eternal life if they would obey it. But they found that 
they were unable to obey the Divine Law; and that, 
therefore, the Law Covenant was unprofitable to them; 
for it gave them death instead of life. No imperfect man 
can keep God's Law. 

In the fifth chapter St. Paul proceeds to show how 
the redemption was provided. Then he continues, saying, 
Before the Law, sin was in the world. But where there 
was no Law there could be no transgression of the Law. 
Before the Law was given the Jew had his share with 
the rest of the world in a hope of deliverance and blessing; 
but as soon as the Law came, which he was unable to 
keep, he was cut off entirely, so far as hope of justification 
was concerned; consequently, Jews have had two condemnations 
upon them— the Adamic condemnation and 
that of the Law— "Cursed by the Law and bruised by the 
Fall." We see that the Law Covenant could not grant 
the Divine blessing of life to the Jew because he was 
unable to live up to its requirements. 

THE JEWS UNDER A SECOND CONDEMNATION. 

In connection with this argument showing the difference 
between the attitude of the Jewish people toward 
God and that of the other nations, St. Paul says, "Sin 
is not imputed where there is no Law." God had made 
a special Covenant with the Jews, of which Moses was 
the Mediator. By obedience to this Covenant they were 
to have eternal life. The Apostle wished them to see 
that they did not get eternal life and that the difficulty 
was that they did not keep the Law. He wished them to 
see that in this very Law the Jew was condemned. He 
wished them to see that they were in disfavor. He 
wished them to see that in covenanting to keep the Law 
and failing they brought an additional condemnation upon 
themselves. Sentence had been passed upon Father 
Adam. He died; and all of his children were born in a 
dying condition, and legally dead. Thus the Jews were 
doubly sentenced as compared with the rest of the world, 
who were all condemned through heredity on account of 
the one transgression. The Apostle was showing the 



Jews that there was only one door of hope and that, 
while all mankind needed a Savior, the Jews needed one 
more than did any other people in the world. The Jew 
had enjoyed much advantage and he, therefore, had the 
more condemnation. 

The Jews thought that the Gentiles were worse in 
God's sight than were themselves. They said, Now think 
of the rest of the world, eating their mackerel and swine 
and hares, and doing things that we would not do! Now, 
says the Apostle, "Sin is not imputed where there is no 
Law." God has not charged infraction of this Law to 
any of the nations. You have violated God's Law many 
times, for if you have broken even one commandment, 
you have broken the Law as a whole. The arrangement 
was not that you should have eternal life for keeping 
certain commandments, but for keeping them all. 

The Apostle goes on to say, Death reigned from Adam 
to Moses, even over those who did not know the Law and 
who did not sin according to Adam's transgression. In 
Adam all died. The world is under the general condemnation 
to death, not for sins of their own, but for Adam's 
transgression. God transferred us Jews from this condition 
to the Law Covenant arrangement. But we have 
failed in this second trial and are in more condemnation 
than are the Gentiles. 

Thus the Apostle proved to them that not only the 
Gentiles needed a Savior, but the Jews also; not only the 
world outside of Israel, but Israel also; and that because 
Israel was under a special arrangement with God there 
needed to be some special work done for their recovery. 

Then the Apostle proceeds further to show that 
Christ, who knew no sin, was made a curse for the Jew; 
and that thus there is a special provision made by 
God to release the Jew from condemnation. The special 
sense in which Christ was made a curse for the Jew the 
Apostle has stipulated. (Gal. 3:13,14.) This was to 
hang upon a tree— the extreme penalty of the Law. 
(Deut. 21:23.) Christ was made a curse in that He died 
on the cross. (I Peter 2:24.) Such a death would not 

R4869 : page 340 

have been necessary for the salvation of the rest of mankind, 
but it was necessary for that of the Jew. 

"WHO SHALL DELIVER ME?" 

Taking the standpoint of a Jew under the Law, St. 
Paul, in chapter 7, describes the condition of Israel, saying 
that the Jew had undertaken to keep the Law, but had 
come under bondage to that Law; because of the weakness 
of his body he could not attain life. Then St. Paul 
cries, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me 
from this body of death?" He was under the Law which 
says, Serve God, not only with your mind, but perfectly. 
This he could not do because of weakness of the flesh. 



Who would deliver him from this dead body which caused 
the trouble? His mind was in harmony with righteousness, 
but he was imperfect. Then he tells us how he got 
rid of the condemnation of the dead body, that deliverance 
came through Jesus Christ. 

How have we this relief? All who have made consecration 
and by faith come into Christ are reckoned dead 
to the flesh and alive as New Creatures. So St. Paul 
was glorying, neither in the flesh, nor in the Law, but in 
Christ, who delivered him from this condemnation of the 
flesh as it would belong to the Jew or to any of Adam's 
posterity. 

In verse 18 the Apostle says, "In my flesh there 
dwelleth no good thing"— that is, no perfection. It has 
imperfection from the sole of the foot to the crown of 
the head. Although the Israelites sought to keep the Law 
the reason why they did not do so was that the flesh was 
weak. So we are to admit that the flesh is imperfect, 
while the New Creature strives to keep the body under. 
We are to realize that from the standpoint of Divine 
Justice we are walking after righteousness— no longer 
walking after sin. The thought of "walking after" is 
that we do not catch up, that we are not living up to 
perfect righteousness, but striving thereto. The New 
Creature is handicapped by the flesh. And what was true 
of the Apostle must be true of all the Lord's people. If 
at any time we have thought we were living up to God's 
standard of righteousness we have not had the proper 
conception. If we see what the Lord read into the Ten 
Commandments, it is this: Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God [not with part of the mind, but] with all of thy mind, 
with all of thy strength; and thy neighbor as thyself. 
This is the real spirit of the Law and its requirement; 
and this would be possible only to a being that is perfect. 
On account of his imperfections man cannot keep the 
Law; therefore, God has provided redemption and forgiveness 
of sins through His Son. The world in general 
will have the opportunity of restitution, of having their 
minds restored gradually. But for the Church there is 
a different provision. We present our bodies a living 
sacrifice, after we recognize the "high calling." Then 
our High Priest sacrifices us and God accepts it as a part 
of our Lord's own sacrifice. And eventually we shall 
secure a spirit body, and not a human body such as Adam 
had and such as is promised to the world. 

DELIVERANCE THROUGH CHRIST 

In chapter 8 the Apostle shows that a way of escape 
from the condemnation of the Law Covenant was provided 
for those Jews who come into Christ. Of the 
Church class he says, "Ye are not in the flesh but in the 
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of Christ dwell in you." 
The Church are said to be New Creatures in Christ 
Jesus. To these "old things have passed away and all 
things have become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) "The righteousness 



of the Law is fulfilled in us who are walking, 
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." 

The Apostle intimates to us that if we are in Christ 
we are keeping God's Law in a way that is impossible to 
others. But the New Creature is to remember that he 
has not yet received his new body, which will be perfect 
and which he will receive in the First Resurrection. In 
the meantime he has only the body of flesh in which to 
operate. At death, "It is sown an animal body; it is 
raised a spirit body." (I Cor. 15:44.) The old body 
was not strong enough to keep God's Law; even with the 
assistance of the New Creature the body is still weak. 
Why? Because we are born in sin and shapen in iniquity. 
Sin has reigned for over six thousand years. The weakness, 
etc., are all the more intense by reason of the long 
centuries of sin. 

In the statement, "In that it [the Law Covenant] was 
weak through the flesh" (vs. 3,4), the Apostle does not 
wish us to understand that the Law was weak, for it was 
perfect. The Law was capable, but the Law Covenant 
was weak. There was some fault to be found with the 
Law Covenant, which was weak in that it had an insufficient 
mediator who could not give a ransom to God for 
mankind. The same Law Covenant, under a better 
Mediator, Christ Jesus, will be strong in this particular 
in which formerly it was weak. 

Any of the Jews who could have kept the Law 
Covenant would have had eternal life, for this was the 
Divine promise: "The man which doeth these things 
shall live by them." (Lev. 18:5; Rom. 10:5.) Those 
who will be willing and able to keep the Divine Law, 
eventually, are to have eternal life. All who will not do 
so are not to have eternal life. 

The Apostle says that if righteousness could have 
come by the Law it would have come thus— instead of 
by the cross. Father Adam had been condemned. His 
whole race was condemned in him because of his disobedience. 
They were unable to keep the Law, hence, by 
God's arrangement, as by one man sin entered into the 
world and death as the result of sin, by one man also 
comes reconciliation, freedom from sin.— I Cor. 15:21,22. 

THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF THE LAW IS FULFILLED IN US 

What comfort and consolation are in this assurance! 
These are wonderful words of life, indeed! They inspire 
us with hope. If God will accept perfect heart-intentions, 
instead of the absolute perfection of the 
flesh, then, indeed, we have hope of attaining to the 
standard which He has marked for us— the standard of 
perfection. We can walk after, or according to the 
Spirit. So far as our mortal bodies are concerned we 
cannot walk up to the Spirit's requirements; but our 
minds can walk according to the Spirit; our intentions 
can be perfect; and what our Heavenly Father seeks in 
us is perfection of intention and as perfect control of 



our flesh as possible. 

The statement that our Lord condemned sin in the 
flesh means that He sentenced sin and made possible the 
overthrow of sin. Sin in the flesh had already been 
condemned that the world through our Lord might be 
saved. He demonstrated that a perfect man need not 
sin, and thus magnified the Divine Law. The question 
may arise as to whether He did more than magnify the 
Law. Yes. He made an arrangement whereby the Kingdom 
of Righteousness shall overthrow sin and bring in 
everlasting righteousness. 

The spirit of the Law that was given to the Jew is 
upon the New Creature, but not the Law Covenant. We 
are received of the Lord aside from the Law Covenant. 
God's Law is not to be ignored. Justice has but one Law 

R4869 : page 341 

and that was given to the Jew as the basis of their 
Covenant. St. Paul goes on to show that as the Israelites 
did not get eternal life by their endeavors to keep that 
Law, neither could anyone else get life in that way. But 
God has made an arrangement through Christ by which 
this curse of the Law through human weakness will be 
set aside by the satisfaction of Justice. (Rom. 8:14.) The 
Church is also under the new commandment of sacrificial 
love. 

"Gather My saints together unto Me, those that have 
made a covenant with Me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) 
Those who have accepted this new arrangement give up 
all earthly interests to become New Creatures. And the 
spirit of the Law is fulfilled in these, for they are walking 
not after the flesh but after the Spirit of the Law, seeking 
to attain, through Christ, the blessed portion to which 
they are invited— join t-heirship in the Kingdom. Their 
work with Christ at the present time is to share in the 
sacrifice, the blood of which, in the end of this Age, will 
be used in sealing with Israel the New Covenant. When 
the New Covenant shall be opened to Israel and all the 
world, it will signify to them an opportunity for eternal 
life, through the better Mediator, the Anointed Head and 
Body. 



R4870 : page 341 

KEEPING OUR GARMENTS WHITE 

"He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; 
and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life; 
but I will confess his name before My Father, 
and before His angels."— Rev. 3:5. 

ALTHOUGH there were persecutions of individuals, 
such as recorded in Acts, the 



early Church as a whole was not subjected 

to the severest of trials at first. But when 

the Truth began to spread and had the 

enmity, not only of the Jews, but also of 

the Greeks, emperors and governors found 

favor with the masses by persecuting the 

followers of Jesus. And for aught we 

know so it will be in the not far distant 

future. For a long time the pure Truth has been hidden 

from men, and worldliness, with a form of godliness, has 

had the upper hand in influential circles; but doubtless, 

as the troublous times which the Scriptures predict for the 

end of this Age draw closer, those who will stand firm for 

the Word of the Lord's Testimony may expect to be made 

the scapegoats, under various pretexts. 

We shall not be surprised if a considerable amount 
of persecution develop within the next few years against 
all the "children of light" who will walk up to that light. 
John, the beloved disciple, in some measure or degree 
illustrated or represented the last, living members of the 
"little flock." Doubtless this was the meaning of our 
Lord's statement, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what 
is that to thee?" (John 21:22,23.) John did not tarry, 
but a class whom he in some respects illustrated has 
tarried— a class who see with the eyes of their understanding 
the visions and revelations which John saw in 
symbols, in a trance. 

There are many reasons for concluding that, while the 
various messages in the second and third chapters of Revelation 
were given to the seven churches specified and 
were applicable to them, they should properly have a 
wider application to the whole Church of Christ, the number 
seven representing completeness, and the order 
representing different epochs in the history of the Church. 
Thus the Church at Ephesus would represent the condition 
of the Church in the Apostle's day, at the time of 
the writing of the messages, while the Laodicean Church 
would represent the Church in our day, in the end of this 
Gospel Age. The other churches would correspondingly 
represent different epochs intermediate, between the beginning 
and now. 

To think otherwise would be to attach more importance 
to those seven comparatively small churches of Asia 
Minor than would seem to have been appropriate, and 
would imply an ignoring of other churches larger and 
more influential than they, as, for instance, the churches 
at Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Colosse, Philippi, Thessalonica, 
etc. Furthermore, the details of the message 
given to these seven churches apply to and fit historically 
the experiences of the one Church of the Living God, 
over every member and branch of which the Lord has a 
care. This thought that the number seven signified completeness, 
we find emphasized in the other symbolic representations 
—in the seven golden candlesticks, and seven 
stars, etc. 

The first three chapters of Revelation contain particular 



specifications and general admonitions, not only 
for the local churches therein mentioned, but for all 
"overcomers." They apply not only to the different 
epochs in the history of the Church as a whole, but to 
different classes in any one epoch in the history of the 
Church. 

IMPORTANCE OF KEEPING OUR GARMENTS UNDEFILED 

The words in our text, addressed to the Church at 
Sardis, or to that epoch of the general Church symbolized 
by Sardis, are explained by the context. In this Church 
there was a wrong condition of things, a defilement. 
Trespasses committed had not been repented of and forgiveness 
sought from the Lord. 

In the context it is stated that the majority of the 
Sardis Church had not kept their garments undefiled. 
But "thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have 
not defiled their garments." By these words our Lord 
seems to emphasize the thought that no one will gain the 
prize of the "high calling" if he does not keep his garments 
undefiled from the flesh. Whoever fails to do so 
will not be of the overcoming class to whom will be given 
this choice blessing, is the argument. He that would be 
an "overcomer" must be clothed in white raiment. Any 
who do not persevere in keeping their garments clean will 
have their names blotted out. In this connection we remember 
the words of this same Apostle John, that the blood of 
Christ washes us, not only from the sins that are past, but 
also from all stains upon the robe. He says, "The blood 
of Jesus Christ... cleanseth us from all sin." (I John 1:7.) 
It cleanses us from all unintentional blemishes, 
spots upon our garments. Whoever does not thus keep 
himself cleansed will not be an "overcomer." It is only 
such as observe this cleansing whose names will not be 
blotted out. 

As to our ability to discern whether or not we are 
keeping our garments clean, only the individual himself 
can know to what extent he has watched his conduct and 
kept up his communication with the Lord and daily 
scrutinized life's affairs, the incidents of the day, and 
asked forgiveness for shortcomings and trespasses. 
Others might surmise, but they could not know. We all 
have sense enough to know what things are right and 
what are wrong. If the wrong thing seems not very 
wrong, it would indicate that we are growing careless in 
regard to our robe. As a result we would have less interest 
in the Truth, less interest in keeping our robes 

R4870 : page 342 

clean, less interest in prayer meetings, etc. Between such 
and the Lord there would be a cloud, and a condition of 
leanness would be sure to follow. 

The faithful "overcomers" watch and keep their garments 
clean. "They have not defiled their garments," they 



have kept them "unspotted from the world." They have 
not been willing to have sin contaminate them and to 
separate them from the Lord, but have quickly applied 
for and obtained the precious blood to remove every stain. 
They are so heartily opposed to sin and so earnest about 
keeping their garments unspotted that the Adversary gets 
no hold upon them— "that Wicked One toucheth them 
not." All this indicates a full submission of their wills to 
the will of Christ. They are "dead with Him" and hence 
could not willingly practise sin. 

THE PRECIOUS BLOOD ALONE CAN CLEANSE 

Evidently, the majority of the people of Sardis were 
of the Great Company class and needed to "be zealous 
and repent"; for they were not in a condition to receive 
the greatest blessing possible for them. The principle is 
applicable, evidently, not only to the Church in Sardis, 
but to the Church in general. The things to be overcome 
are the difficulties in the "narrow way." These difficulties 
make the way narrow— all the opposition of our flesh to 
the things of God, the oppositions of the world in general, 
and the snares which the Adversary may place for us. 
The love of self, of popularity, of worldly prosperity, must 
be overcome, as well as love for man-made creeds and 
theories. 

How gracious is the provision of our God in thus 
presenting us with the Robe which covers all the repented-of 
blemishes of the past as well as the unintentional 
and unwitting imperfections of the present! Under 
this arrangement it is possible for the Lord's people to 
walk so carefully, so circumspectly (looking all around 
at every step), as to keep their garments unspotted from 
the world. But, alas, how few, if any, there be who have 
always lived up, in all the past of their Christian lives, to 
this high standard which alone will insure the keeping of 
their garments white! 

Seeing that any deflection from absolute purity of 
heart would constitute a stain, a spot upon the robe, we 
might inquire with great concern, Is there any possibility 
of having such spots or stains removed and of getting my 
robe white again? Thank God, yes; there is a way by 
which the spots and wrinkles may be removed from our 
robes and leave them once more as white and clean as at 
first. The stain-remover is the precious blood. As the 
Apostle says, "If we confess our sins He is faithful and 
just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all 
unrighteousness." 

LET US JUDGE OURSELVES 

While all our efforts could not remove a single stain, 
which the "precious blood" alone can remove, yet it is well 
for us that while realizing our Lord's forgiveness and the 
cleansing of our robe, we should promptly seek to discipline 
ourselves in repentance, otherwise we may expect 



that while our Lord cleanses our robes in answer to our 
earnest prayers, He will, nevertheless, put upon us certain 
chastisements for our correction in righteousness and for 
the strengthening of our characters along the points of 
weakness. The Apostle teaches this when he says, "If 
we would judge [correct, chastise] ourselves, then we 
should not be judged [corrected, chastised] of the Lord; 
but when we are judged of the Lord we are chastened 
that we might not be condemned with the world."— 
I Cor. 11:31,32. 

God's grace cannot admit to heavenly perfection those 
who have not robes of spotless righteousness; hence, we 
are shown that those who have not cared for their garments 
and kept them white must be put through severe 
experiences before they can in any sense of the word be 
sharers of heavenly favors. These severe experiences 
are shown in the symbol as washing their robes in a great 
tribulation. But to show that not penance nor sufferings 
would cleanse the robes, it is particularly stated that the 
efficacy for the cleansing is the "blood of the Lamb." 
Many will be thus purified, purged; and their garments, 

R4871 : page 342 

now soiled by contact with the world, will be cleansed of 
every guilty stain when they, realizing the folly of their 
course, shall repentantly appeal to the Lord and use His 
help. 

We rejoice that these will ultimately sing praises to 
the Lord and be glad in His wondrous grace. But we 
note that even after their robes shall have been washed 
white in the blood of the Lamb, during the time of 
trouble, they will wear no crowns; but, having finally 
overcome, they will be granted "palms" as emblems of 
their victory through Christ; and although they can never 
be of the living Temple of which Christ is the Head, we 
are told that they shall be servants in that temple; and 
although they shall never sit in the Throne, they will be 
highly privileged to serve "before the Throne. Grand 
and glorious privileges will be theirs; but they will lose 
the great "prize," having sold it for the mess of pottage 
of present seeming advantage, which proves unsatisfying 
and brings bitter results. What exhortation to holiness, 
to complete consecration to His will could be stronger! 



R4871 : page 342 

HOW TO LOCATE OURSELVES 

ADMITTING that we might not be able to 
locate others in relationship to the Divine 
Plan, should we not be able to locate ourselves? 
If so, how? 
We should be able to locate ourselves in 



respect to God's grace. If we know the 

various steps to be taken and corners to be 

turned, we should know just how many of 

these we have taken and just where we are. 

Perhaps the following notation of the steps 

of a righteous man called of God to joint-heirship with 

His Son will help us:— 

(1) A longing for righteousness, truth, purity, implies 

a drawing from the Lord along the lines of the less depraved 

parts of our fallen nature. Our first response 

to this drawing is to seek righteousness and seek meekness. 

To such the Lord says, "Draw near unto Me and 

I will draw near unto you." Numerous steps may be 

taken after the first one of turning our back upon wilful 

sin. Each step will bring us a little nearer to the Lord 

and to righteousness, and should show us more clearly 

than before that "in our flesh dwelleth no perfection," 

that we cannot live up to even our own estimate and interpretation 

of the Divine Law— that we need grace and 

R4872 : page 342 

help from on high. This entire course is one of justification 
in the sense that it tends to harmony with God and 
His righteous requirements. 

The soul that thus has reached the place where it 
cries out to the loving God by this time sees clearly the 
need of the Savior and that Jesus is the Redeemer. It 
hears the message, "No man cometh unto the Father but 
by Me." It responds, "Lord, gladly will I go to the 
Father through You." 

(2) The reply of Jesus as to what are the terms of 

R4872 : page 343 

discipleship point out the next step in the way to God 
and, accepted, brings the blessing. Our Lord's words are, 
"If any man will be My disciple, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow Me." The Master does 
not urge haste in decision. The haste is left to the suppliant, 
whose love of righteousness and desire for fellowship 
with God will be measured by his haste in accepting 
the terms of discipleship. To one and all the Master 
says, "Sit down first and count the cost." Do not put 
your hand to the plow and then draw back. Those who 
take years to count the cost will very rarely win the 
prize, we may feel sure. The reasonable course is to 
weigh the proposition— the giving up of self with earthly 
hopes, aims, prospects, joys, entirely into the Father's 
hands as living sacrifices, with the prospect of suffering, 
trials, testing, proving in the present life, and, if faithful, 
glory, honor and immortality on the heavenly plane. It 
should not require long for a mature person of loyal 
heart to realize that the Lord's service is a desirable one 
and that the price, our little all, is insignificant. The 
zealous and faithful will speedily say, "Here, Lord, I give 



myself away; it is all that I can do." 

Then comes the Redeemer's part. In harmony with 
the Father's Plan He now stands as Advocate for all 
such as have come unto the Father through Him. He 
advocates their cause as their representative in the 
heavenly court, approving of them and of their consecration, 
having, additionally, by the imputation of the merit 
of His own sacrifice, made up for their deficiencies, 
that they may be made the righteousness of God through 
Him. We see that the Advocate thus presents our name 
and covers our blemishes, and our sacrifices are accepted 
of the Father— up to the time when the last member shall 
have been received— up to the time when the door to 
this high calling shall have been closed, when the last 
of the wise virgins shall have entered beyond the veil. 

The Father's acceptance of us is indicated by our 
adoption and begetting of the Holy Spirit and the commencement 
of the sealing— the impressing upon us, as 
New Creatures, of the Divine likeness, disposition or 
spirit. We should all know very positively whether or 
not we have taken these two steps. If we have not, it is 
useless for us to look further. 

EVIDENCES OF OUR ACCEPTANCE BY THE FATHER 

(3) The begetting of the Holy Spirit in the early 
Church was indicated by certain miraculous gifts, but 
this was for a special purpose in connection with the 
establishment of the Church. As Paul pointed out, 
those gifts were intended to pass away. (I Cor. 13:8.) 
They were given by the "laying on of the hands of the 
Apostles." (Acts 8:18.) Hence after the death of the 
Apostles these gifts were not bestowed upon any. And 
when those who had received the gifts died, the gifts 
themselves ceased— thus passed away. But instead of the 
gifts came the fruits of the Spirit as evidences or proofs 
of acceptance by the Lord and induction as members or 
branches of the Vine. The fruit buds are small at first. 
They need and have the Husbandman's care. He prunes 
us— he cuts away the earthly things to which we are 
prone to cling. He leaves us without much earthly support 
except that which is connected directly with the 
Root, the Vine. Thus cut off from earthly ambition in 
harmony with our consecration unto death the Spirit of 
the Lord comes into us more and more, producing fruits 
of the Spirit, even as the juices of the vine go to the 
branches and its clusters. Such prunings are an evidence 
of our membership in the Vine and our fellowship in 
the sufferings of Christ; for the Heavenly Husbandman 
thus treats all true branches of the True Vine. We 
should begin to see fruits and graces. Our energy should 
be manifested in a variety of ways towards the Lord, 
towards His brethren and toward all mankind, in proportion 
as we have contact with them. 

Amongst other indications of Divine favor would be 
fellowship with the Lord in prayer and through His Word 



—a love of the Divine Plan, a delight in everything that 
is righteous, just, true, noble— a desire to promote all such 
interests to the extent of our opportunities. Another 
evidence of faithfulness would be our being accounted 
worthy to suffer reproaches and persecutions for the 
Lord's sake and the Truth's sake— and our acceptance of 
these as of Divine providence. 

A further indication of our harmony with the Lord 
would be in our increased appreciation of His Word, a 
deeper insight into its precious teachings and an increasing 
pleasure in serving it out to others— not for vainglory, 
not that they might think something of us, but for the 
Lord's glory and for the good of those who desire to 
know His will. 

EVIDENCES OF BACKWARD LEANINGS 

But some may fail to attain to these depths and heights 
and lengths and breadths of blessing, of privilege. They 
may content themselves with little of the Lord's Truth 
and grace, little of the fellowship of the brethren, and, 
proportionately, more of the world's. These are failing 
to perform their Covenant and obligations of zealous 
sacrifice. They may be good and honorable and kind. 
They may be loyal to the Lord to the degree of not 
wishing to do anything contrary to His will; but they 
are failing of the extreme of loyalty, namely, of the 
anxiety to know and to do. These are in danger of being 
counted unworthy to be in the Bride Class and of being 
consigned to the larger company of the loyal but less 
faithful. Even to attain this honor and position they will 
need to be put through trials, sufferings, difficulties, the 
destruction of their flesh. But they will not have the 
high reward because of failure to run the race with zeal. 
Some may even have attained to all the glorious privileges 
of consecration, service, knowledge, etc., and then become 
cold, careless, overcharged with the cares of this 
life, and thus bring forth less fruit and not be counted 
worthy of membership in the Bride Class. Nevertheless 
the Lord will deal with them, if they are truly His, to 
chasten them and, if possible, to prepare them for the 
"great company" class, even though this may necessitate 
great tribulations. 

Evidences in our day of a condition of unfitness for 
the "little flock" and danger of missing it would be a 
worldly spirit, a careless spirit, a love of the world, a 
slackness of zeal for God, for righteousness, for the 
brethren, and a failure to use opportunities and to seek 
for others for the furtherance of the praises of "Him 
who has called us out of darkness into His marvelous 
light"— a failure to go on to a greater development in 
the fruits and graces of the Spirit. A loss of love and 
zeal for God and His cause and the brethren follows 
and an increasing dimness of the Divine Plan already 
seen and recognized. The extreme of this condition is 
"outer darkness"— a blindness to heavenly things of the 



Divine Plan such as covers the world of mankind in 
general— without the illumination of the Lord's Word 
and Spirit. 

As for those who commit "the sin unto death": It is 
scarcely necessary to discuss these, because persons who 
reach this hopeless condition rarely, we believe, realize it 
or are able to comprehend their own situation. So long 

R4872 : page 344 

as there is a fear of the Second Death and a desire for 

eternal life and a desire for harmony with God, there 

is hope. Two classes are described as being "twice 

dead, plucked up by the roots." One is a class which, 

after having received the holy things of God as New 

Creatures, turn back to the world, to its aims, its pleasures, 

its desires, its ambitions, its sins. These, completely repudiating 

the covenant of sacrifice, are in a hopeless 

condition as respects the future life. But we may perhaps 

say, fortunately, they do not realize their position, but 

rather feel the contentment of the dead world; or, perhaps, 

worse than the world, they are acrimonious and 

bitter against the members of The Christ and against the 

Truth, which they once appreciated but have left. Another 

class who go into the Second Death are pointed 

out as guilty of doctrinal deflection— the renouncing of 

the Redeemer, the loss of appreciation of the merit of His 

sacrifice and of the opportunities which that sacrifice 

secured to us in the way of sacrificing. 

We are also asked respecting our Lord's statement, 
There shall arise false Prophets and false Messiahs 
who shall show great signs and wonders, in so much that, 
if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. 
We are asked whether these very elect refer to the "little 
flock" or include the "great company." We reply that 
evidently "the very elect" means the faithful. All of the 
Spirit-begotten ones are counted in as of the elect, for, so 
long as they are faithful, they are the very elect. It 
would appear that these words of our Lord did not refer 
to something specially of our day, but rather to something 
that has applied for centuries, just as wars and tumults 
have progressed for centuries. One entire chapter in 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. IV., is devoted to the 
examination of this great prophecy and we refer our 
readers to a fresh study. The false teachers and false 
Messiahs who have deceived many are represented today, 
we believe, by some very large and very prosperous denominations 
which are deceiving themselves and millions 

R4873 : page 344 

of others into supposing that they are the True Church, 
the True Messiah, the True Vine of the Heavenly Father's 
right-hand planting. On the contrary, branches of the 
True Vine may be in these different denominations, but 
the earthly institutions themselves belong to what the 



Scriptures designate "the vine of the earth," the fruitage 
of which will soon be gathered into the wine-press of 
the wrath of God. (Rev. 14:19.) God's saintly ones 
down through the Age have been more or less in contact 
with these great systems, anti-Christ systems, deceived 
and deceiving systems. But "the very elect," the saintly, 
as members of the true Body of Christ, will not now be 
allowed to mistake these systems for the true Church. 
The Lord guides them that they are not ensnared. 



R4871 : page 344 

THE CHRISTIAN'S ATTITUDE IN THE DUTIES OF LIFE 

"Not slothful in business; fervent in 
spirit, serving the Lord."— Rom. 12:11. 

THE WORD business has a very broad signification. 

Whatever we do we are to do 

all unto the Lord; or rather, whatsoever 

we do we should do altogether unto the 

Lord. With the Christian, the chief business 

of life is to glorify God, to serve Him 

and, incidentally, as directed by the Lord, 

to serve the brethren, to serve the Truth, to 

serve righteousness, to serve all men as he 

has opportunity, "doing good unto all, especially 

to the household of faith." In our text the word 

business seems to include any occupation, of any kind, that 

would be approved of the Lord. It would not do for us 

to say, Be not slothful in the liquor business or the tobacco 

business, for we are to give our attention only to those 

occupations which we believe have the Lord's approval. 

The expression, "not slothful," is equivalent to the 
expression, not lazy, not indolent. The Apostle's thought 
seems to be that any matter proper to be done should have 
the intelligent and active attention of him whose duty or 
privilege it is. Whatever is worth doing is worth doing 
zealously, well. The Apostle's thought is that we 
are, first of all, to see that our business is a worthy 
one; and secondly, to prosecute it faithfully. If it is to 
provide money for either our personal needs or the Lord's 
work, we should prosecute that business with energy, with 
alacrity and with appreciation of the privilege, as done 
to Him. We should not be slothful or careless in any way. 

A certain amount of provision for our temporal need 
is necessary. How much time is to be given thus is a 
thing for each to determine for himself. After we have 
made a consecration to the Lord, to give our lives in His 
service, there is very little we can give at best. We should 
see that we "redeem the time," buy it back from the 
affairs of this life, as far as reasonably possible, in order 
to secure the more of it for the special service of promulgating 
the Truth. This does not mean that we should 



leave our families dependent upon others. We should 

care for our proper interests. We should not be overcharged, 

but should have a proper care for those dependent 

upon us. As for our own requirement, having 

food and raiment, we should be content and not wish to 

accumulate for a long period of life. 

The word fervent signifies very hot, to boil. The 
thought that the Apostle gives its that whatsoever we do 
we should do heartily, with our might, as unto the Lord. 
The one who takes the course of doing whatever he does 
in a careless manner forms a slothful habit, which is a 
drag on him all through life. Whatever we do we should 
do fervently. We are the Lord's and whatever business 
we have is His. The Lord is pleased that we should be 
energetic in our affairs. If any one is in a business where 
he is violating conscience, he should get out of it into one 
in which he could do some good in the world. 

SHOULD NOT BE BURDENED WITH ANXIOUS CARE 

The Lord's people should not worry or take anxious 
thought respecting tomorrow. The Scriptures imply, 
however, that we should be provident and careful, laying 
by in store, that we may be prepared to do something for 
neighbors and friends who may need. Dollars laid by 
merely represent so many days of labor saved. We should 
not use all of our resources upon the immediate present, 
but exercise self-control, to the end that we may have 
good results in the future. This rule will apply to food 
and clothing, also. If our store is small, we should not 
wonder where the next suit of clothes will come from. 
If we had the next suit it might be stolen. Neither should 
neighbors and friends turn against me? What if I should 
get into great disrepute on account of the Truth? We 
should leave all such things to the Lord. If we need 
persecutions, we hope that He will let them come to us. 
If in the way He chooses to make the Truth worth something 
to us, we should be glad. "All that live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution."— 2 Tim. 3:12. 

R4871 : page 345 

On the other hand, the Lord does not intend us to go 
through life in a careless manner, happy-go-lucky, so to 
speak. We are to have a proper thought for the day. 
What are the responsibilities of today? What are the 
cares? As the Scriptures enjoin, be "not slothful in 
business; fervent in spirit, serving the Lord." We 
are to have a great deal of zeal. We are not to 
worry over things that may happen tomorrow, but 
have faith that God will be with us tomorrow, 
and given grace sufficient for us when it shall come. If 
the Lord's people are living faithfully they will have a 
great deal to think about every day. They will not need 
to go out in advance to worry about tomorrow. We shall 
have plenty to do if we give attention to the present difficulties, 



and go to the Throne of Grace that we may 
obtain grace and strength to help today. 

Our Lord assures us that if the main thought of our 
hearts is concerning His service and the promotion of 
righteousness and the attainment of the Kingdom which 
God has promised to them that love Him, then we need 
carry no anxious cares respecting the future. As His 
disciples we shall have trials and tribulations enough day 
by day, and shall need daily to lean upon the Bridegroom's 
arm as we seek to walk the "narrow way." Sufficient for 
each day will be the evil of itself; and thanks by to God, 
we have also His promise that daily His grace shall be 
sufficient for us. 

To those who are the Lord's consecrated people it is 
the greatest privilege imaginable to serve the Lord. The 
Lord is looking to see to what extent we are willing to 
sacrifice earthly things, earthly approval, that we may 
have His approval and hear His "Well done!" 

Let all who would run the race successfully look well 
to their zeal and activity in the Lord's work. If we bury 
our one or many talents under a weight of worldly cares 
and encumbrances which might be avoided or set aside; 
if we bury them under worldly ambitions for either self 
or family— whether this be by wasting consecrated time 
upon science, philosophy, music, or art, or upon business, 
politics, or pleasures, or in pampering pride and appetite- 
then, as unfaithful servants, we shall sooner or later go 
into "outer darkness." 



R4873 : page 345 

THE WISDOM FROM ABOVE 

-DANIEL l:8-20.-SEPTEMBER 10.- 

"It is good neither to eat flesh nor to drink wine, nor 
anything whereby thy brother stumbleth."— Romans 14:21. 

WE HAVE NOTED the cruelty of the kings 

of olden times. It is appropriate, therefore, 

that we note also certain instances in which 

they manifested great breadth of generosity 

and wisdom. Today's study illustrates this. 

Amongst the earlier captives brought by 

Nebuchadnezzar from Jerusalem some 

twenty years before its destruction were 

four young men of evidently noble birth 

and religious training. Daniel, Hananiah, 

Mishael and Azariah. These captives were not maltreated 

nor enslaved, in the ordinary sense of the term. Their 

intellectual qualities were discerned and they were put 

into a superior school that they with others might be 

fitted to constitute a board of wise men, counselors of the 

king. So different is all this from the nepotism, "graft" 



and "pool" of our day that it seems almost incomprehensible. 

At the same time the instance was an overruling of 
Divine providence by which not merely rebels against 
God in Israel were suffered to be captured and deported, 
but some also who were most loyal of heart to the principles 
of the Divine Law. We may here learn a lesson 
of how God is able to make even the disasters of life 
work out blessings for those who are truly loyal to Him 
even as Daniel and his companions were blessed and 
prospered in the enemy's land, and advanced to positions 
far higher than they would ever have attained in their 
own land. 

ADVANTAGES OF ABSTEMIOUSNESS 

The young Hebrews were attached to the king's household, 
and were provided with extraordinary delicacies, 
including spirituous liquors. The policy of the king in 
providing sumptuously for all the students, who were from 
various lands, was that, being well nourished, they might 
be in their best physical and mental condition. This lesson 
shows that it is a mistake to suppose that high living 
is specially conducive to intellectuality— not to mention 
spirituality. 

From the very beginning, under God's providence, the 
deportment of Daniel brought him into special favor with 
the prince of the eunuchs who had in charge the temporalities 
of these students. There is something in a meek 
and quiet spirit that is impressive; and as a rule such a 
spirit comes only from a proper, religious training. To 
this eunuch Daniel, and his associates through him, appealed, 
requesting that instead of the fine food and 
liquors provided they might have a plain, vegetable diet. 

The eunuch replied that he would be very glad to comply 
with the request, only he feared that when examination 
time should come, these four Hebrews, fed upon the 
plainer fare, would appear to a disadvantage and cause a 
reflection upon himself and possibly cost the loss of his 
position, if not indeed the loss of his life. Daniel, however, 
appealed for a trail of the matter for ten days, 
agreeing to abide by the results. At the end of this 
short time, comparison showed that the four young men 
who practiced abstemiousness were fairer and fatter in 
flesh that were those who shared the king's bounty; so 
their request was granted. 

Of them we read, "Now as for these four youths, 
God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and 
wisdom; and Daniel had understanding in all visions 
and dreams." At the end of the period of their preparation, 
the king communed with the students, "and among 
them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael 
and Azariah...and in every matter of wisdom and 
understanding concerning which the king inquired of 
them he found them ten times better than all the magicians 
and enchanters that were in his realm." 

What was the secret of this wisdom and understanding? 



Did not the secret lie in the blessing of God and in 

the fact that these young men sought to devote their lives 

to the doing of the Divine will— to the doing of righteousness? 

Thus we see that our hearts and minds can be free 

from selfish motives, free from superstition, free from 

fears, free to do the will of God at any cost. Such minds 

anywhere, at any time, are scarce. Such minds always 

develop wisdom. On the other hand, sensuality, selfishness, 

the grinding of personal axes, always becloud the 

judgment. What we need today in every walk of life is 

consecrated men of the stamp of Daniel and his companions 

—whole hearted men— who will give their best for 

the service of their fellow men in whatever sphere their 

R4873 : page 346 

lives may be cast. The world has grown wiser (?) since 
those days. Today a Daniel would not get into such a 
position of influence; or if, perchance, he did get there, 
it would be a miracle if he were not removed— such a 
miracle as has kept Judge Lindsay of Colorado in office 
for several years in spite of every pressure of high handed 
politics which has sought to crush him because of his 
faithfulness to the principles of righteousness. 

Although Babylon has passed away, although few of 
us can be Daniels or have his high position and wonderful 
opportunity, nevertheless the thing that is really needed 
is the Daniel spirit, and that is a possibility with every 
man and with every woman— young or old. "Dare to 
be a Daniel!" Alas! how few appreciate the privilege, 
how few are emulating the Daniel spirit. 

Christians throughout this Age are in a condition very 
similar to that of Daniel. The great King of Glory has 
them in the school of Christ. He wishes to select a few 
to be joint heirs in the Messianic Kingdom when it shall 
be established. The test of examination will come in the 
end of this Age. Those who will then be found worthy 
will be such as have had the Daniel spirit of devotion 
to God and to the principles of righteousness— willing to 
lay down their lives in the service of the Truth— followers 
in the footsteps of Jesus. Of these the Lord speaks, saying, 
"They shall be Mine, saith the Lord, in that day when 
I make up My jewels."— Mai. 3:17. 

"WHEREBY THY BROTHER STUMBLETH" 

Our text gives the thought that in addition to our consideration 
of what is best for ourselves in the way of 
food and drink, to enable us to best serve the Lord, we 
should also have a mind as to the effect of our influence 
on our neighbors. The more noble our characters 
the greater will be our influence upon those 
who are naturally weaker. And that influence should 
always be used for the good of others, for the lifting 
up of the highest possible standards of thought, word 
and deed. Whatever will assist us in this direction 



should be considered, and should be to us as a command 
from God, who has said, "do good unto all men as we 
have opportunity, especially to the household of faith." 



R4873 : page 346 

THE FIERY FURNACE 

--DANIEL 3. --SEPTEMBER 17.- 

"The Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear 
what man shall do unto me."— Heb. 13:6. 

YEARS PASSED after the narrative of our 
last study. King Nebuchadnezzar had advanced 
the four Hebrew captives to positions 
of honor and trust. Just where Daniel 
was at this time we do not know, but his 
three companions, given new names, were 
governors of Babylonian provinces. 

Nebuchadnezzar had conquered the 
world. He was the first to grasp the 
thought of the wisdom of having a universal 
government which would make wars to cease to the ends 
of the earth. He conquered the world and treated their 
rulers who were obedient with a measure of wisdom and 
justice and cruelly destroyed the others as a lesson illustrative 
of his indomitable power. His Kingdom, composed 
of various nations worshipping various gods, he 
wished to cement into one harmonious whole. He instituted 

R4874 : page 346 

a great peace celebration and brought his representatives 
from different parts of the then civilized world to 
Babylon; and with them came representatives of all 
nations. These were to be duly impressed with the greatness 
and magnificence of the Babylonian Power and of 
the futility of resisting it. They were to be given an 
illustration of the benefactions to result from having one 
government and having the entire world at peace. 

Thus seen it was benevolence as well as wisdom which 
was at the foundation of Nebuchadnezzar's scheme. He 
had doubtless heard that the Israelites from of old 
were inspired by a certain promise from their God that at 
a future time their nation should be made the dominant 
one for the ruling and the blessing of all nations, kindreds, 
peoples and tongues. Nebuchadnezzar considered 
this theory of the Jews a wise one, and himself the 
opportune person to be the blesser of the world in the 
name of his god, Bel-Merodach. Had not his god given 
him victories, he reasoned? Were not he, therefore, and 
his nation, the properly qualified ones for the great work 
of blessing the world? He would at least make the endeavor, 



no matter what the cost. 

GOLDEN IMAGE OF BEL-MERODACH 

Nebuchadnezzar would honor the god whom he believed 
had given him his victories. He would make him 
the god of nations. The people from every part of his 
domain should be committed to the worship of this one 
god, that the having of one religion might help to cement 
the various incongruous elements of which his kingdom 
was composed. As a preparation for the great peace festival, 
a broad plain for maneuvers of the troops and 
gathering of the princes and nobles and visitors was 
selected. In the midst of the plain a golden image of 
Bel-Merodach was erected— ninety feet high. It is not 
necessary to assume that the image was of solid gold, 
although Herodotus mentions a statue at Babylon of 
smaller size which was of solid gold, weighing forty-three 
thousand pounds. 

When the great day of celebration came, with the 
governors, princes, captains and provincial rulers, the 
judges, treasurers, counselors and lawyers in their various 
robes of office and surrounded and interspersed with 
the delegates from various nations, the banners flying and 
the musical instruments playing, it must have been an 
impressive sight. We may sympathize with the victorious 
Nebuchadnezzar in a certain measure of pride in the 
achievements of that hour and the peace program 
which it was to celebrate. Thus far his rule had been one 
of conquest; thenceforth, everything conquered, the world 
was to have a great time of peace, prosperity, jubilation. 

At the appropriate time the religious unity of the empire 
was to be demonstrated by a general worship of the 
golden image of Bel-Merodach. Proclamation was made 
that soon the bands would begin to play and that then all 
would be expected to fall down and worship and reverence 
the image which represented Nebuchadnezzar, in 
that it represented his god. 

DISLOYALTY! INGRATITUDE! TREASON! 

Everything seemed to go well until it was reported to 
the king that three governors whom he had set over 
provinces had rebelled against his decree and refused to 
worship the image of Bel-Merodach— had defied the 
king's power— for like all mandates of olden times, the 
penalty for disobedience was so severe as to leave no room 
for opposition in a sane mind. Who were these three 
disturbers of Babylon's peace, spoilers of the great peace 
festival? They were the three young Hebrews whom the 

R4874 : page 347 

king had so graciously treated at the time of their captivity, 
who apparently owed so much to him. He had not 
only given them schooling, but he had exalted them to 



high positions in his empire. How ungrateful to their 
benefactor, how traitorous they were! 

This, undoubtedly, was Nebuchadnezzar's view of the 
affair. Of all the governors he would be most sorry to 
lose these three who were so reliable, but on such an 
occasion he could never permit insubordination to his 
regulations, nor could he think it possible that these three 
men, now about thirty-five years of age, would challenge 
his authority and power knowing, as they must, his autocracy. 
The king, in further leniency, would give these 
headstrong governors further chance for their lives— 
for their all. The trumpets would again sound, and if 
they still persisted, the decree of death must be executed 
against them. The fiery furnace was ready. 

The courage of these three Hebrews stands out on the 
pages of history as sublime. The king reminded them 
that none of the gods had been able to deliver any people 
out of his hand; their own city, Jerusalem, had been 
overthrown. They could hope for no succor, no rescue 
from the death that was before them if they persisted 
in defying the king of the whole earth. Their answer 
was that their God, Jehovah, they were sure was quite 
able to deliver them from the fiery furnace, or from 
anything He might choose, and would do so. But if not 
—if He did not deliver them— and if they were certain of 
it in advance— nevertheless, they would be His faithful 
servants and worship Him alone. How sublime their 
faith and their courage! Such faith and such courage 
we may be sure is pleasing to the Lord. We must not 
expect that in every case God will thus deliver those who 
trust in Him; rather, as these Hebrews intimated, we 
are not able to know the wise plans of our God, nor what 
may be His will respecting what little remains of our 
lives. But of His power and love we are confident. We 
can trust Him where we cannot trace Him. 

THE FURNACE SUPER -HEATED 

When we read that King Nebuchadnezzar became 
furious, we should sympathetically remember the circumstances. 
He had conquered the world, and would he now 
be defied by three men whom he had made what they 
were? He was giving a great lesson to all nations on 
the very subject of the necessity of obedience to his 
government. Could he allow some of his own representatives 
to defy that government? On the other hand, his 
appreciation of the men he was about to slay had been 
evidenced by the exaltation he had given them. Can we 
wonder that under all these conditions he felt furious? 
He was seriously disappointed at the only inharmony 
that had occurred in connection with his great project 
which he felt sure was to work such blessings to all the 
earth, and such honor to himself. In his fury he commanded 
that the furnace should be made seven times 
hotter— evidently forgetting that thereby the sufferings 
of anything cast therein would be diminished. 



Recent explorations show that in that vicinity there 
were naphtha wells; for all we know this may have been 
the fuel used in the great, open furnace. The three 
Hebrews were bound in their clothing, and some of the 
strongest men of the king's guard were commanded to 
throw them into the furnace. As the bound men were 
thrown in, the flames came forth and enveloped those 
who had thrown them in, and destroyed them. A Jewish 
legend tells that the fire streamed out seventy-five feet, 
perhaps driven by a gust of wind, or perhaps occasioned 
by the simultaneous throwing in of additional fuel, especially 
if that fuel was naphtha. The king already had 
had some evidence of the power of Jehovah God, and 
intently watched the furnace. But surely the young Hebrews 
who had such faith in Him were foolish. Yet as 
the king looked toward the furnace, to his utter astonishment 
he beheld four persons walking in the midst of the 
fire, unharmed. He went as close as safety would permit, 
saying to his counselors, "We cast three men into the 
furnace, but behold, I now see four, free, walking in the 
fire, and the fourth has an appearance like a son of the 
gods!" 

What had he done? What should he now do? He 
called to the three, "Ye servants of the Most High God, 
come forth and come hither." They came, unharmed, 
and not even the smell of scorching was upon their 
clothing. Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged the miracle and 
praised the God who had thus by His angel of power 
delivered His servants that trusted in Him and who defied 
the king's mandates and yielded their bodies that they 
might not serve nor worship any god except their own 
God. "Blessed are all they that put their trust in Him." 



R4874 : page 347 

IN A DEN OF LIONS 

--DANIEL 6.-SEPTEMBER 24.- 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear Him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. 

AT THE TIME of this study Daniel was 

an old man. He had been long in service, 

wise and faithful in his administration of 

the government entrusted to him. He had 

seen the Babylonian Dynasty perish. In its 

place came the empire of the Medes and 

Persians. By these also Daniel's grand 

character was recognized— his loyalty to 

principle, his faithfulness as a public servant, 

his obedience to God and the principles 

of righteousness. The new Universal Empire was 

divided into one hundred and twenty provinces with 



one hundred and twenty governors. Over these were 
three presidents. Over these presidents was King Darius, 

R4875 : page 347 

above whom, as chief emperor, was Cyrus. Daniel was 
one of the three presidents, made such because of his 
recognized integrity and ability. 

What a compliment was thus paid to this noble, consecrated 
Jew, and how the recognition of his ability 
marks the breadth of mind of some of the rulers of the 
past! Their desire to have such a man in high repute 
and authority seems to evidence their good intentions 
in respect to the governing of the world. Indeed, we 
believe that this is true also of many noble minded, modern 
monarchs— that they give to their subjects the best government 
of which they are capable, according to their 
own imperfect judgments. 

That which will specially mark Messiah's Kingdom 
will be that it will not only have perfect ideals in respect 
to human government, but that it will be backed 
by Divine power, before which every knee shall bow 
and every tongue shall eventually confess.— Phil. 2:10,11. 

ENVIOUS OF DANIEL 

From all that we know of the governments of the 
Orient, present and past, they have been full of dishonesty, 
of what in our day is designated "graft." As 
an illustration: it is said that in the China-Japan war, 

R4875 : page 348 

contracts for cannon and other war materials were 

given to manufacturers closely allied to government 

officials, and that the most shame-faced dishonesty was 

practiced— for instance, that wooden cannon were delivered 

and mounted upon fortifications, while the contract 

money, which was paid for the genuine article, went 

to the thieves. A man like Daniel, in so important a 

place as that which he occupied as one of the three presidents 

or supervisors of a great empire, was sure to be 

in the way of grafters— a hinderer of their schemes. 

Realizing that he could not be deposed, the first step 

was to find some fault with him which would secure 

his removal; but the man's integrity and uprightness in 

general gave no hope in this direction. 

Finally a scheme was concerted. They knew that 
Daniel's religion lay at the foundation of his entire 
course in life. They must involve him along the line 
of his devotion to his God or not at all. King Darius, 
like every other man, was approachable through flattery. 
It was a custom of the East to closely associate the king 
with religion. He was supposedly a favorite with his 
god, else he would not enjoy so high a station. 

Working upon this theory, the conspirators, high in 



office, approached the king with a project which they 
assured him would help to make strong and united the 
various parts of his empire. It was this: that the king 
should be recognized for a month as the only channel 
of mediation or access between his subjects and their 
god or gods. The claim was that such a recognition 
would elevate the dignity of the throne in the minds of 
the people. King Darius of course felt flattered and at 
once agreed to the arrangement and issued an order to 
that effect— never for a moment thinking of what might 
be the result in the case of Daniel; and never for a 
moment suspecting that his counselors were seeking to 
entrap him and to legally accomplish the death of his 
most trusted officer. 

PRAYED THREE TIMES DAILY 

Daniel heard of the decree, but altered not his usual 
custom of praying three times every day before a window 
of his house which looked out toward Jerusalem. Morning, 
noon and night he remembered his God and remembered 
his vows of faithfulness to Him and called to mind 
the gracious promises respecting the Holy Land, that it 
would yet be the center of the whole earth and of God's 
holy people; that eventually, through these, Divine blessings 
would be extended to every nation, people, kindred 
and tongue. 

Some one has remarked that, as the sharpening of 
scythes in harvest time does not mean lost time or energy, 
so also time spent in prayer is not lost as respects the 
affairs of life. Unquestionably the best men and women 
in the world are those who pray, and pray regularly, who 
bow the knee, as did Daniel. Unquestionably the moments 
thus taken from earthly affairs are well spent and 
bring more than commensurate blessings upon the worshiper 
and all with which he has to do. Unquestionably 
it is impossible to live a consecrated life in neglect of 
prayer. What would Daniel have been without his praying 
time! How would his faith in God have persisted in 
that heathen land? How would his loyalty to principle 
have maintained itself in the midst of corruption had it 
not been for his communion with his Maker? To the 
Christian this privilege is still further enhanced by a 
realization that "We have an Advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ, the Righteous," in whose all-prevailing 
Name we may approach with courage the throne of 
heavenly grace, and obtain mercy and find grace to help 
in every time of need.— Heb. 4:16. 

JEHOVAH SENT HIS ANGEL 

The conspirators were on the lookout for Daniel. 
They had witnesses ready to testify, not that they had 
seen Daniel do anything wrong, but that he had violated 
the edict which the king had been entrapped into making 
and signing. The matter was laid before the king and 



he was reminded that it was one of the principles of 
the empire that even the king himself could not change or 
alter an edict once sent forth. King Darius felt himself 
bound hand and foot and ensnared— trapped. All day 
he sought means whereby he could avert the consequences 
of his royal mandate, but he found none. He explained 
the matter to Daniel, assuring him that he believed that 
his God was able to deliver him. What a beautiful 
testimony to the uprightness of Daniel's life! 

Daniel was cast into the lion's den and the stone 
for a door was secured with thongs, the knots of which 
were sealed with the king's signet, a safeguard against 
its being tampered with. That night, we are told, 
was one of great distress to the king. He could think 
only of his faithful officer, the noble man so unrighteously 
treated. He was ashamed of the part which he felt compelled 
to take in the matter. He was abroad early in 
the morning, after a sleepless night, to call to Daniel, to 
learn whether or not he were still alive. His joy of 
heart was great when he learned that he was still safe, 
that his God had sent His angel to stop the lions' mouths. 
Daniel was soon lifted from the pit! Daniel was vindicated! 
His God was vindicated! And the king now 
made another decree— that those counselors who had 
thus sought the life of a faithful man should themselves 
be put to the test by being cast into the same den of 
lions; and this in their case meant destruction, as the 
result proved. 

Oh, that every Christian could and would live as high 
above the world's standards as did Daniel, so that their 
enemies might see clearly that they have no ground for 
charges except those to their credit; that their God whom 
they serve is indeed the true God. 



R4875 : page 348 

WHO WERE TYPIFIED BY THE LEVITES? 

THE LEVITES typified the "Church of the 
First-born, whose names are written in 
heaven." This statement— their "names 
are written in heaven"— implies that they 
are recognized as a spiritual class— have 
come into Divine favor. 

We are given the history of the Levites 
as a typical tribe specially representing the 
first-born; and this history of the first-born 
refers us back to the time when the first-born 
of the tribe of Israel were spared on the night of 
the passover. That night symbolizes this Gospel Age, 
the time of darkness on the earth, when the Lord is 
taking out His jewel class. This "Church of the First-born" 
have passed from death unto life— all of these first-born, 
representing the entire "Church of the First-born," 



are represented in the tribe of Levi. Out from amongst 
these Levites were selected the priestly few, typifying 
our Lord and those who are faithfully walking in His 
steps. So the entire "Church of the First-born" will 
include a great multitude— more than the Body of Christ. 
The virgins who follow her (Psa. 45:14), all belong to 
this "Church of the First-born, whose names are written 
in heaven." The work of the Levites in connection with 

R4875 : page 349 

the Tabernacle service is, undoubtedly, a symbolical one. 

The high priest "went alone once every year"— on the 
Day of Atonement— into the Most Holy. Apparently the 
under-priests did not go into the Most Holy on this day 
(Heb. 9:6,7), but into the first Holy, where were the 
candlestick and the table of shewbread and the golden 
altar of incense. They, doubtless, typified those who are 
seated with Christ in the heavenly (Eph. 2:6), and are 
thus much in advance of the general household of faith. 
The under-priests were the sons of Aaron, and, being of 
the priestly family, or household, occupied a higher position 
and had greater rights and privileges than were 
enjoyed by the remainder of the Levites. The picture of 
the under-priests going into the Holy seems to correspond 
to our experiences of the present time and not to our 
experiences of the future, when we expect to enter into 
the Most Holy through the rent veil. 

The experiences of the antitypical Levites at the 
present time are different from what they will be in the 
future. At the present time they are in the Court condition, 
because only the members of the Body are privileged 
to go into the Holy and to know "the deep things of 
God." But when the articles of the Holy had been 
wrapped up, the typical Levites bore the precious things 
—were allowed to carry them. They could feel that they 
had a right to touch them in a general way, but not in 

R4876 : page 349 

the same way as the priests. This would seem to imply 
that none except those who are walking in the footsteps 
of Jesus could have a deep, full appreciation of the 
Divine Plan. Others might understand these things in a 
comparative degree, but not in their fulness. 

We are to consider, then, that as the Levites performed 
a service in connection with the Atonement Day 
sacrifices, so they will have a special service after the 
Day of Atonement. On the Day of Atonement, when 
the people were waiting for the priest to come out and 
bless them, was not the particular time for the Levites 
in general to teach the people or for them to learn their 
important lesson; but, after this Day of Atonement, the 
Levites were the general teachers of all the people, explaining 
the Law to them. And so we see that this will 
be a part of the work of the antitypical Levites in the 



future. They will have no inheritance in the land and its 
blessings. They will be associated in the Kingdom work 
and in the instruction of the people. But just how this 
will be done we may not now definitely know. 

We might also understand that the Levites in the 
Court very fittingly represent all those who desire to turn 
from sin and approach God and who are making progress 
toward complete justification. They are in a justified 
attitude from the moment they turn from sin and come 
into the Court. This implies faith and obedience. And 
so all who are in harmony with God in any sense of the 
word are, tentatively, Levites; but as to whether they will 
become actual Levites depends on whether they make 
entire consecration. If they do not make this consecration 
they will not receive the special blessings which 
would entitle them to the spirit plane. We all were 
in this sense of the word Levites— in the sense of approaching 
justification, desiring justification, desiring 
harmony with God and seeking it, putting away the filth 
of the flesh, etc.— but we did not reach that justification 
until we presented our bodies living sacrifices and were 
begotten of the Holy Spirit and the new life was begun 
by which we passed from death unto life, by which we 
became the "Church of the First-born" and had our 
names written in heaven. Any who turn back before 
presenting their bodies living sacrifices fail to reach the 
fulness of justification, fail to have the justification to 
life— they fail in degree of faithfulness to right principle 
and in degree of harmony with God. 

While the Court condition seems to represent at the 
present time all those who are approaching God and 
loving righteousness and desiring harmony with Him, it 
appears as though, with the closing of this Age, there 
will be an adjustment of matters by which all those who 
have not come to the point of full consecration and to the 
point of Spirit-begetting, who would not belong to the 
household of faith and to the "Church of the First-born," 
in the absolute sense, will go out and cease to be 
recognized as in the Court. Meantime, the class who have 
already made consecration, "presented their bodies living 
sacrifices," and received the begetting of the Spirit and 
enjoyed for a time the privileges of being members of 
the Body of Christ— these, failing to maintain their standing, 
are represented as separate from the "little flock" 
class, at the end of this Age. Their condition apparently 
is represented by the Court condition thereafter. 



R4876 : page 349 

COVETOUS CONVERSATION 

"Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be 
content with such things as ye have."— Heb. 13:5. 



THE Authorized Version of the Bible uses 

the word conversation in the broad 

sense of conduct, including, not only the 

words, but the looks and the acts of life. 

The force of the text,, therefore, is, Let 

your conduct be without covetousness. 

How could a covetous thought affect our 

conduct? As some see others possessed of 

larger wealth or larger opportunities in the 

service of the Lord, of better conveniences 

than they possess, or who are better looking than themselves, 

etc., they have a spirit, or disposition, of covetousness, 

dissatisfaction with what Divine providence has 

shaped for them. 

When we say, "what Divine providence has shaped 
for them," we do not mean that one should make no endeavor 
for advancement. If a person is happy, he should 
still strive to attain to something more than he possesses. 
A certain amount of ambition is laudable. The ambition 
against which the Apostle is speaking is that of a dissatisfied 
heart, mind, overlooking the blessings already 
possessed and desiring the things that he has not. Rather, 
such a one should say, God could grant greater blessings 
to me if He chose. I am His child and what, therefore, 
He grants me in the way of reward for my endeavors 
must be all right. I shall not envy others their possessions; 
but I shall wait for the Lord and believe that what 
He gives me is best for me, and much better than anything 
I could carve out for myself. 

Covetousness is a desire to have, keep, enjoy— especially 
applied to something that belongs to another and 
which we do not possess. The principle of covetousness 
is a principle of selfish desire. It may manifest itself in 
two ways: First, when it extends to another man's goods; 
and, second, when it pertains to things already in our 
possession. This is specially true of Christians, who have 
given themselves and all they have to the Lord. From 
the moment of such consecration all the powers possessed 
or to be possessed belong to the Lord; and to seek to use 
these for one's self and to refuse to use them in the 

page 350 

service of the Lord would be holding back what belongs 
to the Lord according to our own arrangement with Him. 
What distribution should be made of whatever one may 
have, as the Lord's steward, is to be left to the individual 
himself. Under some very special conditions another 
might give counsel, in the way of helping a brother to do 
a service which he was apparently overlooking, or respecting 
an element of character which the brother was evidently 
cultivating, contrary to the spirit of his covenant 
of sacrifice. 

Some of the Lord's dear children fail to realize their 
privileges of (1) sacrifice, and (2) the cultivation of the 
spirit of contentment and generosity. There are some 



who, after being well fed on spiritual manna, permit a 

selfish craving or a covetous spirit to interrupt their fellowship 

with the Lord to some extent, hankering for 

earthly, fleshly, good things, forgetting the wisdom of 

their Leader, the Lord, and that His love, which has thus 

far delivered them and fed and led them, is still with 

them, the same as ever. Sometimes the covetousness is a 

repining against their lot in life, a desire for more ease 

and comfort and wealth and social influence than are 

within reach. Sometimes it is a protest against their 

share of the aches and pains of the groaning creation and 

their inability to get rid of these. Sometimes it is a 

protest against the illness and death of a loved one. 

How unwise! Should not those who have been fed 
on the spiritual manna realize that all of Spiritual Israel's 
affairs are under the Lord's special supervision? Should 
they not remember that "He doth not afflict willingly nor 
grieve the children of men," but for their good? (Lam. 3:33; 
Heb. 12:10.) Ah! some have found that the prayers 
of murmurers, even when answered, have brought unexpected 
drawbacks. 

Covetous (selfish) prayers are too expensive. Some 
have gained wealth and lost the Truth and its service. 
Some have gained health only to find that with it they 
gained trials no less severe. Some have had their dear 
ones restored to them from the very jaws of death, only 
to wish afterwards that God had not answered their 
payers, or more correctly, to wish that they had accepted 
the Lord's wisdom and providences trustfully, contentedly, 
uncomplainingly. Spiritual Israel should use wisely such 
things as are within their reach, accepting all as God's 
gifts with thanksgiving. Their petitions should be for 
spiritual gifts, including patient endurance and heart 
contentment, accompanied with heartfelt thanks for 
blessings already received. 



R4876 : page 350 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE BULLOCK'S BLOOD 

Questions.— What did the blood of the bullock represent? 

Answer.— The blood presented in the Most Holy 
represented the life, or life-rights of the one sacrificed; 
but the blood itself was a symbol of death. When blood 
is in the veins it is a symbol of life. The blood of the 
bullock and, subsequently, the blood of the goat, in the 
hands of the priest, symbolically said, This animal is 
dead, and here is a proof of it. So the presentation of 
the blood meant the presentation of this sacrificed life 
with all the rights appertaining thereto. 

Our Lord had certain life-rights when He died. The 



expression life-rights may properly be used also in connection 

with an individual who does not have life in the 

full sense, but who has made a full consecration and has 

been accepted by the Lord. Such a one is reckoned as 

having passed from death unto life. In the moment of 

his having righteousness imputed to him, he passes from 

death unto life. The Advocate has imputed to that one 

R4877 : page 350 

a sufficiency of His merit to compensate for any deficiency; 
he is thus rendered acceptable and is then in 
a reckonedly complete condition. He then has life-rights; 
and it is those life-rights that are said to be sacrificed, or 
presented to God. In this manner the person may be said 
to become a member of the great High Priest's Body. 
Christ imputes to him a sufficiency of merit to compensate 
for his demerit; and having been made acceptable to the 
Father by this imputation, he becomes a member of the 
Body of the great High Priest. 

There is a difference between offering our sacrifice and 
presenting ourselves. Not we, but the High Priest accepts one 
as a member of His Body, He imputes to that one 
a sufficiency of His merit to give him life-rights. By virtue 
of being reckoned perfect, one has life-rights, a condition 
which permits him to be a sacrifice. 

All those life-rights which our Lord possessed when 
He died were symbolically represented in the blood of the 
bullock; and with that blood the sprinkling was done in 
the Most Holy. 

There was just one moment when the knife in the 
hand of the high priest smote and slew the bullock. That 
moment represented the moment when our Lord, at Jordan, 
became dead as a man and alive as a New Creature, 
when "He, through the eternal Spirit, offered up Himself 
without spot to God." But it was not as a New Creature 
that He offered up Himself, but as the man Christ Jesus. 
His spotless humanity was what He there offered. This 
He did through the eternal Spirit of Sonship and loyalty to 
God; and this was the opportune moment, the moment 
foretold in prophecy. Then He was acknowledged a 
Priest. If Christ were on earth, on the earthly plane, He 
could not be a priest according to the flesh, not being of 
the family of Aaron. The only Order of Priesthood, 
therefore, to which He belonged was a spiritual Order, the 
one mentioned in the Scripture which says: "Thou 
art a Priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek." 
(Psa. 1 10:4.) He was not a Priest according to the flesh, 
but as a New Creature. 

The High Priest came into his office by virtue of his 
work of sacrifice. The bringing of the bullock into the 
Court meant its presentation for sacrificial purposes. So 
with Jesus. When He came to John at Jordan, He made 
a surrender of Himself. This the Father acknowledged. 
The disciples of the Lord presented themselves, but they 
were neither accepted as sacrifices nor begotten of the 



Spirit, until Pentecost. On that day, while they were 
waiting, God accepted the sacrifice, and made them priests 
at that moment. 



THE IMPUTATION OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

Question.— Does Christ impute His righteousness 
to the members of His Body? 

Answer.— When we say that our Lord imputes His 
righteousness, we are not to think that He gives His own 
righteousness as the High Priest, but that He imputes 
the merit of His human sacrifice on our behalf. When, 
as the Man Christ Jesus, He laid down His life, without 
being under sentence of death in any degree, there was 
a merit in that sacrifice. The early life-rights, which 
the Lord laid down, were to His credit, giving Him 

R4877 : page 35 1 

the power of restitution for the world of mankind, the 
power for their regeneration. But before the merit of 
that sacrifice is given to the world, it is made the basis of 
our justification, for the covering of our imperfections. 
It could have been used for us in restitution, but such was 
not God's Plan during this Age. Hence, Jesus' merit is 
imputed to believers who consecrate, and also covers the 
blemishes and unwitting trespasses of their imperfect 
earthen vessels to the end of their course. 



RIGHTEOUSNESS AND MERIT 

Question.— What distinction would you make between 
the righteousness of our Lord and His merit? 

Answer.— The righteousness of our Lord was His 
right-doing, His right conduct, His perfect character while 
He was theman, while He was on trial. The merit is 
the Divine appreciation, the Divine estimation of that 
character, of that right-doing. Since He ceased to be a 
man, our Lord has, of course, no righteousness as a 
human being. That righteousness which was His before 
His consecration and which He maintained, constitutes a 
merit in the Divine sight, which is imputed to the Church 
now, and which is to be utilized by Him in the blotting out 
of the sins of the whole world, shortly. It is a sufficiency 
of merit; for one man was sentenced to death and, later, 
another man was passed upon as worthy of life. This 
merit, therefore, this value of laying down a life not 
worthy of death, is at His disposal in the Divine arrangement. 



SHOULD BE APPLIED ANTITYPICALLY 



Question.— Have we any Scripture to show that 
the Aaronic priesthood will exercise their priestly office 
in the Millennial Age? 

Answer.— One Scripture that might be understood 
so to teach is found in the book of Malachi, which says 
that when the Lord shall come into His Temple, "He shall 
sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and He shall purify 
the sons of Levi and purge them as gold and silver, that 
they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness."— Mai. 3:3. 

Some might apply this Scripture to the sons of Levi 
in a literal way. But we think that it is antiypical, that 
the Church constitutes the Levitical system and that these 
are the spiritual Levites whom the Purifier will make 
ready, that they may offer unto God an acceptable sacrifice, 
as antitypical Levites and a Royal Priesthood. 



page 351 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study V., VI., Organization of the New Creation. 
SEPTEMBER 3 

(126) Does the foregoing signify that the sisters may 
never explain to others "the good tidings of great joy?" 
P. 267, par. 2. 

(127) What is the Apostle's advice regarding woman's 
attitude in Church gatherings for worship and praise? P. 268, 
par. 1. 

(128) To what kind of Church gatherings did the Apostle's 
restrictions evidently relate? P. 268, par. 2,3. 

(129) Did the Apostle Paul favor the "woman's rights" 
idea? P. 269, par. 1. 

(130) What argument on this subject can be drawn from 
Eph. 4:11,12, noting the gender indicated in the Greek? 
P. 269, par. 2. 

(131) Would it be considered "teaching" for a sister to 
quote the words of the Lord or the Apostles upon any subject 
under discussion, or to read or refer to recognized publications 
explanatory of the Scriptures? P. 270, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 10 

(132) What is evidently the beautiful and appropriate 
symbolism of this Divine order in the Church, "Let her be 
covered?" P. 270, par. 2. 

(133) What was there in the dress of the High Priest and 
the under priests which typified this sex-distinction? P. 271, 
par. 1. 

(134) Explain the Apostle's teaching with respect to the 
sisters wearing a head covering, as stated in 1 Cor. 11:3-7,10-15. 
P. 271, par. 2. 



(135) Was this a Divine command? and are there good 
reasons for perpetuating this custom? P. 271, par. 3. 

(136) Briefly summarizing, what are the liberties and the 
limitations of sisters in the Ecclesia? P. 272. 

SEPTEMBER 17 

(1) Although the entire Church throughout the world is 
one, how should each separate Ecclesia be considered, and 
conduct itself? P. 237, par. 1. 

(2) How is each congregation to recognize all other 
Ecclesias, and expect the Lord to provide for the needs of the 
Church as a whole? P. 273, par. 2. 

(3) While thus looking for special instruments to be used 
of the Lord, what should be the attitude of the Church toward 
all such and their teachings? P. 274, par. 1. 

(4) What Scriptural authority for expecting one general 
channel of instruction at the Lord's second presence, and how 
does this affect the individual Ecclesias with respect to order, 
discipline, etc.? P. 274, par. 2. 

(5) In the selection of elders for an Ecclesia, what should 
be the qualifications of those who attempt to express the mind 
of the Lord by voting? P. 275, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 24 

ORDAINING ELDERS IN EVERY CHURCH. 

(6) What is the significance of the word ordain in Acts 14:23? 
P. 276, par. 1. 

(7) Is the same Greek word used by the Lord and the 
Apostles with respect to the ordination of the Apostles, and 
indeed of every member of the New Creation? P. 276, par. 2. 

(8) What was the custom of the early Church? Cite two 
instances of this method. P. 276, par. 3. 

(9) Is there no other word mentioned in the New Testament 
as signifying to give authority or permission to preach, 

as the word ordain is now generally used and understood? 
P. 277, par. 2 to P. 278, par. 3. 

(10) What spirit is responsible for the division into 
"clergy" and "laity?" P. 278, par. 4, first part. 



R4885 : page 351 

BROTHER RUSSELL IN GREAT BRITAIN 

Thursday, Oct. 12 London Albert Hall. 

Sunday, " 15 London Tabernacle. 

Tuesday, " 17 Brighton. 

Wednesday, " 18 Portsmouth. 

Thursday, " 19 Southampton. 

Friday, " 20 Bournemouth. 

Sunday, " 22 London Tabernacle. 

Tuesday, " 24 Perth. 



Wednesday, " 25 Dundee. 

Thursday, " 26 Paisley. 

Friday, " 27 Greenock. 

Saturday, " 28 Glasgow. 

Sunday, " 29 Glasgow. 

Monday, " 30 Motherwell. 

Tuesday, " 31 Belfast. 

Wednesday, Nov. 1 Londonderry. 

Thursday, " 2 Portadown. 

Friday, " 3 Dublin. 

Sunday, " 5 London Tabernacle. 

Monday, " 6 Cambridge. 

Tuesday, " 7 Oxford. 

Wednesday, " 8 Newport. 

Thursday, " 9 Cardiff. 

Friday, " 10 Swansea. 

Sunday, " 12 London Tabernacle. 

Monday, " 13 Northampton. 

Tuesday, " 14 Leicester. 

Wednesday, " 15 Nottingham. 

Thursday, " 16 Sheffield. 

Friday, " 17 London Tabernacle. 



page 354 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



these studies are recommended to students as veritable "bible 
keys; prices are net and barely cover cost of production. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages" gives an outline of the 
Divine Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemptions 
and restitution: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 75c. (3s. 1 1/2.) 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner 
and time of the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible 
Testimony on this subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. 
(Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. 1 l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies 
which mark events connected with the "Time of the End," 
the glorification of the Church and the establishment of the 
Millennial Kingdom; it also contains a chapter on the Great 
Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the dates and other 
teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 
6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. 1 l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the 
dissolution of the present order of things is in progress, and 
that all the panaceas offered are valueless to avert the predicted 
end. It marks in these events the fulfilment of prophecy, 
noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of Matt. 24 and 
Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 1/2 d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man." treats 
an all-important subject— the hub, the center around which all 



the features of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the 
most careful and prayerful consideration on the part of all 
true Christians: 640 pages in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 1/2 d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative 
Week (Genesis 1, 2), and with the Church, God's "New 
Creation." It examines the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, 
obligations and hopes appertaining to those called and 
accepted as members of the Body under the Head: 750 pages in 
embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 1/2 d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vol.) 
$3.00, (12s, 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages: German, six vols.; 
Swedish, five vols.; in Dano-Norwegian, four vols; in Greek, 
1, 2, 3 Nx 5 vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish 
Italian, Hungarian, Polish, and Finnish, one vol. each; 
bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same. 

Vol. 6, Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 each. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII SEPTEMBER 15 No. IS 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From "The Watch Tower" 355 

Speaking-With-Tongues Delusion 355 

Unrest in China 355 

The Matter With the Churches 355 

Persecutions of Jews Continues 357 

The Judgment of the Angels 358 

Some of Them Probably Repentant 358 

The Word and the Way 359 

Loyalty the Great Test 360 

Set as a Watchman 361 

"River of the Water of Life" 362 

No Bride to Say "Come" 362 

Endless Torments Unscriptural 363 

"Pray Always" 364 

Independent Bible Study 365 

Faith, Not Sight 365 

Some Interesting Letters 366 

Testimony Meetings— Volunteer Work 366 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 367 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 



CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



COLPORTEURS TAKE NOTICE 

Perfection is, of course, impossible, but we desire that all 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES shall be as nearly perfect as is 
reasonable to ask in any books. We request the assistance of 
Colporteurs to this end. If you receive damaged or imperfect 
books write to us immediately, giving particulars and sending 
a sample showing the imperfections. Deduct for same with 
postage from next remittance. Address book to the Society 
in care of "Colporteur Dept." Mark it "Damaged" and put 
your name on wrapper. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for October follow: (1) 273; (2) 



165; (3) 328; (4) 12; (5) 308; (6) 202; (7) 1; (8) 
91; (9) 59; (10) 299; (11) 8; (12) 286; (13) 170; 
(14) 259; (15) 177; (16) 293; (17) 283; (18) 159; 
(19) 106; (20) 112; (21) 105; (22) 130; (23) 79; 
(24) 214; (25) 119; (26) 332; (27) 108; (28) 95; 
(29) 51; (30) 230; (31) 313. 



R4877 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"SPEAKING -WITH-TONGUES " DELUSION 



WE HAVE heretofore referred to some earnest 

people who are evidently ensnared by 

the Adversary into believing that they are 

enjoying a restoration of the gifts whereby 

God blessed and established the Christian 

Church in the first century. Their strong 

delusions continue to increase under a 

spirit power which, we believe, is not from 

God nor from the dead, but from the fallen 

spirits, the fallen angels. In addition to 

the speaking with tongues and the miraculous healing of 

the sick and the seeing of visions, they now have spirit 

manifestations. Their latest claims, reported in their religious 

journals, are that the Lord Jesus, on several occasions, 

has appeared in their midst at their meetings, has 

been seen with the natural eye, etc. 

That these people are earnest and evidently honest 
only increases our sorrow for them. (For dishonest people 
we have comparatively little sympathy.) We fear 
that a later development will be spirit manifestations of 
a still more pronounced type. The fallen angels are evidently 
desirous of deluding the whole world. They have 
certainly had great success, so far as many of the false 
doctrines are concerned. And as we read the Scriptures 
we believe they will for a time have a still greater influence 
in human affairs shortly. Those of our readers 
who have contact with any of these deluded people 
should point out to them the Apostle's words, "Believe 
not every spirit," and should remind them that the fallen 
angels are "lying spirits," and that the entire confidence 
of God's people should be in the teachings of the 
Scriptures. 

The Scriptures clearly testify that those who possessed 
the gifts of the Spirit in the early Church received them 
from the Apostles by the laying on of hands, so that 
when the Apostles were dead and also those upon whom 
they had laid their hands and communicated the gifts, it 
ended those "gifts" in the Church. And the next step of 
progress was the manifestation of the fruits of the 



Spirit, as St. Paul most clearly points out— I Cor. 13:8. 



UNREST IN CHINA-BRITISH UNFAITHFUL 

Bishop W. B. Lewis, of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church of Foo Chow, China, discussing recent trouble and 
present unrest in the Canton Province, says:— 

"The real root of the trouble is because the Chinese 
government has suppressed the growing of poppy. In 
1906, England and China entered into a treaty to suppress 
the opium traffic. The terms of the treaty were 
that England was to decrease the importation of opium 
one tenth each year and China agreed to suppress the 
growing of poppy in the same ratio. 

"China has lived up to the terms of the treaty and 
England has not. In consequence of this the price of 
opium in China has increased fourfold and the result is 
that millions of dollars are flowing out of the country and 
nothing is coming in. All the time England is profiting 
by the condition as it now is. The residents of a large 
part of Southern China do not understand the treaty and 
hence the rebellion was brought about. However, the 
present condition will not continue much longer, as the 
British government cannot face the world because of 
failure to abide by the terms of the treaty. I believe the 
English are coming to the realization that this condition 
cannot go forward, and I believe developments will occur 
in the near future. The final outcome will be that England 
will have to abide by the terms of the treaty and then the 

R4878 : page 355 

opium traffic will cease. The Chinese government will 
effectively suppress the growing of poppy." 



THE MATTER WITH THE CHURCHES 

"What's the matter with the churches?" says the 
Toledo News-Bee: "It's only those who will not see who 
are sanguine enough to maintain that there is nothing the 
matter with them. For it is blazoned in actual fact, so 
that he who runs may read, that the churches, judged 
merely by what they have done outside of the spiritual 
realm, in the way of civic and social betterment, have 
failed thus far to show adequate results for the enormous 
sums they have invested in buildings, and for the preaching 
of the gospel at home and abroad. 

"Dr. Thomas E. Green, writing in Hampton's on 'What 
Is to Become of the Preacher?' says:— 

'"That of the 90,000,000 people in this country, 
32,936,446 are church members (census report of 1906). 

"That of the 1,440,000,000 people in the world, a billion, 



one thousand million, are not Christians. 

'"That church attendance is falling off. It needs 
neither figures nor argument to establish the fact that 
church attendance and church worship are in a condition 
of decline. The experience of any community is ample 
proof. 

'"That since 1905 the collections in London churches 
have fallen off 35 per cent. 

'"That not five per cent, of the workingmen of England 
and America attend church. 

R4878 : page 356 

'"That the supply of ministers is rapidly falling off.' 

"So much for that part of it. Now for the other: 
The average American minister earns less than half the 
wages of the average American bricklayer. 

"Americans give more liberally for missions than for 
home work, but for every dollar put in the 'foreign 
field' for actual mission work, more than another dollar 
is spent in administration. Of the ten million dollars 
contributed in this country for missions last year, less 
than five million dollars got to the 'heathen.' 

"Taking a certain Wisconsin town of 2,700 inhabitants 
as representative, we are shown 13 church organizations, 
the largest numbering 225 communicants, the smallest 25, 
keeping up 1 1 church buildings at an aggregate cost of 
$10,400 per year. 'There are in the United States 14 
kinds of Baptists, 24 kinds of Lutherans, 15 kinds of 
Methodists and 12 kinds of Presbyterians,' says Dr. Green. 

"To cap the climax with a final absurdity he cites the 
fact that there is a lone southern Methodist church on the 
Manitoba border and an equally lonesome northern Presbyterian 
church languishing in the beach of the gulf of 
Mexico." 



The Toledo News-Bee concludes its editorial above 
by saying, "It seems clear as daylight that the salvation 
of the sects lies in Christian co-operation." 

Just so. The disease is apparent, but the real cause 
and the proper remedy are not discerned. Why should we 
plan for the salvation of the sects? Should we not 
rather strive for the salvation of the people who for so 
long have been confused and misled in various directions 
by the sects and the creeds of the "dark ages"? If everybody 
agrees that our Lord and the Apostles recognized 
only the true Church, "the Church of the living God 
whose names are written in heaven," and if all the division 
of God's people into sects and parties with contradictory 
creeds has been wrong, why should any of us seek 
to uphold or to save the sects from destruction? Surely 
all true Christians should unite in abolishing sectarianism, 
each by destroying his own creed fences, which separate 
God's professed people into various more or less antagonistic 



little companies. 

The proposition of Church Federation is merely a 
method of sect salvation, preservation, the very thing 
which no true Christians should desire. We are told that 
Federation would ignore doctrines altogether and merely 
make of the different sects a social and working combination 
along lines upon which all could agree. But is this 
the Divine order? Would not this be substituting the 
commandments of men, the Federation, for the doctrines 
of Christ? Should we not, therefore, rather remember 
the Apostle's words which assure us, not only that there 
is but one Church of the living God, but also that there 
is but one Lord, one faith and one baptism, one God and 
Father over all and one Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?— 
Eph. 4:5,6. 

Manifestly it is our duty to abandon all of our various 
creeds formulated after the death of the Apostles and to 
go back to the words of Jesus, the Apostles and Prophets 
and to accept and believe these as the Divine revelation of 
the Divine will and purposes. Some may incline to say:— 

YOU ARE A CATHOLIC! 

In the sense that the word catholic signifies general 
instead of sectarian, the charge would be correct; but we 
are not Roman Catholic any more than Anglican Catholic. 
Nor were Jesus and the Apostles Roman, Greek or 
Anglican Catholics. They were catholics in a broader 
sense. And we strive to take a similar position, ignoring 
national as well as sectarian boundaries and lines and 
authority. The broad term Christian, without any limitations, 
includes the catholic or general thought and is quite 
sufficient for us and, we believe, should be sufficient for 
all of the followers of Jesus. 

But someone will ask, When you speak of the one 
true Church, do you not necessarily mean the Roman 
Catholic Church? Oh, no, my friend; there were plain 
Christians before there were Roman Catholic Christians 
or Christians of any of the other various branches. We 
refer to the one Church which Jesus and the Apostles 
established on the foundation of their teachings as found 
in the Holy Scriptures. It did not ignore doctrines, but 
admonished that we should contend earnestly for the 
"faith once delivered to the saints" (Jude 3), which would 
be sufficient for the man of God.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

The one Church of Christ, inspired by the true faith, 
the true doctrines of the Bible, will be bound together 
by the cords of love, fellowship, brotherhood, "that they 
all may be one as Thou, Father, and I are one." (John 17:11.) 
As our Heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus do 
not need to be bound together by fear or threats, so likewise 
the true members of the true Church will need no 
such bondage to make them one in spirit or in doctrines, 
for, as the Master said, "Ye shall know the Truth and 
the Truth shall make you free." The secret of this true 
union is that each member of the true Church is fully consecrated 



to God and His service and is a saint striving 
for perfect mastery over his flesh and is begotten of the 
Holy Spirit and its holy desires for righteousness and 
truth, taught and providentially overruled and guided to 
a knowledge of His will and an understanding of His 
Word. Thus "they shall all be taught of God." This is 
the Holy Catholic Church. All of its members will be 
taught of God. 

Ah, you say, such a Church of saints would not number 
four hundred millions as we now boast! 

No, we reply; it would be as the Master declares, a 
"little flock" in comparison to the masses of humanity and 
the masses of Christianity. But that "little flock" would 
be burning and shining lights in the world, as the Master 
declares. The human organizations for benevolent, educational, 
charitable and other good works there might 
still be, but, disillusioned, they would no longer style themselves 
churches, but would know that there is but the one 
Church. 

When we learn to look from the Bible standpoint we 
see that inside and outside of all the different sects and 
parties and creeds of Christendom there is just such a 
"little flock" of saintly footstep followers of Jesus. These 
are the true Church as God sees it. The human institutions 
called churches, while containing some of these members 
of the true Church, are merely social clubs and not 
churches. There is but one, and it is scattered everywhere, 
and yet, "The Lord knoweth them that are His." 
-2 Tim. 2:19. 

THE CHURCH'S WORK FOR THE WORLD 

Ah! but, says one, where would come in the Church's 
work for the world? We reply: God's work for the 
world will be accomplished through the Church after the 
Church shall have been completed, changed, glorified, in 
the Kingdom. God's work in the present time is not the 
salvation of the world, but the salvation of the Church; 
the world's salvation will follow by and by during the 
reign of Messiah for a thousand years, when Satan shall 
be bound; then every evil influence will be restrained and 
every good influence let loose. 

Now the Church is to make herself ready as the Bride 

R4878 : page 357 

of Christ. (Rev. 19:7.) Now the individual Christians 

are called upon to make their calling and election sure. 

Only incidentally, and not as their chief work, are they 

to let their light shine before men. Now the Lord's 

blessing through Apostles, Prophets, evangelists, teachers, 

is exclusively for the edifying of the saints for the work 

of the ministry, until we all come to the full stature of 

the Man— the Christ, the Anointed, of which Jesus will 

be the Head and the Church the members in glory. (Eph. 4:12-14.) 

God is not now dealing by force to compel 



every knee to bow and every tongue to confess. That 
will be by and by. Now the still, small Voice is calling 
the saintly class to separation from the world, to fellowship 

R4879 : page 357 

with God, to joint-heirship with Jesus in the Kingdom 
soon to be established "under the whole heavens." 

What the world has so much been calling for will soon 
be realized, namely, a Church Triumphant, a Church in 
glory and perfection, a Church empowered of God to put 
down sin, to correct and chasten the sinners and to lead 
as many as possible of them into ways of righteousness 
unto everlasting life. 

Reverting, then, to the question at the head of this 
article, "What is the Matter with the Churches," our reply 
is that the difficulty is due to the formation and perpetuation 
of various human systems, each trying to palm itself 
off as the one true Church of Christ. Some time after 
the formation the self-deception gave way before the 
saner thought that none of them surely could make such 
a claim. The next step amongst the Protestant sects was 
to say, If you will recognize me, I will recognize you, and 
we will claim that Christ has many churches and ignore 
His statement that there is but one. This policy has been 
successful for quite a while. And it would even now be 
successful were it not that the eyes of human understanding 
are opening and the inconsistencies of all the various 
creeds of Christendom are recognized. Now it begins to 
be manifest that for centuries there has been something 
radically wrong with the faith, the hope, the baptism and 
the names of all the different sects; now true Christians of 
all denominations are perplexed and groping after truth, 
and so perplexed that they scarcely realize that, to find 
it, they should go back to the Fountain Head, Jesus and 
the Apostles and their teachings. 

Meantime, also, the masses of Christendom are becoming 
awakened— they are going into modern infidelity 
called Higher Criticism, New Thought, Theology, 
Theosophy, Evolution, Christian Science, etc. Thus, between 
the perplexity of the saints looking for truth and 
the nominal masses looking for the truth in other directions, 
no wonder the sectarian systems are uninteresting 
except to the comparatively few who, as ministers, officers, 
etc., "feel it their duty" to attend meeting and to profess 
creeds which they do not believe. 

The real duty of every Christian is to take his stand 
for the Truth and against sectarianism and its base misrepresentation 
of the Divine character. With the creed 

fences down these, the saintly few, would soon come together 
under the attractions of the green pastures and 
still waters of the Divine Word. The charities of the 
world would progress very much as now because the poor, 
the Master said, we would have always with us until His 
Kingdom would be established, which will destroy poverty, 
as well as overthrow sin and death. 



THE OUTLOOK IN GERMANY 

There is not a serious political mind in Germany today 
that does not consider the internal conditions as very 
grave, however different the political views may be. The 
leaders of the People's party at the decisive debates on 
the suffrage bill, one after another declared with greatest 
emphasis that they viewed the situation as very serious; 
that we are approaching very serious times; this conviction 
was also shared by the Social Democrats. In fact, 
the view has already been expressed that we are in an 
era of revolutionary legislation, of immense and inconceivable 
political, social and ethical transition. We 
merely mention this in support of our conviction that the 
internal conditions of Germany are in reality very serious, 
and we regard it not as a refutation, but as a confirmation 
that the sentiment prevailing in Germany is to some extent 
nervously hysterical and may be characterized partly by 
that expression which stamped the period preceding 
the French revolution— apres nous le deluge (after us the 
deluge) . — Rheinish-Westphalian News . 



PERSECUTION OF JEWS CONTINUES 

In Russia the tale of Jewish persecution continues to 
unfold itself. The recent political crisis was hailed by 
the Russian Jews as promising some relief, for it was 
thought that whatever resulted, the condition of affairs 
could not grow worse and no regime could exceed in 
cruelty that of M. Stolypin. In the result, M. Stolypin has 
remained in office and his myrmidons in different parts of 
the empire continue their foul work. The order has apparently 
gone forth that the conscience of Europe is no 
more to be shocked by massacres, but the same object is 
to be attained more thoroughly and without any scandal 
by means of relentless persecution. 

Odessa is in particular the center of Jewish persecution 
of the most heartless description. The anti-Semitic 
governor of that city has already succeeded in 
creating a mass of Jewish pauperism, estimated to number 
80,000, and at the same time, by seizing the management 
and the funds of the local Jewish charities, the means of 
coping with this appalling misery have been destroyed. 
The Universities of Russia have long been practically 
closed to Jewish students, but there has been no hindrance 
of their studying as external students. 

Almost the last act of the government previous to the 
recent crisis was, however, the exclusion of the Jews 
from the ranks of external students, and nothing that has 
since happened has served to alter this decree. Thus, the 
Russian government has now succeeded in depriving 



6,000,000 of the most enlightened of the inhabitants of the 
empire of all means of obtaining higher education. It 
seems as if the Policy of Pobedonostcheff still holds good 
—the solution of the Jewish question by the destruction of 
one-third of the Jewish population, the conversion of a 
second third, and the migration of the rest.— Exchange. 



INCIPIENT AGNOSTICS 

The Methodist Recorder notes the lament of Rev. 
Thomas Payne, D.D., respecting the mischief wrought by 
the theory of Evolution, especially among the young, and 
of the teaching of other false doctrines in Sunday Schools 
and Bible Classes and from many pulpits, as well as by 
professors in schools and colleges:— 

"He asserts that owing to this many young men have 
given up their reading of the Bible and other books of a 
religious nature, and gives instances in which young people 
from Christian families have come home from schools 
and colleges of this description incipient Agnostics. His 
avowed object is to help such by leading them back to 
faith in God and confidence in His Word. He charges 
the Theory of Evolution with being the chief cause of 
most of the erroneous teaching of the time; and to its 
unquestioned acceptance and hasty application he traces 
the mischief that he laments." 



R4879 : page 358 

THE JUDGMENT OF THE ANGELS 

THE APOSTLE PAUL asked of the Corinthian 
Church, "Know ye not that we [the 
saints] shall judge angels?" (I Cor. 6:3.) 
We have been frequently asked as to how 
the saints shall judge angels? 

We have given the suggestion that it 
would not be appropriate for the saints 
to judge the holy angels, for evidently the 
holy angels do not need any judgment. In 
the past there was one judgment of the 
angels; this is mentioned by St. Peter. (2 Pet. 2:4,5.) He 
says that in the time before the flood the angels had their 
trial; and that those angels who did not maintain their 
condition of loyalty to God were cast down to tartarus— 
that is, to our earth's atmosphere, there "restrained in 
chains of darkness until the Judgment of the Great Day." 
(See also Jude 6.) This "Judgment of the Great Day," 
to our understanding, means that in that Great Day another 
trial will come to those angels. 

The question might arise as to what will be the character 
of and when will be that "Great Day"? We answer 



that the Great Day is the Seventh Day. God divided the 
history of man, apparently, into seven great epochs of 
1,000 years each. Six days (1,000-year days) of this 
great Week are in the past; the Seventh Day is the Last 
Day (1,000 years long, as are the other six). So this 
Last Day is the Great Day of Messiah— of the Kingdom 
of Messiah— in which He will rule and reign in the world 
for its judgment, uplifting and blessing. That will be the 
Great Day, in comparison with other days; the Sabbath 
Day, as compared with the six days of trouble and unrest 
that the world has experienced. In that Day peace 
and rest will come to the world, for Christ who takes 
the Kingdom will bring everything into subjection. To 
Him "Every knee shall bow and every tongue confess." 
-Phil. 2:10,11. 

So in connection with that Great Day, humanity is to 
have a judgment— "He (Jehovah) hath appointed a Day, 
in the which He will judge the world in righteousness by 
that Man whom He hath ordained." (Acts 17:31.) The 
great "Man" God has ordained is Jesus the Head and 
the Church His Body, of which the Apostle says some 
are Jews and some are Gentiles— "to make of the twain 
(Jews and Gentiles) one New Man"— the Mediator, the 
Peace Maker between God and mankind.— Eph. 2:13-17. 

R4880 : page 358 

Without any question, then, we can see when the 
world will have its Judgment, or trial Day, to decide 
which of them will be worthy and which will be unworthy 
to receive perfect life as human beings. But now 
as to the trial of the fallen angels:— 

THEIR JUDGMENT PROBABLY NOW 

We have answered in previous issues of THE WATCH 
TOWER that this trial will be, we believe, at the very beginning 
of this Great Day. And why at the beginning? 
For the reason that there is only one way, so far as we 
can see, in which these fallen angels can have a trial, 
their trial consisting in having a fuller opportunity to 
sin, if they so desire, or an opportunity to show, if they 
wish, that they are sick of sin and desire to return to 
harmony with God. We cannot think that God will allow 
this trial of the angels during the Millennial reign, for 
then, nothing shall hurt; nothing shall destroy; Satan 
will be bound and all evil influences will be restrained. 
No, it cannot be then. And in order to be tried at all, 
these fallen angels must have certain liberties granted, 
to prove them. Otherwise, where would be their trial? 
Consequently, reasoning along this basis (2 Peter 3:7), 
we reach the conclusion that the trial of these fallen 
angels is in the near future— perhaps to some extent 
already begun. In what way? Somewhat after the manner 
of their previous trial before the flood. And what 
happened at that time? The account is given in Genesis, chapter 6. 



We read that at that time "The sons of God 
(materialized angels— Jude 6,7) saw the daughters of 
men that they were fair; and they took unto themselves 
wives of all that they chose (apparently without consulting 
anyone), ...and there were born unto them 
children, who became mighty men of renown"— giants, 
different from purely human stock. 

This was a very peculiar condition of things. How 
could this be, you may ask? How could the angels do 
this? The Scriptures answer that at that time the angels 
had a liberty which they do not now have. That liberty 
was the privilege of materialization— the taking on of a 
human body. They acted as men, they ate as men, they 
spoke as men; and as men they begot children. But 
since these fathers were of a superior stock, in some 
respects their children were men of renown and giants 
as compared with the ordinary human stock. 

THEY ARE CONFINED TO EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE 

The Apostles Peter and Jude tell us that after their 
wrong course these angels were separated from association 
with the heavenly and holy angels, who were in harmony 
with God, and were cast down to tartarus, to our 
earth's atmosphere, "to be reserved in chains of darkness 
until the Judgment of the Great Day." What does 
that expression mean? The "chains of darkness" we believe 
to be a figurative statement signifying that they 
were no longer permitted to materialize in the light and, 
generally, not able to materialize at all. But of late 
spiritists claim, and we believe truthfully, that these 
spirits can now materialize in as real and tangible flesh 
as any human being possesses. As they state, and as the 
facts prove, this can be done only under certain circumstances; 
they still have a great deal of difficulty in 
materializing in the light. The "chains of darkness" 
still seem to be on them to some extent. 

Spiritists further claim, however, that the spirits are 
breaking these bonds and that gradually they will be able 
to do fully in the light everything that they can now do 
in the dark, and even more than this. The Bible corroborates 
what the spiritists claim, only that the spiritists 
teach that these things are done by the dead; who, the 
spirits tell, are more alive after death than before. Spiritists 
assert that it is the spirits of dead human beings 
that materialize. But the Bible takes the opposite position 
and says that these spirits are the fallen angels, 
and that so far as humanity are concerned, the dead are 
totally dead and must remain so until the resurrection. 

So, then, the Bible and the Spiritists are in decided 
conflict; and yet there is this harmony that we speak of, 
namely, that at the time of the Judgment of the Great 
Day we may expect the bonds restraining these spirits 
to be loosened. Of course God could hold them in 
restraint; but He will now permit these fallen angels to 
have a great lease of liberty. Then will come to them a 



great trial and testing, or judgment, in respect to their 
willingness or unwillingness to do according to the 
Divine will. 

SOME OF THEM PROBABLY REPENTANT 

It would not surprise us if some of the fallen angels 
who sinned in the past have repented and have had long 
centuries of experience with the unrepentant ones; and 
that these have suffered persecutions from those of evil 
mind. And so there may thus be two classes among the 
fallen angels; the one class desirous of doing the will of 

R4880 : page 359 

God and the other class, like Satan himself, wilfully 
opposed to the will of God. The trial time will prove 
each of these angels and manifest to which class each 
belongs. 

We think, too, that we see in the Scriptures a passage 
which we had not seen with the same force before 
—a Scripture that seems to give a thought along this 
very line. It seems to imply that at a very near date 
probably these fallen angels will have wonderful power, 
such as they have never had since the days of the flood, 
and that this wonderful power will be used in a very 
malevolent manner, to stir up mankind to evil doing; and 
that this will be the key, the secret connected with the 
awful time of trouble which the Bible tells us will mark 
the conclusion of this Age and which will constitute the 
forerunner or beginning of the New Dispensation. 

THE HOLDING OF THE FOUR WINDS 

The Scripture we have in mind is found in Revelation 7:1-3. 
This symbolical passage speaks of the four 
angels which stand at the four corners of the earth and 
hold the four winds that they should not blow upon the 
earth or upon the sea "until we shall have sealed the 
servants of our God in their foreheads." To our understanding 
we are in that very time when the servants of 
God are being sealed in their foreheads. The forehead 
represents the intellect; and to be "sealed in the forehead" 
is to be intellectually marked. 

The intimation is that at this time, in the conclusion 
of this Gospel Age, God will grant some intellectual 
mark upon his servants that no others will have; that 
there will be a great work of sealing; and those in perfect 
harmony with God are to be His servants in the work 
of sealing. This seal is the Truth. "Ye shall know the 
Truth and the Truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) 
The Truth will mark in their foreheads those who receive 
it, branding them in a way that others of mankind 
are not marked or branded. 

All of the Lord's truly consecrated children can see 
what a wonderful power the knowledge of the Divine 



Plan has been. How different everything in the world 
seems! How the eyes of their understanding have been 
opened to see many things that they could not understand 
before! Just as soon as the sealing of the saints 
is completed, just as soon as all the elect are thus marked, 
just as soon as this Age shall be completed, then those 
four angels who are holding the four winds, that they 
should not blow upon the earth, will let them loose; and 
the effect will be— what? If four winds, from the four 
corners of the earth, come together, they make a whirlwind; 
and that is exactly what the Bible declares the 
great time of trouble will be. 

SOME FORCEFUL SYMBOLS 

The thought we wish particularly to call attention to 
is that these "winds of heaven" are symbolical winds— 
not literal winds; and that the "earth" that is not to be 
hurt is the symbolical earth— not the literal earth; and 
that the "sea" that is not to be hurt is the symbolical 
sea— not the literal sea. We have previously shown, in 
our STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, that these symbols are 
found throughout the Old and New Testaments; the 
earth represents the social order, government, restraint, 
etc.; and the sea represents the restless mass of mankind, 
which more or less lash and dash against the earth, 
the governmental power. "The winds of heaven," in this 
case, we understand to be "the powers of the air." 

The Bible says that Satan is the Prince of the Power 
of the Air, that he is the Prince of Demons. (Eph. 2:2; 
Matt. 9:34.) Therefore we understand that in this symbolical 
sense "the powers of the air" are the demons; 
that these powers of the air that are being held until 
the saints of God shall have been sealed in their foreheads, 
are these fallen angels. As soon as the power that 
is now controlling them shall be removed, we shall have 
a reign of evil all over the earth. The evil spirits will 
do all the evil that is in their power, and this will constitute 
the trial of all the fallen angels— the lifting of 
the restraints to see whether they will go contrary to 
the Divine will. All who thus manifest their alliance 
with evil in any way will become subjects of the Second 
Death; while others who show their loyalty to God will 
mark themselves as worthy, presumably, of everlasting 
life. 

It may be something in connection with the saints 
that will constitute the test of these angels. However, 
we need not wait many years until we shall know. 



R4882 : page 359 

THE WORD AND THE WAY 

"And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, 'This is 



the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and 
when ye turn to the left.'"— Isaiah 30:21. 

IN OUR DAY when the evil spirits seem to 

be trying very hard to get into close communication 

with humanity, we learn of 

what is called the "clairaudient power." 

Suggestions are made to the person having 

this power that he has a great favor from 

God in being able to hear what others cannot 

hear. Usually he becomes puffed up, 

thinking that he is in special favor with 

God and the angels. Then the fallen angels 

are very liable to take advantage of his wrong thought 

and to seek to obsess him. We have tried to guard people 

from this very condition of things; and from time to time 

we hear of those who are helped. Only a few days ago 

we had a letter from a lady who had thought that a godly 

influence was being exercised upon her, whereas later she 

found that it was a malevolent influence to bring her into 

slavery of mind. But the voice referred to in our text 

we understand to be the voice of God. The Scriptures, 

written in the past for our admonition, constitute this 

voice. This voice is behind us in the sense that the history 

of the centuries is behind us. So we are to hearken to the 

voice that comes through the Apostles and Prophets; 

and as we hearken, we recognize that it is the voice of 

the Lord, pointing the way in which we should go. 

But as we hearken to the past we hear also the voices 
of false prophets; as, for instance, the voice of Satan, 
the great Adversary of the past. The voice of God said, 
"Ye shall surely die." The Adversary's voice said, "Ye 
shall not surely die." At one time all of us were dead. 
Some of us, however, were blessed as we obtained the true 
information and followed in the way God directed. Many 
of the so-called "Fathers" of the past, we find, do not give 
the same voice that Jesus and the Apostles and Prophets 
gave. We are to guard against all such voices and to 
listen for the Shepherd's voice; to look for the righteous 
arrangements made for us. We are not to investigate 
anything which would not seem to be the voice of God, 
but which tends to deceive, to alienate the sheep from the 
Shepherd. 

R4882 : page 360 

The child of the Lord has learned where to seek 
counsel; and the counsel of wisdom is always ready to 
come to his aid. The Prophet describes it as a word, a 
voice "behind thee." It is not a voice before thee, of 
some new theology— of Evolution or Spiritism or 
Christian Science or other human philosophy— but it is 
the old theology, with its blessed doctrine of hope through 
Christ our Redeemer and Lord, our Teacher, our Example 
and our Leader. It is the voice of the Lord through His 
inspired Apostles and Prophets, from two thousand to 



four thousand years ago. It is to this Word of Divine 
inspiration, then, that the Prophet would direct the attention 
of all those desiring wise counsel; and in that 
Word we hear the voice of God, saying, "This is the Way, 
walk ye in it." 

BIBLE TO BE OPENED UP TO THE WORLD SHORTLY 

While these words of the Prophet were addressed 
directly to fleshly Israel, their application to spiritual 
Israel is none the less forcible. As applied to fleshly 
Israel, the Prophet foretells the return of Divine favor 
to them when the long season of their chastisement and 
of their blindness shall be at an end. Then, under the 
Mediatorial Reign of Christ, the blind eyes shall be 
opened, the deaf ears shall be unstopped and the voice 
of the whole inspired Word, then made clear to their 
understanding, will direct them in the right ways of the 
Lord; for the books (the Law and the Prophets and the 
New Testament Scriptures) shall be opened, and they 
shall be judged according to their teaching.— Rev. 20:12. 

The way then indicated to fleshly Israel and to all the 
world will be a grand highway of holiness; "and the 
ransomed of the Lord" shall go up thereon "with songs 
and everlasting joy upon their heads." (Isa. 35:10.) And 
the end of that way will be life and peace, salvation to 
the uttermost from sin and death, and complete restoration 
to human perfection. 

While the way of life will be made very clear to 
Israel and to the world, in the Age to come, it is made 
none the less clear now to the children of God who walk 
by faith and not by sight. It is shown to be, first, a way 
of faith; and those who now walk by faith are the true 
Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:16,29), to whom pertain the 
Covenant and the exceeding great and precious promises, 
in their largest fulfilment. Second, It is a way of entire 
consecration to God, even unto death, which implies the 
burial of one's own will into the will of God— the presenting 
of self a living sacrifice. 

LET US WALK AFTER THE SPIRIT 

In harmony with these two principles— faith and consecration- 
we are taught to walk in newness of life, not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit; not as other Gentiles 
walk, in the vanity of their minds, but circumspectly; "not 
as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time"; not by sight, 
but by faith.-Rom. 6:4; 8:1; Eph. 4:17,18; 5:15,16; 
2 Cor. 5:7. 

By faith and consecration we have come into a new 
life as spiritual sons of God; and yet we have this treasure 
in earthen vessels and the new life is only in its embryo 
condition. Hence the necessity of walking after the 
spiritual instincts of the New Creature and keeping down 
the stronger impulses of the old creature. This is what 
it is to walk in newness of life, after the Spirit and not 



after the flesh. To "walk after the flesh" is to pursue its 
hopes, aims and ambitions; and since the flesh and the 
spirit are at war one with the other, it is impossible to 
maintain the life of both. Therefore, it is written, "If ye 
[spirit-begotten ones] live after the flesh, ye shall die; 
but if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify [put to death] 
the deeds of the body, ye shall live."— Rom. 8:13. 

While the Word of the Lord speaks thus on general 
principles as to the way in which we should walk, we are 
also bidden to come with all the minor affairs of life to 
inquire of these Divine Oracles. If we know not whether 
to turn to the right hand or to the left, we come and find 
the promise, "Commit thy way unto the Lord"; "He will 
direct thy steps." Or, if heavy laden, we find the promise, 
"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest." Thus the voice behind brings 
comfort, peace and rest in the midst of all life's cares and 
trials, if we walk in obedience to all its principles and 
precepts. "And as many as walk according to this rule, 
peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God!" 
-Psa. 37:5; Prov. 3:6; Matt. 11:28; Gal. 6:16. 



R4881 : page 360 

LOYALTY THE GREAT TEST 

AT THE CLOSE of the Millennium, when men 

shall have been made perfect, the world of 

mankind will be subjected to a final test, 

not as to their perfection of human nature, 

but as to their loyalty to God. The test 

upon Mother Eve was of this character. 

She was not deceived in the sense of not 

knowing the meaning of loyalty to God or 

what constituted disobedience. God had 

forewarned her. She knew what was right. 

But she was deceived so far as the consequences were 

concerned. So with Satan. He was deceived as to the 

outcome of his course, in thinking he would be able to 

carry out his plans despite the Lord. 

So, we believe, it will be at the end of the Millennial 
Age. Some of mankind will be deceived as to the result 
of the course they will take. All who are entirely loyal 
to the Divine Law will perceive the error of the wicked. 
During the Millennial Age Christ, as the Mediator, will 
stand between mankind and the full requirements of 
Justice; and mankind will be, as it were, in a household of 

R4882 : page 360 

protection. When all evil influences are restrained mankind 
will have a very favorable opportunity for coming 
to a full knowledge of the Divine requirements. After 
they shall have enjoyed the blessings of Restitution to 



the full, then it will be appropriate that a test shall 
come to see whether their adherence to righteousness is 
merely a matter of policy or whether they have reached 
such a condition of heart-loyalty to God and righteousness 
as not to be moved from righteousness by any influence. 
At the end of the Millennial Age, then, after they shall 
have been turned over to the Father, He will thus test 
mankind to see whether or not they have learned full 
obedience. Evil influences will be let loose for a 
season. If they have not learned thoroughly the lesson 
of obedience they will be unworthy of everlasting life 
and will demonstrate that theirs has been merely a policy-service. 
It will be because they have not come into 
fulness of heart-harmony with God that they will be peculiarly 
susceptible, in this trial respecting their loyalty. 

ALL MUST BE TESTED AS TO LOYALTY TO GOD 

Satan was tested as to his loyalty to God. Adam and 
Eve were tested as to their loyalty to God. In the time 
of Noah the angels were similarly tested— not as to 
whether they preferred right to wrong, but as to their 
entire loyalty. Jesus Himself was tested as to His 
loyalty to the Father. So mankind, at the end of the 

R4882: page 361 

Millennial Age, will be tested as respects their heart-harmony 
with God. 

As to the nature of their test we are not specifically 
informed. Possibly the temptation that will 
come to mankind at that time will be the desire to take 
possession of the government of earth before it is 
fully turned over to them. If this be true, since they 
will know that it is God's intention to turn the earth 
over to mankind when the end of the thousand years 
shall come, they will be anticipating the immediate 
transfer of everything from the Ancient Worthies, who 
shall have been ruling as "princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 
When the time shall be fully come, they will be 
disappointed. "And they went up on the breadth of the 
earth and compassed the camp of the saints about, and 
the beloved city."— Rev. 20:9. 

This shows the condition of many of the world at that 
time. Many of them will become restless. They will 
say, "These Ancient Worthies are holding back the 
Government from us. We do not need to have anything 
to stand between us and the government of the world." 
This attitude will be disloyalty to God. Knowing that all 
things are of Divine arrangement, they should say, "The 
thousand years, seemingly, are over. We thought this 
Government would be turned over to us. But we will 
leave matters entirely in God's hands. If He sees best to 
give us the Government, well and good. But if He 
sees best to hold it back after the time is up, we shall be 
satisfied." Such would be the attitude of loyalty. 



So today. Our attitude should be to recognize that 
there is but one God and one Lord Jesus Christ; and that 
we will obey them. In due time we shall see God's Wisdom, 
Justice, Love and Power fully demonstrated; that 
they are fully harmonious in all of the affairs that God has 
permitted. Those who can see this by faith, are now 
demonstrating their loyalty of heart to God. 



R4881 : page 361 

SET AS A WATCHMAN 

--EZEKIEL 3. --OCTOBER 1.- 

"Hear the Word at My mouth and give 
them warning from Me."— Ezek. 3:17. 

EZEKIEL RANKS amongst the great 

Prophets. Most realistic were his visions 

and powerfully described. A portion of 

his prophecy was written before the final 

serious troubles upon the kingdom of 

Judah, which resulted in the overthrow of 

Zedekiah's kingdom. The remainder of 

the book was written after the complete 

overthrow of the kingdom. The entire 

prophecy was given in Babylon, Ezekiel 

himself residing there and ministering as a Prophet 

chiefly to the captives, arousing their hearts to an appreciation 

of their situation and to a hope of return in God's 

appointed time to their own land. 

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that 
Ezekiel's mission was entirely or even chiefly to the Jews 
of his time. Rather we are to understand, through St. 
Peter's statement, that he, with other Prophets of old, 
spoke and wrote things which they themselves and the 
people who heard them did not understand— things which 
God did not wish to have understood until after the giving 
of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost— things which would 
be "meat in due season" for the spiritual Israelites 
throughout this age. 

For instance, when Ezekiel tells the people, "The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die," he was delivering a truth 
applicable to the Gospel Church during this Age, and a 
truth which will be applicable to the whole world during 
the Messianic reign, but which was not truth nor applicable 
to the Jews at the time of the utterance. Why? 
Because the whole world at that time was lying in the 
Wicked One; as St. Paul explains, they were all under 
sentence of death through Adam's disobedience. They 
could not be put on trial for life, individually, until first 
they should be redeemed from the Adamic condemnation. 

The blood of bulls and goats could never take away 
sin from the Jews, nor redeem them; the redemption 



could come only in the Divinely appointed way— through 
the death of the Savior; and the Savior had not yet come, 
had not yet brought life and immortality to light through 
the Gospel. And as for Israel's Law Covenant, it was 
merely typical of the New Covenant of the future, and 
we have the Apostle's word for it that the Law could not 
make anything perfect. 

No amount of turning from sin could give anybody 
eternal life. None could so turn from sin as to be perfect, 
hence the necessity for the Savior. When Ezekiel 
refers to the proverb that "the fathers have eaten a sour 
grape and the children's teeth are set on edge," he was 
stating the general fact that all human sin and weakness 
descend by heredity from parent to child, and that the 
matter of recovery is therefore a hopeless one except as 
a Redeemer, separate and distinct from the sinner race, 
would be provided. And this provision for release from 
the weakness inherited from Father Adam has been provided 
by Jehovah through His Only begotten Son, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, the world's Redeemer. 

"TIMES OF RESTITUTION" 

In the 16th chapter of Ezekiel's prophecy the declaration 
is clearly set forth that in the Divine Plan a great 
restitution is sure to come which will affect not only 
Israel and the living nations of the time, but also the 
dead of all nations. From the 40th verse onward the 
Prophet describes the certainty of God's promise to recover 
Israel, to bring them back into His favor, and that 
on a better basis than ever in the past. At the same time 
the Lord declares, through the Prophet, that the Samaritans 
will be restored and blessed, and that the Sodomites 
will be restored and blessed. The latter nation had been 
entirely destroyed by fire from heaven, as the Redeemer 
declared. It follows that their restoration must be from 
the tomb, from death, hades, sheol. 

The prophecy goes on to declare that the Lord will 
not do this because of any worthiness of the Israelites 
or others, but for His own Name's sake— of His own 
good pleasure. In other words, this is the purpose which 
God purposed in Himself from before the foundation of 
the world. This is the purpose which He declared to 
Enoch, saying that in due time Messiah would "come 
with myriads of holy ones" to establish justice and 
righteousness in the earth, to bless the people. This is 
the same message which God declared to Abraham saying, 
"In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." This was the hope which Israel had so long 
entertained and which the Lord declares will not go 
unfulfilled. 

This description is found in verses 40 to 60, the conclusion 
being that when Israel thus experiences the goodness 
of God in their restitution they will be ashamed and 
never open their mouths again by way of boasting or 
complaint. This will be after God's favor shall have been 



R4881 : page 362 

restored to them, and He shall be pacified toward them 
in respect to all of their idolatrous doings of the past. 
The pacification of Divine Justice is found in the redemption 
accomplished by our Lord and Savior. 

Ezekiel is one of the Prophets referred to by St. 
Peter as prophesying respecting coming "Times of Restitution" 
—blessings of Messiah's Kingdom to be inaugurated 
at the close of this Age, as soon as the Church 
shall have been elected to be the Royal Priesthood and 
shall be glorified with the great Prophet, Priest, King, 
Mediator, their Head and Lord. St. Peter declares that 
these coming "times of restitution" are mentioned by all 
the Holy Prophets since the world began, and Ezekiel's 
reference to them marks him as one of the Holy Prophets. 
-Acts 3:19-23. 

Viewing our study from this standpoint we perceive 
that Ezekiel stood for, or represented the Son of Man, 
the great Teacher, the Redeemer; he also represented the 
members of the Bride of Christ whom the glorious Head 
may, from time to time, use as His mouthpieces. 

Ezekiel was carried miraculously forward to some of 
the captives residing by the river Chebar. After a time 
he received a message for them, declaring that God had 
appointed him a watchman to give warning from Him. 
This warning has been going forth ever since the Gospel 
was preached. It tells the wicked, that is, the wilfully 
wicked, the intentionally wicked, that the end of their 
way is death, but that by turning from wickedness they 
may live. This message of this Gospel Age is not to the 
whole world, but, as the Scriptures declare, "To him that 
hath an ear to hear." St. Paul uses this message saying, 
"The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is 
eternal life, through Jesus Christ Our Lord."— Rom. 6:23. 

NOT TORMENT BUT DEATH 

It is worthy of note here that neither the Prophet nor 
those whom he typified were ever commissioned to say 
to mankind that the sinner would be eternally roasted, 
nor suffer eternally in any condition. The extreme penalty 
for sin presented to us in God's Word is, "The soul 
that sinneth, it shall die." In other words, God declares 
that He will not give eternal life to the wicked, but only 
to those who will turn from sin to righteousness. Thus 
we read, "Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die?" And 
again, "He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath 
not the Son shall not see life (everlasting), but the 
wrath of God abideth on him"— the wrath or sentence 
of death everlasting. 

In any event, the Prophet and those whom he represents, 
including all of God's consecrated people of today, 
are duty-bound to make clear this feature of the Divine 
Program, namely, that all wilful sin will bring death; 



that all wilful sinners, as St. Paul declares, shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction— not with everlasting 
torment. (2 Thes. 1:9.) Every member of the Body of 
Christ is a watchman on the walls of Zion, even though 
today Zion be in Babylon, as were those typically 
addressed by the Prophet. 



R4882 : page 362 

"RIVER OF WATER OF LIFE" 

-EZEK. 47:l-12-OCTOBER 8- 

"Whosoever will, let him take of the 
Water of Life freely."— Rev. 22:17. 

IN THIS STUDY also we find that the Lord 
through Ezekiel gives us a picture of the 
Messianic Age, very similar to the one 
given us in the book of Revelation, seven 
hundred years after. 

Ezekiel's picture shows Jerusalem and 
the Temple of God as the starting point 
for the River of the Water of Life; so in 
the Revelation account. Ezekiel shows the 
river deepening and broadening from a rivulet 
to a mighty river. He pictures it as flowing down to 
the Dead Sea, and carrying life whithersoever it goes. 

He pictures the Dead Sea as being revived, recovered 
from its deadness, and full of fish. No such river has 
ever yet sprung forth from Jerusalem, nor can we imagine 
how the river would ever have its start in the mountain 
top and reach such proportions in the short distance. 

This description, picturing a great spiritual truth, is 
in full accord with the picture in Revelation. It represents 
beautifully, forcefully, the blessings of refreshment 
and restitution which will issue forth from the 
New Jerusalem, the Kingdom of Messiah, when it shall 
be established amongst men. Gradually the mighty influences 
of the reign of Messiah will extend blessings to 
all mankind, even to the submerged class, steeped in ignorance 
and superstition and degradation, fitly represented 
by the Dead Sea. 

Revelation pictures this river as flowing from under 
the Throne, the New Jerusalem, clear as crystal, and 
having trees of life on either side of its banks, good for 
food. Ezekiel has the same picture in mind; he tells of 
the same trees, whose leaves shall not fade and whose 
fruit shall not fall, but which will bring forth good fruit 
every month, because the water which refreshes them 
comes from the Sanctuary. "The fruit thereof shall be 
for meat, and the leaves thereof for healing." Similarly, 
in Revelation, we are told, "The leaves will be for the 
healing of the people; and the fruit for the sustenance 



of everlasting life; and the Water itself will be for their 
refreshment." Then, we are told, "the Spirit and the 
Bride" shall give the invitation— a world-wide invitation; 
"Whosoever will" then may come, and he who hears the 
invitation may say to others, "Come, and drink of the 
Water of Life, freely" ! 

NO "RIVER OF WATER OF LIFE" NOW 

We are certain in our application of these symbolic 
pictures, that they belong to the future and not to the 
present time. Where is the Water of Life of Revelation 

R4883 : page 362 

now? Where have we anything corresponding to the 
life-sustaining trees and their healing leaves? On the 
contrary, we have the Lord's Word for it that "No man 
can come unto Me except the Father which sent Me draw 
him." (John 6:44.) In other words, there is a measure 
of selection or election as respects the class invited to 
constitute "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife." "No man 
taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called." 

But with the end of this Age will come the end of the 
elective process; then the Divine Message will be Free 
Grace, an offering and opportunity to every creature of 
Adam's race. All blind eyes will be opened that all may 
see; all deaf ears will be unstopped that all may hear; 
and the knowledge of the glory of God shall fill the 
whole earth; none will need to say to his neighbor, 
"Know the Lord, for all shall know Him from the least 
unto the greatest of them."— Jer. 31:34. 

NO BRIDE TO SAY "COME" 

The Revelation picture tells us that the Bride of 
Christ, as well as the Holy Spirit, will give the invitation 
to every creature to come and partake of the Water 
of Life, freely. But how could the Bride give this invitation 

R4883 : page 363 

before she exists? That there is no Bride at the 
present time is manifest. Now is the time for calling the 
Bride class. Now is the time for those invited to make 
their "calling and their election sure;" but there will be 
no Bride until the Incoming Age. The name "Bride" 
implies a marriage; the Church is already espoused to 
Christ, but the marriage is promised to take place at His 
second coming. Then there will be a Bride, and shortly 
after, the Bride, in association with her Lord, will be in 
Kingdom power, in the New Jerusalem— the heavenly. 
From that City, that new Seat of earth's Empire, will go 
forth God's Message, gradually deepening and broadening 
until every member of the race shall have had an 
opportunity to share in its blessing of life everlasting. 



In thinking of these glorious favors coming to mankind, 
let us remember that they will all be earthly— a 
restitution to that which was lost. Earthly splendor and 
human perfection are God's provision for the willing and 
obedient of mankind in general. The invitation to become 
members of the Bride of Christ is a limited one, 
having a limited time; and if our understanding of the 
Scriptures is correct, the end of this special opportunity 
is nigh— the time for the change to the condition of 
glory is at the door— the time for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth is at hand. 

In view of these coming blessings foretold by the 
Prophet and by the Lord Himself, can we not join with 
the poet in singing:— 

"Rejoice! rejoice! the promised time is coming! 
Rejoice! rejoice! the wilderness shall bloom! 
And Zion's children soon shall sing, 
'The deserts all are blossoming!' 
Rejoice! rejoice! the promised time is coming! 
Rejoice! rejoice! the wilderness shall bloom! 
The Gospel banner, wide unfurled, 
Shall wave in triumph o'er the world, 
And every creature, bond or free, 
Shall hail the glorious Jubilee!" 



R4883 : page 363 

ENDLESS TORMENTS UNSCRIPTURAL 

-BY REV. CHARLES KINGSLEY-MAY 9, 1857.- 

ABOUT endless torment.— (Keep that expression 
distinct from eternal, which has been mixed 
up with it, the former being what the popular 
creed really holds.) You may say: 

"(1) Historically, that, 

"(a) The doctrine is found nowhere in 
the Old Testament, nor any hint of it. The 
expression, in the end of Isaiah, about the fire 
unquenched and the worm not dying, is plainly 
of the corpses of men upon the physical earth, 
in the valley of Hinnom, or Gehenna, where 
the offal of Jerusalem was burned perpetually. Enlarge on 
this, as it is the passage which our Lord quotes, and by it the 
meaning of His words must be primarily determined. 

"(b) The doctrine of endless torment was, as a historical 
fact, brought back from Babylon by the Rabbis. It was a 
very ancient, primary doctrine of the Magi, an appendage of 
their fire-kingdom of Ahriman, and may be found in the old 
Zends, long prior to Christianity. 

"(c) St. Paul accepts nothing of it as far as we can tell, 
never making the least allusion to the doctrine. 

"(d) The Apocalypse simply repeats the imagery of Isaiah 



R4884 : page 363 

and of our Lord; but asserts, distinctly, the non-endlessness of 
torture, declaring that in the consummation, not only death, 
but hell shall be cast into the Lake of Fire. 

"(e) The Christian Church has never really held it exclusively 
till now. It remained quite an open question till 
the age of Justinian, 530, and significantly enough, as soon as 
(200 years before that) endless torment for the heathen became 
a popular theory, purgatory sprang up synchronously by 
the side of it, as a relief for the conscience and reason of the 
Church. 

"(f) Since the Reformation it has been an open question 
in the English Church, and the philosophical Platonists, of the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, always considered it as 
such. 

"(g) The Church of England, by the deliberate expunging 
of the 42nd Article, which affirmed endless punishment, 
has declared it, authoritatively, to be open. 

"(h) It is so, in fact. Neither Mr. Maurice, I, nor any 
others who have denied it, can be dispossessed or proceeded 
against legally, in any way whatsoever. 

"Exegetically, you may say, I think, that the meanings of 
the word aion and aionios have little or nothing to do with it, 
even if aion be derived from aei, always, which I greatly 
doubt. The word is never used in Scripture anywhere else 
in the sense of endlessness (vulgarly called eternity). It always 
meant, both in Scripture and out, a period of time. Else how 
could it have a plural— how could you talk of the aeons and of 
aeons of aeons, as the Scriptures do? Nay, more, how talk 
of houtos ho aion (which the translators, with laudable inconsistency, 
have translated 'this world'), i.e., this present 
state of things, 'Age,' 'Dispensation,' or Epoch. Aionios, 
therefore, means, and must mean, belonging to an Epoch, or 
the Epoch; and aionios kolasis is the punishment allotted to 
that Epoch. Always bear in mind— what Maurice insists on, 
and what is so plain to honest readers— that our Lord and the 
Apostles always speak of its being in the end of the Age 
or Aion, not as ushering in a new one; that the Lord would 
come to judge and punish the old world, and to create a new 
one out of its ruins; or rather, as is better expressed, to burn 
up the chaff and keep the wheat; i.e., all the elements of 
food, as seed for the new world. 

"I think you may say that our Lord took the popular doctrine 
because He found it, and tried to correct and purify it, 
and put it on a really moral ground. You may quote the 
parable of Dives and Lazarus. 

"He there represents Dives as still Abraham's child, under 
no despair, nor cut off from Abraham's sympathy, but under a 
direct, moral training, of which you see the fruit. He is gradually 
weaned from the selfish desire of indulgence for himself, 
to love and care for his brethren, a divine step forward 
in his life, which of itself proves him not to be lost. The 
impossibility of Lazarus' getting to him, or vice versa, expresses 
plainly the great truth, that each being where he 
ought to be at that time, interchange of place (i.e., of spiritual 



state) is impossible. But it says nothing against Dives 

rising out of his torment, when he has learned the lesson of 

it, and of his going where he ought to go. The common interpretation 

is merely arguing in a circle, assuming that there 

are but two states of the dead, 'Heaven' and 'Hell,' and then 

trying at once to interpret the parable by the assumption, and 

to prove the assumption from the parable. Next, you may 

say that the English word damnation, like the Greek katakrisis, 

is perhaps krisis simple, it simply means condemnation, 

and is (thank God) retained in that sense in various of our 

formularies, where I always read the words, e.g., 'eateth to 

himself damnation,' with sincere pleasure, as protests in favor 

of the true and rational meaning of the word, against the 

modern and narrower meaning. 

"You may say that Fire and Worms, whether physical or 
spiritual, must, in all logical fairness, be supposed to do what 
fire and worms do do, viz., destroy decayed and dead matter 
and set free its elements to enter into new organisms; that, 
as they are beneficent and purifying agents in this life, they 
must be supposed such in the future life; and that the conception 
of fire as an engine of torture is an unnatural use 
of that agent, and not to be attributed to God without blasphemy, 
unless you suppose that the suffering (like all which 
He inflicts) is intended to teach man something which he 
cannot learn elsewhere. 

"You may say that the catch, 'All sin deserves infinite punishment, 

R4884 : page 364 

because it is against an Infinite Being,' is a worthless 
amphiboly, using the word infinite in two utterly different 
senses, and being a mere play on sound; that it is directly 
contradicted by Scripture, especially by our Lord's own words, 
which declare that every man (not merely the wicked) shall 
receive the due reward of his deeds— that he who, etc., shall 
be beaten with few stripes, and so forth; that the words 'He 
shall not go out till he has paid the uttermost farthing,' evidently 
imply (unless spoken in cruel mockery) that he may 
go out then; and that it is scandalous for Protestants to derive 
from thence the opposite doctrine, while they call the 
Papists rogues for trying to prove the perpetual virginity of 
the Blessed Virgin Mary from exactly the same use of heos. 

"Finally, you may call on them to rejoice that there is a 
fire of God, the Father, whose name is Love, burning forever, 
unquenchably, to destroy out of every man's heart and out 
of the hearts of all nations, and off the physical and moral 
world, all which offends and makes a lie; that into that fire 
the Lord will surely cast all shams, lies, hypocrisies, tyrannies, 
pedantries, false doctrines, yea, and the men who love them 
too well to give them up, that the smoke of their basanismos 
(i.e., the torture which makes men confess the truth, for 
that is the real meaning of it; basanismos means the touch-stone 
by which gold was tested) may ascend perpetually, for 
a warning and a beacon to all nations, as the smoke of the 
torment of French aristocracies, the Bourbon dynasties, is 
ascending up to Heaven and has been ever since 1793. Oh, 



Cooper— Is it not good news that that fire is unquenchable; 
that that worm will not die? They tried, we tried, in our 
ignorance, to quench that fire, when we put Louis XVIII. on 
the throne. But the fire burned up him and our chaffy works. 
The parti pretre tried to kill the worm which was gnawing 
at their hearts, making them dimly aware that they were 
wrong, and liars, and that God and His Universe were 
against them, and that they and their system were rotting 
and must die. And they put poor Poerios and Madiais in 
prison, and showed all the signs of weak terror, suspicion, 
spite; but they cannot kill God's worm, Thomas Cooper. 

"You cannot look in the face of many a working, Continental 
priest without seeing that the worm is at his heart. 
You cannot watch their conduct without seeing that it is at the 
heart of their system. God grant that we here in England— 
we parsons (dissenting and church)— may take warning by 
them. The fire may be kindled for us. The worm may seize 
our hearts. To judge by the temper of the 'Record' and the 
'Morning Advertiser,' it has its fangs in some of our hearts 
already. God grant that in that day we may have courage to 
let the fire and the worm do their work— to say to Christ, 
These, too, are Thine, and out of Thine infinite love they 
have come. Thou requirest truth in the inward parts and I 
will thank Thee for any means, however bitter, which Thou 
usest to make me true. I want to be an honest man, and a 
right man! And, of joy, Thou wantest me to be so also. Oh 
joy, that though I long, cowardly, to quench Thy fire, I cannot 
do it. Purge me, therefore, O Lord, though it be with 
fire. Burn up the chaff of vanity and self-indulgence, of 
hasty prejudice, second-hand dogmas— husks which do not 
feed my soul, with which I cannot be content, of which I feel 
ashamed daily— and if there be any grains of wheat in me, 
any word or thought or power of action which may be of 
use as seed for my nation after me, gather it, O Lord, into 
Thy garner. 

"Yes, Thomas Cooper, because I believe in a God of Absolute 
and Unbounded Love, therefore I believe in a Loving 
Anger of His, which will and must devour and destroy all 
which is decayed, monstrous, abortive, in His Universe, till 
all enemies shall be put under His feet, to be pardoned surely, 
if they confess themselves in the wrong and open their eyes 
to the truth. And God shall be All in All. 

"Those last are wide words. It is he who limits them 
(not I who accept them in their fulness), who denies the 
verbal inspiration of Scripture." 



R4883 : page 364 

"PRAY ALWAYS" 

"Pray without ceasing."— 1 Thess. 5:17. 

A LITTLE QUOTATION from somebody's 

brain seems wonderfully fitting in the consideration 



of our text— "Prayer is the 

soul's sincere desire, uttered or unexpressed." 

It is a complete definition, for 

sometimes we pray with groanings that 

cannot be uttered. 

There is one form of prayer, one feature 
of prayer, which is very appropriate 
to us, namely, thanksgiving. Yet the 
Scriptures discriminate between prayer, praise and 
thanksgiving, and use these words in the same connection, 
as representing various features of worship, communion 
with God. In the sense of petition our definition 
also applies when we include thanksgiving in our prayers. 
Expressed or unexpressed, prayer is the soul's sincere desire. 
Prayer that would not be the soul's sincere desire 
would not be acceptable. We may not always know how 
to render our thanks to God, but it is comforting to 
remember that the Lord knows our thoughts and is willing 
to accept our feeble expressions. 

All those who have come to the Lord must first have 
recognized their need of coming and His readiness, 
willingness and ability to supply all necessary things. 
We need rest and peace and life everlasting. These we 
do not find in the world around us. There is no real 
peace outside of the Lord's provision: "My peace I give 
unto you; not as the world giveth give I unto you. Let 
not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." 
(John 14:27.) The things which the Lord has promised 
to His people are things which eye hath not seen nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man. 

Whoever, therefore, has received the earnest of the 
Spirit has something to desire, something to look forward 
to, something to pray for. Therefore we pray, Thy 
Kingdom come, that the blessings which the Lord has 
promised shall be fulfilled, not only those for the world, 
but also those for the Church. 

SHOULD PRAY FOR FORGIVENESS EVEN AS WE FORGIVE 

As the Christian goes through the world he finds various 
things to distract his heart. But since he finds that 
the Lord has promised that peace he should look for 
that peace, should expect it. We should pray to God for 
the things that we think we ought to have. But we are 
to take His superior wisdom as expressed in His Word 
as our guide; and we are to ask according to His Word. 
If we have a measure of peace and of blessing, we should 
pray all the more for the fulness of joy. While we have 
been cleansed from original sin by the precious blood of 
Christ, we must remember that we have daily trespasses; 
and we should pray daily, "Forgive us our trespasses." 
This request the Lord answers on condition that we ask 
for forgiveness of our trespasses as we forgive those who 
trespass against us. So the Christian will find a great 
deal to pray for in all of life's affairs. 

The Christian, however, should not be so absorbed in 



meditation that he cannot do his work. But the spirit of 
prayer should be with him, so that in every affair of 
life, in every perplexity, he would be ever ready to turn 
his mind toward the Lord for His blessings and to look 
to the Lord regarding all daily interests; for we are the 
Lord's. This course would be a life of prayer without 
ceasing. We do not cease to ask for the coming of the 

R4883 : page 365 

Kingdom simply because we have asked for it once. We 
do not cease to pray for our daily food. We acknowledge 
that all good things come from Him. We recognize 
that "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from 
above and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with 
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning" 
(James 1:17); and that He who gave His Son for us is 
ever ready to give to those who seek to serve Him. 
This attitude of heart is praying without ceasing. 
Sometimes the thought may only flash through the 
mind, but, nevertheless, it brings a blessing to us. All of 
God's dealings with the Elect class are for their development; 
and one feature of this development is to learn to 
know whence our blessings come and to appreciate the 
fact that God is the Giver, and that "no good thing will 
He withhold from those who walk uprightly." 



R4885 : page 365 

INDEPENDENT BIBLE STUDY 

A BROTHER WRITES for our opinion respecting 

the wisdom and propriety of the 

different classes having "independent Bible 

study." 

We cannot be sure just what force or 
significance the Brother gives to the word 
independent. Just so sure as each individual 
has a full right to study the Bible 
without hindrance from anybody, so has 
every class this right or liberty. But in 
using our liberties it behooves us to exercise as much 
"wisdom from above" as possible. For four centuries 
Protestantism has been contending the right of private 
judgment for interpretation of God's Word and has exercised 
this right, and we would be the last to dispute it. 
At the same time two things are worthy of remembrance: — 

(1) There has been very little independent Bible 
study all this time. 

(2) No very clear understanding of the Bible was 
reached during all these centuries. We account for 
this by supposing that the Lord's due time for 
opening His Word to our understanding has only 
now come. If now the Lord has blessed us with 



clearer views of His Word, it behooves us to remember 
that we did not get it because of the four hundred years 
of independent Bible study, but by His specially calling 
it to our attention in His own peculiar way in recent 
years. Wisdom no less than humility should teach us to 
be neither too boastful nor too reckless in our use of 
the word independent in connection with this question. 
While we have the same right to independence that our 
forefathers had it might do us no more good than it did 
them. Rather we should seek for dependent Bible study, 
rather than for independent Bible study. Our dependance 
should not be upon man, but upon the Lord; yet we 
should expect the Lord to use human instrumentality in 
the present, as in the past. 

The matter is for each individual Christian and each 
class of students to decide. The Lord has laid down no 
law on the subject. His children are to use the "wisdom 
which comes from above" in respect to these and all 
matters. 

The questioner may mean to distinguish between the 
use of Berean Studies or topics from the topical index of 
our new Bibles and the taking up of a chapter or an 
Epistle without any guide or help, except such as would 
be given by the leader of the class and its members. If 
so, much would depend on the personnel of the class and 
their development in the knowledge of the Truth. It is 
for the class to decide for itself every particular respecting 
its meetings. And should a class so decide they would 
have a perfect right to try different methods and to judge 
which proved the most helpful. 

In any event those possessed of the new Bible study 
helps could follow nearly any lesson in the New Testament 
by noting the references and studying them and, if 
desirable, bringing them into the class. Any class leader 
who would make objection to a reference being made to 
THE WATCH TOWER or to STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in connection with the discussion of any topic should 
properly be viewed with suspicion as a teacher. Why 
should he be afraid of any comment, from any quarter? 
And, especially, why should he fear or avoid or desire 
others to avoid any reference to the writings which God 
has used in giving him and the others instruction in the 
Scriptures? 



R4884 : page 365 

FAITH, NOT SIGHT 

"We walk by faith, not by sight."— 2 Cor. 5:7. 

THIS PRINCIPLE holds true in respect to 
all of God's dealings with His people during 
the night of weeping preceding the 
glorious morning of joy, when they shall 



see as they are seen and know as they are 
known. Hence, to approach God's Word 
and have a right understanding of it, implies:— 

(1) A heart condition of teachableness. 

(2) A heart condition of faith in God, as the great 
Teacher who knows our limitations and who has promised 
to guide the willing and obedient into all Truth as it 
becomes "meat in due season." 

R4885 : page 365 

(3) An expectation of Divine guidance in the understanding 
of the Scriptures, even as God has promised, 

and, expecting this, they may seek for it in prayer. 

(4) An exercise of their reasoning faculties that, 
while expecting and seeking, and looking in the direction 
of their expectations, they may thereby approve or 
disapprove what is presented to them. 

(5) Great care as to how they neglect these favors 

of God. They should beware of headiness and highmindedness, 

lest, having enjoyed the light and the blessing, 

these should slip from them and leave them again 

in the outer darkness in which we see the whole world 

of mankind groping. 

To continue in the light and truth and blessing necessitates 
character-development, for the privilege of the 
light of knowledge is God's reward for purity of heart, 
of intention, of endeavor. So may we come into Christ 
and abide in Him and bring forth much fruit. 



HEROES OF ALL TIME BUILT THEREOF 

"It takes great love to stir a human heart 

To live beyond the others, and apart; 

A love that is not shallow— is not small; 

Is not for one or two, but for them all. 

Love that can wound love, for its highest need; 

Love that can leave love, though the heart may bleed; 

Love that can lose love, family and friend, 

Yet steadfastly live, loving to the end. 

A love that asks no answer, that can live, 

Moved by one burning, deathless force— to give! 

Love, strength and courage; courage, strength and love- 

The heroes of all time are built thereof." 



R4885 : page 366 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with joy and thanksgiving that we report the first 
public meeting at this place. 



There were forty-one present. Brother Sturgeon's discourse 
on "Where Are the Dead?" was heard with excellent 
attention. One lady has since attended several meetings. 

During the army maneuvers last week the leader of our 
class gave shelter to many of the soldiers who were drenched 
with rain, and almost exhausted from a forced march. The 
family remained up all night, serving hot coffee and a lunch, 
the soldiers having been without food about twenty hours. 
The men slept on the floors while their clothing was dried 
by the fire. Their offer to pay was declined, as the family 
considered it a privilege as Christians to do these things. 

When they marched away to the town the brother went 
with them. The sight of a church drew forth from an officer 
a slighting remark. The brother said he was an ambassador 
for Christ and could also serve them in that way. The officer 
called the men to "attention," and on the street the brother 
gave them a talk on "Restitution," which was very well received 
by the men. AMY M. CLOTTREY.-Mass. 



TESTIMONY MEETINGS-VOLUNTEER WORK 

DEAREST BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Inclosed find report for the first half of June. Praise the 
Lord! The work goes forward with great force. To say 
marvelous results are being accomplished now would be to 
put it mildly. Oh, how thankful we are and should be, and 
how diligent we all should be during these closing moments 
that no stone be left unturned by us to forward our own part 
of this glorious work! Surely everyone of the Lord's dear 
ones has a part, if it is only to patiently endure the weakness 

R4886 : page 366 

of their bodies, and comfort and pray for those a little more 
able in body, but no more so in spirit. God bless these exhausted 
ones. It is good to have them, and to see how they 
can be truly happy, though unable to work as formerly. 

Your suggestion re "Manna Texts" being used as subjects 
for prayer, praise and testimony meetings is a timely one and 
a good one. It appears to me it will meet a favorable reception 
everywhere. My hope is it may become universal. 

Another important matter which appears to deserve notice 
is that in some places the brethren appear not to appreciate 
the privilege of service— in "volunteering" in the distribution 
of the papers— not half as they should. Sometimes they hire 
boys to do it for them. The thought is that it would never 
do for them to risk their respectability by appearing on the 
street thus. It would endanger their popularity and thus 
injure their practise or trade, etc. It is, of course, all right 
to hand out medicine or goods to the public, "but not the 
Truth," for the world approves the one and frowns upon the 
other. The boy may burn up the papers, and no one attend 
the meeting, and the Lord's cause languish and die, but what 
matters that so long as they retain their popularity and 



practise ! 

Their sluggish consciences are in this way given another 
opiate and put to sleep. Evidently the thought is that 
the Lord is very thankful to have them on account of 
their attractiveness and agility in dodging the issue. Besides, 
in some places the papers sent on request and at considerable 
cost are not distributed at all. Oh, that we might see what 
a privilege it is to do the work, to "suffer with Him!" "Be 
not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his 
prisoner, but be a partaker of the affliction of the Gospel."— 
2 Tim. 1:8. 

Thank God much is being done, but the work is not yet 
at its best. Let everyone put his shoulder to the wheel, throw 
his popularity and pleasing personality into the wagon and, 
with a mighty shout, the work will go right on to completion 
and to Glory. 

Much love to yourself and to all the dear ones at Bethel 
and everywhere. 

I am faithfully your servant in the Master's service, 
O. L. SULLIVAN. 

RE MANNA TEXTS FOR TOPICS 

We learn that our suggestion has been quite misunderstood. 
It was that the Thursday MANNA texts be used as the topic 
for the Wednesday night Testimony Meetings in all the 
Classes. 

It appears that some of the dear brethren do not grasp the 
meaning of the word testimony. Some get the thought that 
a little talk or sermon on the suggested text is a testimony. 
Not at all, dear friends. Our thought re a Testimony Meeting 
is that during the week personal experiences, associated 
with the text of the week, be watched for, and the next 
Wednesday be told to the Class. Perhaps our thought would 
be better grasped if these were called "Experience Meetings." 

Such experiences are fresh and interesting— they seem 
never to grow stale. Besides, they are educational. We get 
more and better experiences out of life when we learn how 
to look for and note them. Try this plan! 

BROTHER RUSSELL. 



page 366 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May I take a few moments of your valuable time to tell 
you how gracious our dear Lord has been to me, and how 
I thank him for the work you are doing? 

Last October one of your sermons, printed in the Southbridge 
Herald and entitled, "Where Are the Dead?" caught 
my eye. I read it with amazement. Never had I supposed 
the dead were asleep. I took my Bible concordance and 
looked up every reference under the word "dead." I found 
you were right. 

I took my Bible and your published sermon over to 



a friend, and asked her if she had ever thought of the subject. 
She said she had always believed the dead were asleep, 
and so did her mother. Her mother was a Seventh Day 
Adventist. She asked me if I would not like to read some 
books her mother had. I said, "Yes, I am interested in 
religious reading." 

Among the books was the second volume of the STUDIES 
in the SCRIPTURES. The title attracted my attention, as I had 
always been much interested in the time prophecies and 
wished I might understand them. Well, that book was a 
feast to me and made me long for the first volume. I determined 
to write the Society and see if the book was still 
published. The book I had was an old edition printed in 
Allegheny. 

Just then one of the dear Colporteurs canvassed our little 
town and found me. Was I not answered before I had 
asked? I learned then for the first time that you were the 
author of the books as well as of the sermons. I had until 
then thought the book an Adventist one, and that it was 
only a coincident that the sermons seemed to be along the 
same line of thought. I purchased the first three volumes 
and enjoyed a great spiritual feast. I saw and understood the 
truth clearly, but thought myself too unworthy to enter the 
race. 

In response to my request, my husband gave me the last 
three volumes as a Christmas present. I also have now THE 
TOWER, Diaglott and Bible Helps. 

I consecrated last February and symbolized it in April. I 
cannot tell you the joy I have had since I found "Him 
whom my soul loveth." I had always been a staunch church 
member, but felt I was not living up to my profession. 
Through a deep humiliation, I was constrained to a greater 
hunger and thirst for righteousness. Oh, how I have been 
filled! 

I withdrew from the church here and united with the 
Worcester class. The step cost me all but two of my friends 
here, but for everyone I lost I have gained a hundred in the 
Truth. Take the world, but give me Jesus. I know I am 
growing in the knowledge of the blessed Truth and trust, 
through the grace and merit of our dear Lord, to render an 
acceptable sacrifice. 

Now, dear Brother, I wish you to take my name as one 
who has taken and loves the Vow. It has been such a help 
to me in every way, especially in governing my thoughts and 
words and actions. 

God bless you richly for the work you are doing and grant 
the sermons may reach other hungry souls. 

Your sister by His grace, MRS. MABEL F. BROWN. 



R4886 : page 366 

AN APPROVED METHOD FOR BEREAN STUDIES 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-- 



I feel constrained to write you a few words in respect 
to the Berean Studies. The classes in some places are reluctant 
to yield even one Pilgrim address for Berean Study, 
saying, We have the Studies all the time, but the Pilgrim 
seldom. 

I know just how they feel and yet those Studies 
are the best lessons the Church has ever had. Since they 
are so generally used the friends specially need the sample 
illustration of how they can be made both interesting and 
profitable. A word from you in THE WATCH TOWER, I am 
sure, will be appreciated and would be a great assistance to 
many. 

When the Berean questions first appeared in THE WATCH 

R4886 : page 367 

TOWER they were different from what we had been forming, 
because I had always formed my own questions. Several 
times I was tempted to ignore the printed questions; yet I 
did not wish to do so, because, coming from you, I felt these 
to be additional "steps of the righteous ordered of the Lord." 
Now, however, having become accustomed to the Berean 
questions, I find them of great value and appreciate them 
highly. I will outline the rules I follow in Berean Studies. 
I will be pleased to have your criticism of them. 

I do not ask the class to formulate the questions, but read 
the questions from THE WATCH TOWER or pamphlet. I do 
not address the questions to one or two of the leading ones 
of the class, but give them, sometimes to one and sometimes 
to another, reaching as nearly as possible all of the class. If 
someone attempts to read the answer from a book I object, 
reminding the one that in school as children we were not 
allowed to look on the book, but were supposed to have 
learned the lesson and to know the answer before coming to 
the class. The reading of the answer from the book I may 
call for last; or, perhaps, I read it myself, but that is after 
the discussion and is generally understood to be the conclusion 
of the lesson. 

While I generally address the printed questions to individuals, 
sometimes I make it general and invite voluntary 
replies and encourage them. In some instances I have 
thought it advisable, for the sake of some beginner, to formulate 
questions additional to those printed in order to assist 
in bringing out some other good points. My effort continually 
is to draw the answers from the class and to say 
as little as possible myself, except by way of 
recapitulation. 

I believe it a mistake for the leader of Berean Study to do 
more talking than others in the class. If in leading I have 
been obliged to do most of the talking throughout I consider 
that lesson a failure so far as my leadership is concerned, for, 
if it had been profitable, the class would have been anxious 
to speak. 

Of course, I give the class opportunity for asking additional 
questions in line with the printed questions of the lesson; 
but I do not consider these questions as addressed to me 



personally, desiring a personal answer, so I turn the questions, 
the same as the others, to the class, and seek to draw 
out the proper answer and to supplement the answers by 
some words of my own, helping to make the matter still 
more clear if possible. 

After questions have been fully answered by the class, 
the leader also having given his thought, then I suggest 
that we call on Brother Russell to give his answer. (Then 
all may look in the book to note the answer given and not 
before.) I find it well to restate the question just before 
giving your answer so that the matter may be as clear as 
possible before the minds of all. 

After hearing Brother Russell's answer I, as the leader, 
ask the class if there are any further remarks. Some may 
have occasional questions. 

So far as I am able to judge, the class of International 
Bible Students giving most attention to the Berean Studies 
are spiritually and intellectually better nourished than some 
that are depending upon preaching. Preaching, of course, 
has its place; but it could not be expected that many of the 
dear friends have special talent along this line— nor would 
many of them have much time for preparation if they had the 
talent. 

Anyway, classes that have learned to appreciate the 
Berean Studies and to use them, generally give these the preference 
as being most helpful to growth in knowledge and in 
grace. 

Yours in His fellowship, JAMES H. COLE. 



page 367 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study VI., Order and Discipline in the New Creation. 
OCTOBER 1 

(11) Does the Lord recognize the elders alone as the Body 
of Christ, or has any elder the right to self-appointment, 

or to ignore the judgment of the Church as a whole in any 
matter? P. 279, top. 

(12) Should any brother assume public duties without an 
election, and what is the special advantage to the whole 
Ecclesia in following this Scriptural method? P. 279, par. 1. 

(13) Why are not these matters, so clearly Scriptural, more 
generally understood and set forth? P. 279, par. 2. 

THE PERIOD OF ELDERSHIP. 

(14) In view of there being no Scriptural limit to the 
period for which an elder should be elected, what course 
may be appropriately followed? P. 280, par. 1. 

NUMBER OF ELDERS. 



(15) What should determine the number of elders in any 
Ecclesia? P. 280, par. 2. 

(16) In the event of none being found possessed of the 
Scriptural qualifications, what course should be pursued in 
choosing an elder? P. 281, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 8 

WHO MAY ELECT ELDERS, AND HOW? 

(17) Who may vote for elders, or make nominations? 
And how should the latter preferably be done? P. 281, par. 2. 

(18) What disadvantage in voting by ballot for elders? 
P. 281, par. 3. 

MAJORITIES NOT SUFFICIENT. 

(19) So far as practicable, what proportion of votes should 
decide an election? P. 282, par. 1,2. 

VARIETIES OF MINISTRIES. 

(20) Read carefully the Apostle Paul's address to the 
Elders at Ephesus (Acts 20:17-33) and show how his words 

set forth the general scope of the ministry to which each individual 
must adapt himself and his talents as a steward. 
P. 283. 

LAYING ON OF HANDS OF THE PRESBYTERY. 

(21) Quote several Scriptures which mention the laying 
on of hands in the Ecclesia, and explain each in its proper 
connection. Pp. 283-285. 

OCTOBER 15 

(22) Do any of these texts signify permission or authorization 
to preach? 

A PAID MINISTRY? 

(23) Was a paid ministry the custom of the early Church? 
P. 285, par. 4. 

(24) Had our Lord's teachings been supplemented by appeals 
for money, how would they have been received? 

P. 286, par. 1. 

(25) What spirit should prompt the ministers of the Gospel 
of Good Tidings Unto All Men? P. 286, par. 2. 

(26) How reply to the argument that extremes of "large 
salaries or no salaries" should be avoided? P. 287, par. 1. 

(27) What was the example set by the Apostle Paul with 
respect to salaries? P. 287, par. 2; P. 288, top. 

OCTOBER 22 



(28) What was the attitude of the Lord and the Apostles 
on this subject? P. 288, par. 1. 

(29) Is there any Scriptural intimation that the elders 
serving the Church at home received salaries or expense 
money? P. 288, par. 2. 

(30) On the other hand is there Scripture forbidding the 
acceptance of such money, providing it was voluntarily offered 
by the Ecclesia? P. 288, par. 3. 

DISCIPLINE IN THE ECCLESIA.--MATT. 18:15-18. 

(31) Explain how the foregoing Scripture teaches that the 
administration of discipline is not confined to Elders, but a 
function of the entire Church. P. 289, par. 1. 

(32) In the event that any matter of difference cannot be 
settled by the two preliminary steps mentioned in Matt. 18:15-1£ 
what course should be pursued by the Elders? P. 289, 

par. 2, first half. 

OCTOBER 29 

(33) What is the object of these proceedings on the part 

of the Ecclesia to punish the offender? P. 289, par. 2, last half. 

(34) Should the transgressors refuse to obey the Ecclesia's 
decision, what further steps should be taken? P. 290, par. 1. 

(35) Are the faults of the offender to be made public 
property during these proceedings, or afterward? P. 290, par. 2. 

(36) Would this procedure give rise to frequent Church 
trials? P. 291, par. 1. 

(37) What is unquestionably the cause of the majority of 
Church and family troubles? And what instructions have the 
New Creation concerning this important matter? P. 291, par. 2. 



page 370 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

Views of "Our Very Best Convention" 371 

Ten Days Session in the Mountains 371 

A Diversified Program 373 



Reception at Overlook Inn 375 

What of the Harvest? 377 

King Cyrus God's Shepherd 378 

God's Purifying Word 379 

The Second Temple's Foundation 379 

Was the Proper Course Taken? 380 

Spiritual Israel's Policy 380 

"Songs in the Night" 380 

A Song of Deliverance 380 

Knowledge Necessary to Growth in Grace 381 

The Terms Upon Which We are Called 381 

Show Me Thy Face (Poem) 382 

Some Interesting Letters 382 

Further Word From India 382 

The View From Ireland 383 

page 370 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



"SCRIPTURE STUDIES" IN NEW BINDING 

The binding of the six volumes of "STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
has generally been conceded to be quite attractive: 
it may, therefore, surprise some to know that we have 
changed the general style and that we believe the change 
works a wonderful improvement. We are living in a day of 
progress and we are merely endeavoring to keep up with the 
procession in outward appearance. We believe that we are far 
ahead of the procession so far as the subject matter of these 
volumes is concerned when compared with all other religious 
teachings and Bible expositions. 

We had a sample of the new edition at the Mt. Lake 
Park Convention. The Colporteurs there and all who saw 
the sample agreed that the change made is a very desirable 
one. About sixty new Colporteurs joined the working force 
at the Convention and were permitted to start with the new 
edition. Otherwise the old edition will continue to be supplied 
until exhausted— about November 1. 

The new volumes will be supplied in paper boxes, the 
first three boxed together, or the entire six. Colporteurs 
are finding that the full set of six, with THE WATCH TOWER 
for a year, all for $2.65, is a very attractive proposition, 
which also leaves a good margin for the Colporteur's expenses. 
Any person of ordinary ability by following the 
Colporteur "method" of presenting the books should be able 
to make reasonable expenses. We do not encourage anybody 
to think of doing more than this, although a few do more. 
Indeed some of the Colporteurs are contributors to the Tract 
Fund. There is still a wide field of good territory open. 



R4893 : page 370 

THE MEMORIAL DATE FOR NEXT SPRING 

It seems early to announce the date of the Memorial for 
1912, but some of our readers are asking for it, as our journal 
reaches far-off points. The date for the celebration next 
Spring will be Sunday evening, March 31, 1912, after 6 p.m. 
According to the Jewish calendar the fourteenth day of the 
month will begin at the time mentioned, and it was on that 
date that the lamb was to be slain, and that our "Lamb" was 
slain. And it was on the same night preceding that our Lord 
instituted the Memorial and symbolical eating of His flesh 
and blood as the antitype of Israel's Passover Lamb. 



R4886 : page 371 

VIEWS OF "OUR VERY BEST CONVENTION" 

WE HAVE already noted the fact that there is 
a general disposition to rate each Convention 



at its conclusion "the very best." But 
with full allowance for this tendency we 
believe that we are fully justified in writing 
down the Convention of September 1-11, 
191 1, as outstripping all the previous 
assemblages of the kind held under our 
Society's auspices. Several matters contributed. 
The weather was fine, with 

rains at night but fair in the daytime, except one forenoon, 
during the eleven days. The accommodations were 
comfortable and the mountain air invigorating. The 
assignments of topics to the various days contributed in 
a measure also, and the fact that there were no outside 
attractions of any kind assisted us in our desires to forget 
the world and all else but heavenly things during 
this little season of withdrawal from the busy cares of 
life for communion with the Lord and study of His 
Word. The Auditorium proved to be a very satisfactory 
one. The speakers could be heard from all parts of the 
great building, which seats about thirty-six hundred and 
has standing room for another thousand. 

From morning until night, day after day, the Lord's 
people assembled for praise and study, comparatively 
few seats being vacant. Rarely were there under three 
thousand in attendance. On our principal occasion the 
audience was estimated at four thousand. These, of 
course, included residents of that vicinity. A conservative 

R4887 : page 371 

estimate of the friends of the Truth present at the 
Convention would be three thousand. 

Noting the mention made in THE WATCH TOWER of 
the consecration of children on similar occasions a request 
was made here. Accordingly two opportunities 
were afforded, which brought forward about a hundred 
children consecrated by their parents to the Lord— for 
sickness or health, for poverty or wealth, for life or 
death— that God's will might be done in them, toward 
them, and that the parents might be blessed with wisdom 
and grace to instruct them and guide them in the nurture 
and admonition of the Lord. Two opportunities for baptism 
were given, in order that some who could not stay 
to the end of the Convention might be served as well 
as others who could not come at its beginning. The total 
number of adults immersed in symbol of their full consecration 
to be dead with Christ was one hundred and 
seventy -eight. 

From Monday evening until Friday evening— five 
evenings— Brother Russell held receptions at "Overlook 
Inn," or "Bethel," as it was called. About six hundred 
were invited each evening. This afforded a special opportunity 
for greetings and fellowship. Each evening 
Brother Russell gave a brief address. Intermingled with 
hymns of praise some simple refreshments— ice cream 
and cake— were supplied and then, as the dear friends 



filed out, Brother Russell shook hands with each and engaged 
in a word of greeting. A newspaper report of the 
first evening's topic will follow. No reports were published 
of the other evenings so far as we heard. 

One of the most interesting features of the Convention 
was its closing session, when the speakers, to the 
number of about one hundred, ranged themselves in front 
of the long platform and a congregation of about four 
thousand filed past shaking hands with each. More than 
an hour and a half was consumed thus. Some were joyful, 
some were tearful. All seemed earnest and determined 
by the Lord's grace to attain to the Grand Convention 
promised in the Scriptures— "the General Assembly 
of the Church of the First-borns." At the conclusion of 
the handshaking, as each passed out, one of the little 
celluloid hearts was presented, as is intended to be done 
at each Convention. 

We cannot attempt to give even a resume of the numerous 
addresses made on this occasion. Perhaps we 
cannot do better this time than give newspaper reports, 
which follow:— 



BIBLE STUDENTS TEN-DAYS' SESSION IN THE 
MOUNTAINS 

For the past week a most remarkable Bible school has 
been in session in the top of the Allegheny Mountains, in 
the well-known Chautauqua grounds. The hotels and 
cottages have been filled to overflowing, and numbers of 
cots have been in use. The delegates are from all parts 
of the world. The enthusiasm is not of the boisterous 
sort, but manifests itself in earnestness of look and tone, 
and in the continued large attendances at the meetings. 
These begin in the morning and continue practically all 
day with an intermission for noon luncheon. The programmes 
are pleasantly varied. The large auditorium has 
splendid acoustic properties. Its capacity is rated at 
forty-five hundred, including the platform, which seats 
five hundred men. 

Lovers of the Bible cannot fail to be impressed with 
the earnest fidelity of every speaker to the Holy Scriptures. 
Higher Criticism finds no place in the programme, 
neither does the doctrine of Evolution. Both are publicly 
denounced as contrary to the teachings of the Bible. 
The Bible is treated not as many books, but as one book. 
The claim is set forth that it is God's Book because holy 

R4887 : page 372 

men of old spoke and wrote as they were moved by the 
Holy Spirit. It is claimed that this operation of the 
Holy Spirit in the minds of the writers of the Bible is 
responsible for the oneness of its testimony. 



WHY THE BIBLE SEEMS CONTRADICTORY 

The claim of the International Bible Students Association 
is that the reason that Christians are divided into 
various sects and parties is not that the Bible has contradictory 
teachings corresponding with the contradictions 
of the creeds, but because our fathers through the 
colored spectacles of their creeds in the past but partially 
understood its teachings. Rightly understood it must be 
in complete harmony with itself and have but one teaching 
—one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and 
Father over all, and one Lord Jesus Christ, and one 
Church of the First-born whose names are written in 
heaven.— Hebrews 12:23. 

These students seem intent upon finding the harmony 
in the Bible which all acknowledge should be there, if all 
the writers of the Bible were inspired by the same Holy 
Spirit. More than this, unlike any other class of Christian 
people in the world, these Bible students claim to 
have found the key of interpretation which makes the 
entire book harmonious from Genesis to Revelation. 
Surely no more earnest company of Christian people ever 
assembled at Mountain Lake Park. Surely none ever assembled 
to give more careful study to God's Word. 
Surely none ever seemed more thoroughly rejoiced, more 
happy in the Lord. And the claim is that this happiness 
springs from a right understanding of the Bible which 
has drawn the hearts of believers nearer to God and 
nearer to each other. 

THANK GOD FOR THE LIGHT 

"Ah!" says one, "Our hearts are glad because we see 
that the Bible's teaching, rightly understood, is that God 
is love and that God's dealings with the world are not 
ended but really only beginning. We now see what we 
were blinded to for a long time, namely, that the work 
of this Gospel Age is the selection of the 'Church of the 
First-born, whose names are written in heaven.' (Heb. 12:23.) 
We now see that these are to be the Bride of 
Christ, associated with Him in His glorious Kingdom for 
which we pray, 'Thy Kingdom come.' We now see that 
Messiah's Kingdom is to be established in power and great 
glory amongst men, and that its work will be to bless 
and uplift humanity. 

"Once misled by the creeds of the Dark Ages, we 
supposed that all the heathen must be in torture because 
we knew that these were not qualified as saints for the 
presence of God and His eternal glory. How we wondered 
at this! We wondered how our great Creator 
could be either just or loving and yet bring into existence 
a race of beings under such conditions and for such an 
end. Now we see that we were deluded and that in so 
believing we were believing men and not God— mistaken 
men, however good. We once believed, too, that all our 
neighbors, friends, relatives who were not of the saintly 



class— not fit for heaven, and so dying, would be consigned 
to eternal torture. Ah! how our hearts rebelled 
against such a decision, but we thought that if our great 
Creator had so determined, it must be right, and continued 
to believe it. Now we see, as the Scriptures declare, that 
this fear was not of God, 'but taught by the precepts of 
men.'" 

CAUSE FOR CHEERFULNESS 

"Can you wonder that we are cheerful, happy in the 
Lord," says Pastor Russell, "rejoicing that we can 
now see our God and the teachings of the Bible in a new 
light— a light consistent with consecrated reasoning faculties? 
Can you wonder that we are happy to find that the 
Church is to get even greater blessings than it ever 
dreamed of— to be with the Lord Jesus, the Redeemer, as 
His Bride in a great work of blessing, reclaiming and 
saving mankind from sin and death? Can you wonder 
that we are happy in realizing that the heathen millions 
who never had an opportunity for testing and trial, which 
God declares is secured for every member of Adam's 
race through the merit of Christ's sacrifice, are to be 
granted a trial? 

"Can you wonder that we feel greatly relieved to 
know that many noble men and women, friends and neighbors, 
of all denominations, not saintly and not followers 
in the footsteps of Jesus, and not therefore to be accounted 
worthy of a share in His Kingdom as members of His 
Bride Class, are nevertheless to have a glorious provision 
in God's due time? We are glad that while we 
may hope for heavenly, spiritual blessings beyond the 
veil, the hope of the world is in restitution to all that was 
lost by sin and redeemed by the Cross. We are glad to 
think that in God's due time Adam and every member of 
his race will have full opportunity of coming back to 
harmony with God and to full human perfection and to 
everlasting life in an earthly Eden. We are glad to understand 
God's Word to teach that the Second Death will 
be like the first except that it will be everlasting— none 
will be redeemed from it, none will be resurrected from 
it. But we are glad that none but the wilfully wicked, the 
incorrigible, will be consigned to that obliteration, annihilation. 
Of such St. Peter tells us that they will perish 
'like natural brute beasts.'" 

WHEN WILL THESE THINGS BE? 

"Will it be long before these matters become general?" 
was asked. 

"No, the glorious consummation is near, according to 
our understanding of the Bible," replied Pastor Russell. 
"A revised statement of the Bible chronology shows that 
six thousand years have just passed, and that we are 
thirty-seven years in the seventh thousand. This seventh 
thousand, we understand, is the Messianic period, in 



which Satan is to be bound and all the works of darkness 

to be overthrown. During this period Messiah shall 

reign, establishing truth and righteousness and blessing 

the whole world with the light of the knowledge of the 

glory of God. Indeed, we believe that the inventions of 

the past forty years stand closely related to this New Dispensation 

upon which we are entering. Furthermore, 

our own better understanding of God's Word we attribute, 

not to superior wisdom on our part, but to the 

R4888 : page 372 

fact that God's due time has come for parting the veil 
and showing us 'things to come.'" 

THE WORK IS GOD'S 

"Is it your expectation that your Association will be 
used of God in bringing about this Messianic epoch— in 
converting the world?" was the next query. 

"Our Association is indeed glad to do what it can to 
scatter the darkness and to reveal the light now due. It 
does indeed hope for some blessing upon its efforts, especially 
among the more religious, the consecrated Christian 
people of all denominations. But it is far from our 
expectation that we could accomplish the overthrow of 
Satan and his intrenched system which now holds sway 
in the world. We do not by this cast any reflection upon 
the many good men and good women associated with the 
powers that be— the ruling powers, the political powers, 
financial powers, social powers. Doubtless these, like 
ourselves, are doing all in their power to forward the 

R4888 : page 373 

cause of truth and righteousness, each along his own 
lines and according to his own light. 

"This work has been in progress for centuries, but we 
feel sure cannot effect the grand results foretold in the 
Bible. For their accomplishment it is necessary that our 
Lord Jesus, the invisible, glorious King of kings and Lord 
of lords, shall assume His great power and begin His 
reign of a thousand years of triumph over sin and death. 
Nor is it our expectation that His Kingdom will be inaugurated 
in a peaceful manner, nor that the world will 
even know what is the matter with its affairs. The Bible 
teaches us that we are on the verge of the most terrible 
time of trouble which the world has ever known. The 
only consolation we have in connection with this matter 
is the Divine promise that behind that awful cloud of 
human (rather an insane) fury, there is a silver lining. 
The storm will level poor humanity in the dust, but thereby, 
incidentally, it will act as a plowshare to prepare 
humanity for the blessing of Messiah's reign of righteousness, 
peace, justice, truth." 

An official of the Association made the following 



comment upon the proceedings of the Convention:— 
A DIVERSIFIED PROGRAM 

September 1 was the opening day. General W. P. 
Hall, U.S.A., gave the opening address, which was quite 
pithy and to the point, as might have been expected from 
our famous Philippine warrior. Stripped of his epaulets 
and honor medals the General looked every inch a 
preacher. It is said that his Philippine experiences had 
considerable to do with bringing General Hall into the 
ranks of Bible Students. His glimpse of heathendom 
convinced him that the world needs the Kingdom of God's 
Son, in power and great glory, to accomplish among 
men things which no human arm or human tongue can 
bring to pass. 

Hon. J. F. Rutherford was the chairman of the first 
half of the Convention, September 1-6. Mr. Rutherford 
made a very interesting address in which he outlined the 
hopes and objects of the Convention, and congratulated 
those present on the beauties of the location chosen for 
the assembly. He expressed hopes that all might be 
richly blessed of God and carry with them blessings to 
their various homes. 

THANKFUL DAY-SEPTEMBER TWO 

The day opened with a praise and testimony meeting, 
which manifested no backwardness. There were ten to 
twenty-five nearly always on their feet waiting opportunity 
to give their testimony to God's grace, to their 
appreciation of His Word, and to their desire to be close 
followers in the footsteps of Jesus. Then followed discourses 
by Brother W. M. Hersee, of Canada; Brother 
Daniel Toole, of Michigan, and Brother A. M. Saphore, 
of Pennsylvania. 

The afternoon services opened with a praise meeting. 
The vast audience seemed to sing with the spirit and with 
the understanding. Then came an address by Brother 
R. E. Streeter, of Rhode Island; Brother F. F. Cook, of 
Michigan, and Brother O. L. Sullivan, of Tennessee. 

There was great variety, but the theme which pervaded 
all the addresses and the testimonies was in harmony 
with the keynote of the day, thankfulness, appreciation 
of Divine goodness, gratitude. Discontent and 
everything analogous thereto were reprehended. 

HOLINESS DAY-SEPTEMBER THREE 

The opening service was one of praise to the King of 
kings; then followed Brother A. E. Burgess, of Michigan, 
and Brother J. F. Rutherford, of Missouri. 

In the afternoon Brother A. I. Ritchie, of Ontario, 
and Brother C. T. Russell, of Brooklyn, and Brother I. F. 
Hoskins, of California, followed each other. The speakers 
of the day discussed the subject of holiness, what it 



is and what it is not. It showed that Adam's race is a 

fallen one, none of them perfect, hence none of them absolutely 

holy, however well intentioned. They pointed 

out that the Divine arrangement in Christ provides that 

those who by faith accept Jesus and make full consecration 

to Him and strive to walk in His steps— these are 

reckoned as holy or blameless. Their imperfections may 

still be manifest, notwithstanding their best endeavors 

for perfection, but they are covered in the Divine sight, 

because their imperfections are unwilful and because they 

are treated as new creatures in Christ Jesus. 

A Sunday evening service was held, conducted by 
Pastor Russell. It was a question meeting, and a number 
of very interesting questions were discussed and answered, 
apparently to the satisfaction of the vast 
audience. 

HOPE DAY-SEPTEMBER FOUR 

The day opened with an hour's praise and testimony 
meeting. It was very orderly, dignified and earnest; 
those who testified seemed full of hope, and, as some 
expressed themselves, living on the mountain top of faith 
and hope. 

There were two discourses in the forenoon, one by 
Brother J. D. Wright, of Ohio, the other by Brother 
P. E. Thompson, of Ohio. Hope was the general theme, 
though discussed from different standpoints by the two 
gentlemen— ably in both instances. Hope was shown to 
have a basis. Many hopes have a poor foundation, because 
built upon unsatisfactory promises and by unsatisfactory 
promisers. 

The Christians' hope is built upon the promise of God 
set forth in the Holy Scriptures. So surely as the Bible is 
the Word of God, these exceeding great and precious 
promises are unshakable foundations for an exceeding 
great and precious hope. The Christians' hope was shown 
to be a hope of glory, honor and immortality— join t-heirship 
with the Redeemer in His Kingdom. Theirs is a 
hope which will endure trials. It will not fail. It has 
the assurance that all things shall work together for good 
to God's faithful people, and that if they suffer 
with Him they shall reign with Him. This hope includes 
a change of nature from earthly to spiritual and the prospect 
of reigning with Jesus on the heavenly plane over 
the affairs of mankind for the purpose of uplifting humanity 
and the earth from their present condition of imperfection 
to all that was represented in Eden originally. 
The unwilling and disobedient are not to be hoped for, 
however; God has given no promise of eternal life to 
any except those who will conform their lives to the Divine 
standards. The wicked will be utterly destroyed 
after having repudiated Divine favor and opportunity. 

The afternoon session was a symposium, participated 
in by Brother E. Thomson, of Washington City; A. G. 
Wakefield, of Virginia; F. C. Detweiler, of Pennsylvania, 



and W. M. Wisdom, of California. The topic was "The 
Christian's Armor." The helmet, the breastplate, the 
sword, the sandals and the shield were discussed and 
their spiritual significance shown. Those who heard 
doubtless had a fresh impetus toward holy living— keeping 
the armor bright and in service against the wiles of 
the flesh and the Adversary. 

CONSECRATION DAY-SEPTEMBER FIVE 

The day opened with a praise and testimony meeting. 
Again there was no lack of testifiers who testified to the 

R4888 : page 374 

grace of God, to the blessings of the Truth and to the 
favors and privileges accorded those persevering in their 
consecration of heart and life, of time and talent. 

Brother J. G. Kuehn, of Ohio, and Brother F. H. 
Robison, of Indiana, delivered addresses in the forenoon, 
which were received with earnest attention. 
The thread of their discourses was in harmony with 
the topic of the day— Consecration. The vast audience 
heard with deep interest the real meaning 
of full consecration of heart and life and all to God. 
Various illustrations were given and exhortations to 
faithfulness on the part of those who have made a covenant 
with the Lord lest they should draw back or in 
anywise prove themselves unfaithful to the covenant of 
sacrifice. In the afternoon Brother G. B. Raymond, of 
New York, delivered a powerful discourse on the subject 
of Baptism. He set forth in no uncertain terms the importance 
of baptism when viewed from its Scriptural standpoint. 
He showed that it included a full consecration to 
the Lord. Following the discourse an opportunity for 
symbolic immersion in water was granted, and 113 took 
advantage of the opportunity. 

HARVESTER'S DAY-SEPTEMBER SIX 

The praise and testimony meeting with which this 
convention day opened was very interesting from the fact 
that it confined itself to testimonies along the line of the 
Harvest work, which were given by many who had energetically 
engaged in the public service. At 10:30 Pastor 
Russell gave an address on the harvest and its laborers— 
"the harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few." 
He claimed that himself, as well as others, had for years 

R4889 : page 374 

been in error respecting the Scriptural use of this expression 
regarding the harvest. He now saw that death 
is not the harvest mentioned by the great Teacher. He 
pointed out that there was a harvest time in the close of 
the Jewish Age, and that similarly the Master taught 



that the Gospel Age, in which we are living, would close 
with a harvest work. He showed that the Jewish harvest 
lasted for forty years, ending in A.D. 70, with a 
great time of trouble upon the Jewish nation— upon all 
who failed to be gathered into the garner. He claimed, 
giving Scriptures apparently in support, that the harvest 
is the end of this Age and is to be much more 
important; that instead of being the harvest of one little 
nation, it is the harvesting of all the Christian effort manifested 
in all the Christian work of today. 

The harvest work is not sectarian; it is the work of 
the Lord. Just as the work of Jesus and His Apostles 
did not gather the whole people of the Jews into the condition 
of spiritual sons of God, so the harvest of this Age 
will not gather all the sons of God to heavenly glory, but 
only those found faithful. "Be thou faithful unto death, 
and I will give thee a crown of life." The trouble with 
which the Jewish harvest ended was pointed out as a prototype 
of the trouble with which the Gospel Age harvest 
will terminate. It was even intimated that we are already 
in the harvest period, and that the separating of the 
wheat and tares is already in progress. 

The diversified means used by our Lord in connection 
with this harvest work was referred to with appreciation. 
From what was said one would judge that the International 
Bible Students Association is carrying on a 
great work in the aid of Bible students in all parts of the 
world. The work in America and Great Britain, of 
course, is the principal work, but mention was also made 
of the importance of the work in progress amongst the 
people of India and Africa. It would seem that Bible 
study from the standpoint which harmonizes the conflicting 
creeds is appreciated even amongst those Christians 
who have come out of heathendom. 

In the afternoon addresses along the lines of harvest 
work were delivered by Brother J. H. Cole, of Ohio; 
Brother I. F. Hoskins, of California, and Brother E. W. 
Brenneisen, of Texas. 

PRAISE DAY-SEPTEMBER SEVEN 

The prayers and testimonies and hymns of the opening 
session were in line with the appointed topic of the 
day— praise to God from whom cometh every good and 
every perfect gift. Then followed a discourse by Brother 
Menta Sturgeon, of Missouri, and another by Brother 
W. E. Van Amburgh, of Dakota. The praise feature was 
the dominant note in both discourses, which were heard 
with deep interest by a full house. 

Brother Russell conducted a question meeting for an 
hour. Many questions were asked which were very interesting, 
and were apparently handled in a manner satisfactory 
to the audience. 

The afternoon session was a symposium participated 
in by Brother M. L. Staples, Virginia; Brother (Dr.) A. 
D. Young, New York; Brother H. E. Hollister, Illinois; 



Brother J. F. Stephenson, District of Columbia; Brother 

J. P. McPherson, Ontario; Brother P. D. Pottle, Ohio; 

Brother Arthur Allen, New Jersey; Brother (Dr.) R. L. 

Robie, Illinois; Brother Wm. Weber, Maryland; Brother 

Wm. Mockridge, New York; Brother T. E. Barker, Massachusetts, 

and others. The topic dealt with the qualities of 

character which Christians are called upon to put off, 

and the character qualities they are to put on if they 

would progress in the Divine favor. Amongst the things 

to put off were anger, malice, envy, hatred and strife. 

Amongst the things to put on were meekness, gentleness, 

patience, long suffering, brotherly kindness and love. 

FRUITAGE DAY-SEPTEMBER EIGHT 

Another excellent testimony and prayer meeting, with 
which praise was interspersed, was held. The fruitage of 
the Spirit was the theme of the day— Christian fruitage. 
The discourses of the forenoon were by Brother George 
Draper, of South Dakota, and by Brother A. H. MacMillan, 
of Nova Scotia. The fruits of the spirit were 
called to the attention of the audience, and the methods 
by which they are developed in every Christian heart 
were discussed. Love was shown to be the sum of all 
the fruits, while patience was shown to be a necessary 
element of every fruit. 

In the afternoon there was a symposium on the fruits 
of the Holy Spirit. It was participated in by Brother 
A. N. Mann, West Virginia; Brother W. S. McGregor, 
Massachusetts; Brother C. P. Bridges, Massachusetts; 
Brother C. F. Fillman, Ohio; Brother M. L. Herr, Pennsylvania; 
Brother James H. Cole, Ohio; Brother C. J. 
Woodworth, Pennsylvania; Brother Carl Hammerle, 
Pennsylvania, and Brother W. F. Hudgings, Missouri. 
The subject was well and thoroughly handled, and doubtless 
all who heard will hereafter better see and understand 
the relationship between the trials and sufferings and disappointments 
of the present life, and the fruits of the 
Spirit which must be developed in preparation for the 
future life. 

SPIRIT-BIRTH DAY-SEPTEMBER NINE 

The morning meeting for praise and testimony was 
left exclusively to those who had participated in the baptism 
service of Tuesday. They gave some good testimonies. 
Very evidently they were very sincere and 
doubtless many of them experienced a great blessing 
and reward for their faithfulness in standing up for 
the truth and symbolizing their consecration after the 

R4889 : page 375 

manner prescribed in the Bible and exemplified by our 
Lord and one Apostle in their own persons, as one 
present expressed the matter. Brother F. A. Hall, of 



Indiana, and Brother E. W. Brenneisen, of Texas, were 
the speakers of the forenoon. They showed clearly the 
distinction between spirit begetting and spirit birth— that 
the former takes place at the time of Christian consecration 
and that the latter will take place at the resurrection 
of the dead. 

In other words, spirit begetting is the start of life as 
new creatures in Christ. The development of the embryo 
new creature proceeds during the present life— represented 
as it were in the chrysalis state. The resurrection will 
be the birth of the embryo to the full perfection of the 
new creature, even as the cocoon delivers up the beautiful 
butterfly whose embryo it held for a time; so human 
conditions and death will deliver up the new creature, a 
spirit begotten one perfected. 

Paul (I Cor. 15) says of spirit birth, "It is sown in weakness, 
raised in power; sown in dishonor, raised in glory; 
it is sown an animal body, raised a spirit body." This 
spirit begetting and spirit birth, however, are exclusive 
matters not intended for all the human family, but only 
for the elect— "called and chosen and faithful." The 
world in general is neither to expect a spirit begetting 
nor a spirit birth. It is shown that the promise for them 
is in restoration to human perfection and an earthly 
Eden. There will be a regeneration to human perfection 
during the thousand years of Messiah's glorious reign. 

This afternoon Pastor Russell is to deliver a discourse 
on true Baptism and its proper symbol, following 
which another opportunity for symbolic baptism will be 
afforded. 

KINGDOM DAY-SEPTEMBER TEN 

This will be virtually the last of the Convention, 
though some may remain over for the 1 1th. The public 
meetings will be at an end. Today's program includes 
a testimony meeting, a discourse by Pastor Russell, 
another by Brother P. S. L. Johnson, and another by 
Brother B. H. Barton, and at 4 p.m. a farewell address 
by Pastor Russell to be followed by a love feast. Everyone 
here is expecting a "feast of fat things" today, and 
doubtless they will obtain it. Conditions seem favorable, 
at least. 



ELECTION OF OFFICERS FOR ENSUING YEAR 

The following officers were elected to serve during 
the ensuing year: President, Pastor C. T. Russell, of 
Brooklyn and London; Vice-President, A. I. Ritchie, of 
Ontario, Canada; Secretary, E. W. Brenneisen, of Texas; 
Treasurer, W. E. Van Amburgh. 

As concerning the work during the coming year, the 
President, Pastor Russell, said: "We are continuing our 
work along the present successful and every way advantageous 



lines. We believe that we are following Divine 

guidance in our endeavor to make known the true interpretation 

of God's wonderful Book, which we all in the 

past so seriously misunderstood and misrepresented. Partially 

blind eyes everywhere are opening today, and warm 

Christian hearts are rejoicing to see more clearly than before 

the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 

the love of God which passeth all understanding." 

"What about your own movements, Pastor Russell?" 

"It was understood when I left London in the spring 
that I would visit them again in the fall; that expectation 
I must fulfil. With our modern rapid and great 
conveniences the journey is not a burdensome one. I 
expect to return about the first of December." 

Following this Pastor Russell will go on a world's 
tour and a committee has been selected to accompany him 
on his journey. 

The persons invited to serve on this committee are 
Major-General W. P. Hall, U.S.A.; Mr. E. W. V. 
Kuehn, of Toledo; Mr. J. T. D. Pyles, of Washington, 
D.C., and Mr. Charles F. Anderson, of Baltimore, Md. 
Not all of these gentlemen have positively accepted the 
responsibilities of this service, but it is confidently expected 
that they will accept. As the Association pays no 

R4890 : page 375 

salaries, the invitation carries with it the responsibility 
of all providing for their own expenses. 



RECEPTION AT "OVERLOOK INN" 

Although Pastor Russell delivered two addresses yesterday, 
and is on the programme for several future occasions, 
none of these afford the Bible Students personal 
fellowship with the beloved President of the Association. 
Accordingly arrangements were made whereby six hundred 
can meet the Pastor each evening by special appointments. 
Last evening witnessed the first of these Receptions 
at "Overlook Inn." 

The six hundred invitations offered for the evening 
were heartily accepted. It was a happy crowd— not 
mirthful, not hilarious, not jolly, but happy, restful, peaceful 
—just such expressions of faith as one would expect 
to find amongst earnest Bible students who have found the 
"pearl of great price." These Bible students claim this 
and more; that they find in the Bible precious promises 
for the non-elect world— wholly different from the heavenly 
prize for which they declare they are striving. 

Pastor Russell greeted each guest personally on arrival, 
then made a brief address, following which some 
light refreshments were partaken of. Social and religious 
refreshments were enjoyed, and in good season the 
gathering dispersed, after joining in a hymn and being 



led in prayer by the entertainer. Pastor Russell's words 
of greeting, which we subjoin, were evidently greatly 
enjoyed by the hearers. 

He said: "Dear Christian Brethren, I congratulate 
you and myself on the Lord's blessings toward us which 
have permitted us to come together at this beautiful 
Park in the top of the Mountains for a few days' rest 
from secular affairs and to engage with each other in 
Christian fellowship and study of the Father's Word. I 
am reminded of the Master's words to His Apostles inviting 
them to just such a little season of rest and refreshment 
as we are enjoying here. The Apostles had 
been absent proclaiming the Kingdom at hand. They 
returned at the time when Herod cruelly beheaded John 
the Baptist. They were astonished that God would permit 
such an unjust procedure. They thought of Jesus, 
the King, whom they proclaimed and whose power had 
been so abundantly manifest in the casting out of demons 
and the healing of the sick. They surely wondered 
why so great a power should remain passive while the beloved 
forerunner of Jesus was put to ignominious death. 
If Herod's power could thus be exercised against one of 
the Prophets, why might he not be able to do similarly 
against Jesus and His Apostles? Were they trusting in 
a King whose authority was an empty boast and who was 
helpless in the presence of opposition? 

"The Great Teacher realized the situation, and when 
they began telling Him of John and of their teachings 
and of their wonderful works in His Name, Jesus said 
unto them, 'Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, 
and rest a while; for there were many coming and going, 
and they had no leisure, so much as to eat.'— Mark 6:31. 

R4890 : page 376 

"Let us for a moment imagine ourselves as instead 
of the Apostles, and the Master speaking to us instead 
of to them. Let us see how much we have in common 
with them, even after eighteen hundred years have passed. 
We, like them, have had the pleasure, privilege and responsibility 
as ambassadors for God, of telling to the 
ears of the willing that Messiah's Kingdom is at hand. 
As it was at hand eighteen centuries ago in the sense that 
it then was offered to the Jews who declined to receive it, 
so now in the end of this Age, Messiah's Kingdom is at 
hand in the sense that it is about to be established in 
power and great glory, because the preliminary work of 
finding the Bride and the guests for the wedding has 
about been accomplished. 

"As the Apostles were astonished at the beheading of 
John, so we frequently have been astonished to note to 
how great an extent Divine providence permits the prosperity 
of the 'prince of this world' and the 'children of 
this world' in their opposition to those who are sacrificing 
their lives for the cause of God, of Truth, of righteousness. 
Our Great Teacher feels as deep an interest in 



His followers today as He did eighteen centuries ago, 

and He has made provision for us financially and otherwise, 

that we may come together here in this beautiful 

mountain top away from the world's strife, from business 

and worldly pleasure. Let us hear again the Master's 

words and now apply them to ourselves: 'Come ye yourselves 

apart into a desert place and rest a while.' Here 

commune with Me and with the Father. Here tell us 

of what you have done and what you have taught. Here 

examine carefully to see how correctly, how truthfully, 

you have presented My message. 

"As the coming and going throng hindered Jesus and 
the Apostles from even taking proper refreshment, so with 
us. Being so fully engaged in Divine service and even 
though greatly enjoying it and glad to tell the good Message 
in season and out of season, sometimes we do not 
in the busy course of the Lord's service and in making 
necessary provisions for our temporal needs have sufficient 
time for eating the spiritual food, that we may be 
properly refreshed, strengthened and upbuilt in the 'most 
holy faith.' 

"And now here we are. Already we have had precious 
fellowship with the Great Teacher and with the brethren. 
I trust that we are all feeling more than repaid for 
having come here. I trust that the Message of Divine 
Grace and Truth which first began to be spoken by our 
Lord, and which was confirmed unto us by those who 
heard Him, is now refreshing our hearts as we 'repeat 
the story o'er and o'er of grace so full and free.' Let 
our prayers and endeavors continue that our stay may be 
profitable, strengthening, uplifting, to the intent that we 
may be the better developed as 'copies of God's dear Son.' 

"I am reminded also of another occasion when Jesus 
took three of the Apostles apart into a mountain top— 
the Mount of Transfiguration. He was transfigured before 
them. His face appeared to shine, His garments to 
be glistening white. And with Him were Moses and 
Elias, also glorious in their appearance. The sight was 
too glorious for the Apostles fully to comprehend. In 
a partial stupor of drowsiness one of them proposed that 
they should stay always in the mountain top and that a 
tabernacle be built. But as they came down from the 
mountain the Great Teacher explained that what the disciples 
had witnessed was merely a vision. Moses and 
Elijah had merely appeared to be present, just as in the 
vision given to St. John— the Apocalypse. Persons were 
seen and heard in John's vision. So in this also. Every 
purpose was served just as well as though Moses and 
Elias had been personally present. 

"As for Jesus, He, of course, was personally present, 
but not glorified, as the vision show Him. He had not 
yet passed beyond the veil into the heavenly, glorious 
state. His garments were not white, but merely were 
made to seem so. His countenance did not really glow 
like the sun, but merely so appeared. St. Peter, referring 
to this very vision, declares that it was no fanciful fable, 



even though it should not be classed as on an equality 
with Divine revelation made through the prophets. He 
says, 'We have not followed cunningly-devised fables 
when we declared unto you the power and coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, for we were eye-witnesses of His 
majesty when we were with Him in the Holy Mount 
and heard the voice from the cloud. But we have a more 
sure word of prophecy to which we do well to take heed 
as to a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn.' 
-2 Pet. 1:19. 

"Christian experience today runs along the same lines. 
The more earnest and zealous of the Lord's followers are 
invited to go up with Him into the Mount of Transfiguration. 
Our eyes of understanding are opened. We 
see wonderful things— old things in a new light and new 
things as they become due to us in our day. Surely the 
advanced Christian sees his Master resplendent with a 
new brightness as he comes to closer fellowship with 
Him and with the Father in the Holy Mount! May this 
be our blessed experience, dear friends, during this Convention 
season. Seated with Jesus in the heavenlies, may 
we appreciate more and more the things of the Kingdom, 
as in contrast with earthly things. 

"It would be foolish for us to think of abandoning the 
duties of the hour to build tabernacles with a view to remaining 
in this ecstatic fellowship. No, the vision will 
be but for a few days, and again we will return to the valley, 
realizing that what we have enjoyed was but a vision 
and foregleam of what we shall experience after our resurrection 
'change.' May it be with us as it was with St. 
Peter. As he looked back to the vision in the Holy 
Mount and was sure that he followed no fable, so may 
we in coming days look back to present experiences to 
rejoice in them and to realize that they have brought us 
into a closer fellowship with our Redeemer in the sufferings 
of this present time and in hope of the glory that 
shall follow at His appearing and Kingdom. 

"By the way, let us not forget that that transfiguration 
scene was a picture of the coming Kingdom. The 
resplendent Jesus represented our Lord in glory, while 
Moses represented the Law Covenant. Elijah represented 
the Church of this Gospel Age, which will 
end her earthly career by being taken to heaven, even 
as Elijah typically was carried into the heavens. Both 
branches of the Kingdom, both divisions of the Church, 
the Jewish and the Christian, stand related to Messiah, 
the center of the Divine blessing promised for all the 
families of the earth. 

R4891 : page 376 

"In concluding, dear Brethren, let me quote you the 
words of the poet and trust that they will be more than 
fulfilled in your experiences and mine during this 
Convention":— 



"Come ye yourselves apart and rest awhile, 
Weary, I know it, of the press and throng; 

Wipe from your brow the sweat and dust of toil, 
And in My quiet strength again be strong. 

"Come, tell Me all that ye have said and done, 
Your victories and failures, hopes and fears; 

I know how hardly souls are wooed and won; 
My choicest wreaths are always wet with tears. 

R4891 : page 377 

"Come ye aside from all the world holds dear, 

For converse which the world has never known- 
Alone with Me, and with My Father here, 
With Me and with My Father not alone. 

"Then fresh from converse with your Lord return, 
And work till daylight softens into even; 

The brief hours are not lost in which we learn 
More of our Master and His rest in heaven." 



WHAT OF THE HARVEST? 

THE BIBLE HARVEST NOT A HARVEST OF DEATH--NOR A 
REVIVAL HARVESTING, BUT A REAPING OF THE 
FRUITAGE OF THE AGE-"THE HARVEST 
IS THE END OF THE AGE" 

Wednesday was known at the Bible Students Convention 
at Mount Lake Park as "Harvester's Day." The 
early morning session was one of praise, prayer and testimony, 
but only those working in a public or semi-public 
manner in the Gospel Vineyard were classed as Harvest 
Workers, and these alone were invited to give testimony. 
It surely could not be denied that the testimonies were 
excellent, evidencing great zeal for God, for His Word 
and for His people. 

It was subsequent to this testimony meeting, namely, 
at 10:30 o'clock, that Pastor Russell stepped upon the 
platform to deliver an address to Harvest laborers. He 
spoke for one and one-half hours, and evidently to the 
pleasement of his hearers. His text was, "The harvest 
is plenteous, but the laborers are few. Pray ye, therefore, 
the Lord of the harvest, that He will send forth laborers 
into His harvest. "-Matthew 9:37,38. 

The speaker said in part: "Many of us for long years 
thought of the Bible references of the harvest, our text 
included, as applicable to every time. We had not then 
learned that the Bible must be studied dispensationally, in 
order to be understood. Now we perceive that the time 
of our Lord's first advent was the harvest time of the 
Jewish Age, and that as a harvest it applied to that nation 
only. 



For more than sixteen hundred years the Law 
Covenant had been in operation between God and Israel. 
Under it they had been disciplined and schooled, instructed 
through the Law and by the Prophets. Jesus 
came, not only to be the Redeemer of mankind in general, 
but especially to offer Himself as King to the Jews, and 
to make them His joint-heirs in His Kingdom. Had there 
been a sufficient number of Jews in heart-readiness to receive 
the Gospel Message, according to Divine agreement, 
the entire Bride Class would have been elected or 
chosen from that one nation, and not a Gentile would have 
been invited to participate in the honors of these Spirit-begotten, 
called in the Scriptures the spiritual Seed of 
Abraham. (Gal. 3:29.) Nevertheless the Lord foreknew, 
and had provided for Israel's rejection and the 
opening of the door to membership in the Bride Class to 
worthy Gentiles. 

"It was at the close of the Jewish Age, at the time, 
therefore, when that people should have and did have 
their greatest degree of ripeness and preparation that our 
Lord presented Himself and began to do the reaping 
work. He sent forth His disciples as His representatives, 
two and two, and later He sent 'seventy also.' When 
these returned our Lord declared to them, 'I sent you to 
reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor; other men (the 
faithful Prophets, etc., of the past) labored and ye are 
entered into their labors— to gather the fruit of their labors. 
-John 4:38. 

"The Great Teacher tells us distinctly that while His 
work was that of reaping, He blended it with a sowing. 
Seeing that the Jews were not ready for the Kingdom- 
seeing that eighteen centuries would be required for the 
calling and developing of the spirit-begotten ones, the 
Master started the work of seed-sowing for the new dispensation. 
Then, according to His parable, He left the 
work in the hands of His servants and 'went into a far 
country,' even heaven itself. Since then He has been 
supervising His work and has been represented through the 
faithful members of His Church, His Bride. He and the 
Apostles sowed the good seed of the Kingdom, meanwhile 
gathering the ripe wheat of the Jewish nation into the 
Kingdom class through the begetting of the Holy Spirit. 
By and by the harvesting of the Jewish Age ended completely, 
when all the wheat of that nation were gathered 
into the Gospel Church of spirit-begotten ones, and then 
came the burning of the chaff— the great time of trouble 
with which the Jewish Age fully ended, A.D. 70. 

"Since then the work of seed-sowing, evangelism, etc., 
amongst the Gentiles has gone on, not without difficulty, 
however. As our Lord's parable shows, Satan, the Adversary, 
came in the night, during the 'dark ages,' and 
oversowed the wheat-field with tare seed. As a result, 
the field looked very prosperous, although in reality 
the tares had a choking and disastrous effect on the 
wheat. Nevertheless, the Lord would not allow the separating 
of wheat from tares until the full end of the Age, 



the harvest. The Bible intimates that the tares were so 
numerous and so intertwined with the wheat in their 
various interests that to have plucked them all up would 
have brought the disastrous 'time of trouble' too soon; 
hence the decree that both should grow together until 
the harvest. 'The harvest is the end of the age.'— 
Matthew 13:39. 

"Our studies together, dear Brethren, have led the 
majority of us to conclude that we are now living in the 
harvest time— in the end of this Age. Oh! how glad we will 
be if it is true! How glad we are to believe it true! and, 
we think, on good evidence. If it is true, as we believe, 
that the forty years' 'harvest' of this Age began in 1874, 
the implication is that the trials of the Church are nearly 
at an end— that the faithful will soon be gathered to the 
heavenly garner. By the glorious 'change' He will cause 
us to shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of our 
Father for the scattering of the world's dark night and 
the ushering in of the new day. Messiah's day is to 
bring glorious opportunities for earthly blessings to 
Israel, and to all the families of the earth through Israel. 
If our hopes be true then they mean a blessing, not for 
the Church alone, but for the entire groaning creation, 
which, if willing and obedient under Messiah's reign, will 
be released from the bondage of corruption into the 
glorious liberty appropriate to the children of God.— 
Romans 8:21. 

"As Bible students we have already seen that the Jewish 
nation as a people were prototypes of spiritual Israel 
in many particulars— that the period from the death of 
Jacob to the fall of Jerusalem in A.D. 70 is the exact 
parallel to the period of the Gospel Church from the 
death of Jesus to October, 1915, A.D. 

"Surely it is not by accident that these two Ages correspond, 
nor by accident that Israel as a people typified 
spiritual Israel! Neither will it be by accident if the 
events of 1915 correspond to the events of A.D. 70. In 
other words, as the harvest of the Jewish Age ended 
with a time of trouble, so our Lord's words assure us that 
this Gospel Age and its harvest will end with 'a time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation.' 
(Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21.) That a crisis is nearing everybody 
admits. That socialists and anarchists are threatening 

R4891 : page 378 

the very fabric of society nobody will deny. The 
Bible alone explains the situation and shows us, dear 
fellow-students, that the work of the present Age is 
about completed— that the elect members of the Bride of 
Christ have nearly all been found and made ready. The 
blessing for the world will be along material lines ushered 
in by the time of trouble, which will eventuate in anarchy, 
according to the Scriptures— a general leveling of 
the human family as the initial step of the reign of the 
glorious Messiah, whom men will shortly see and recognize 



with the eyes of their understanding." 

Pastor Russell took up the various features of missionary 
work in home and foreign lands, in which he and 
associated Bible Students are co-laboring. He referred 
to the progress in Bible study which is being effected 
throughout the civilized world and to the more or less 
successful methods. He urged all to remember that 
every child of God is an ambassador and representative 
of the Kingdom and prospectively a member of the 
"Body" of the glorious Messiah. 

Pastor Russell also gave some interesting details respecting 
the progress of Bible study in Central Africa, 
in South Africa, in Jamaica, India, etc. He urged that 
each consecrated child of God should remember that he 
is to be, with the Master's direction, a burning and shining 
light, showing forth the praises of Him who called 
Him out of darkness into His marvelous light. He urged 
love for God and for our fellows and the absolute avoidance 
of all appeals for money. He said our Heavenly 
Father informs us that He is rich, that all the gold and 

R4892 : page 378 

silver are His and the cattle upon a thousand hills. "Let 
us use carefully, frugally, wisely, liberally, what He has 
so kindly sent, but let us not ask for more, even from 
Him. And surely we are not authorized to beg in the 
Name of our rich Heavenly Father! If our work is of 
Him, He is able to sustain it, and He will do so until it 
shall be finished. If it is not of the Lord, then the sooner 
it stops the better we should be pleased." 



In the afternoon, from two to three, was another 
prayer and testimony meeting along the same lines as 
the morning meeting. It, also, was a success. 

At three p.m. Brother J. H. Cole gave an address to 
Colporteurs on successful Colporteur methods. 

At four Brother I. F. Hoskins gave an address to 
Colporteurs. 

At four-thirty Brother E. W. Brenneisen gave an interesting 
talk on tract distribution, the distribution of 
free literature. According to his statement, The International 
Bible Students Association is engaged in quite 
an extensive work distributing much free literature in 
all the prominent languages and on topics calculated to 
produce healthy growth along lines of Scripture study 
and righteousness in word and deed. 



R4892 : page 378 

KING CYRUS GOD'S SHEPHERD 



-EZRA 1:1-11; 2:64-70.-OCTOBER 15.- 

"He retaineth not His anger forever, because 
He delighteth in mercy."— Micah 7:18. 

THE HEATHEN GODS are all vengeful. 

The God of the Bible alone lays claim to 

being a God of love, "whose mercy endureth 

forever," as one of the Psalms repeats 

again and again. Alas! how terribly our 

God of Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power 

has been misrepresented to the world, and 

to the Church, as a God delighting in the 

eternal torture of the vast majority of His 

Creatures; for if such were His provision 

for them, and He knew the end from the beginning, it 

would surely prove that He delighted in, and intended 

their torture. But when our eyes open to a proper interpretation 

of God's Word, how His character becomes 

glorious before our eyes and commands our love and our 

devotion! As the Apostle declares, it is the Divine Love 

which constrains us to be faithful and obedient. 

Today's study relates to the release of the Israelites 
from their Babylonian captivity, and their return to 
Palestine. This return was in exact fulfilment of the 
Lord's Word at the mouth of Jeremiah, the Prophet, who 
specifically told, not only of the destruction of the city, 

R4893 : page 378 

but also that it would be seventy years before the return 
of its inhabitants.— Jer. 25:12; 29:10; compare 
II Chron. 36:22,23. 

We suggest a careful reading of the Scriptures above 
cited to establish the fact that the seventy years predicted 
related to the desolation of the city of Jerusalem and of 
their land, and not merely to the captivity of the people, 
some of whom went into captivity twenty years before 
the city was destroyed. Many in applying this have 
started the seventy years from the beginning of the first 
captivity, and thus are twenty years out of the way. 
Facts of history have been so built around this error, 
gradually, that many now hold the unscriptural view; 
but if the Bible is to be our criterion we must stand by it. 

One of the most wonderful things connected with the 
story of Israel's release from Babylonian captivity is that 
Cyrus was named by the Prophet Isaiah in advance, and 
called "God's Shepherd"— "Cyrus is My Shepherd and 
shall perform all My pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, 
thou shalt be built; and to the temple, thy foundation 
shall be laid." (Isa. 44:28.) Profane history gives 
Cyrus a very honorable name, calling him "gracious, 
clement and just, treating men as men, and not as mere 
tools to be used and cast aside— a conqueror of quite a 
different type from any the world had previously seen." 
Plutarch declares that "In wisdom, virtue and magnanimity 



he seems to have surpassed all kings." 

KING CYRUS' NEW METHOD 

Nebuchadnezzar's theory of government was to bring 
representatives of the peoples of all lands to Babylon and 
there make them homogeneous, choosing the best of every 
nationality. But when Cyrus came upon the scene, as 
the conqueror of the Babylonian empire (Darius, the 
Mede, being under him), he found that the theory of his 
predecessor had not worked out satisfactorily. The 
mixed people of Chaldea were not patriotic. Cyrus 
adopted the opposite plan for governing the world. He 
not only gave liberty to the Jews to return to their own 
land, and gave them assistance back, but he did the same 
for the people of other nations, exiled in Babylon. 

The brief epitome of the giving of his proclamation 
of liberty to the Jews is, "Thus saith Cyrus, King of 
Persia: All the kingdoms of earth hath Jehovah, 
the God of heaven, given unto me; and He has charged 
me to build Him an house at Jerusalem, which is in 
Judah. Whoever there is among you of all His people, 
his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, 
which is in Judah, and build the house of Jehovah, the 
God of Israel (He is the God), which is at Jerusalem; 

R4893 : page 379 

and whosoever is left, in any place where he sojourneth 
[unprepared for the journey], let the men of his place 
help him with silver and with gold and with goods, and 
with beasts, beside the free-will offering for the house 
of God, which is at Jerusalem." The King himself gave 
liberally toward the work and, through the treasurer, 
numbered to the Israelites vessels and utensils of the 
temple, great and small, fifty-four hundred. 

Tradition says that the Israelites set out on their 
journey accompanied by an escort of a thousand cavalry 
for their protection from the desert Arabs, and that they 
went forth to the sound of joyous music, in harmony 
with Isaiah 48:20,21— "Go ye out of Babylon; flee from 
the Chaldeans, with the voice of singing declare ye, tell 
this, utter it even unto the end of the earth; say ye, The 
Lord hath redeemed His servant Jacob." 

GOD'S PURIFYING WORD 

If we have been astonished from time to time at the 
readiness of the Israelites to go into idolatry, we may 
also feel astonished that from the time of their return 
from the Babylonian captivity, idolatry, in its grosser 
form, was never even known amongst them. In Babylon 
they sat down by the banks of the rivers and "wept as 
they remembered Zion" in its desolate condition; and 
then their thoughts traveled back to the gracious promises 
of God to which their nation was still heir. Then 



hope for deliverance brought prayer to the Deliverer. 
The effect of the captivity was excellent. Those who 
availed themselves promptly of King Cyrus' offer were 
such as reverenced the Lord and trusted in His promises. 

The total number to return was about the same number 
that now occupy the city of Jerusalem (returning 
after a still greater scattering than at the time of the 
destruction of their city by Nebuchadnezzar), about 
fifty thousand. 

Professor Addeney has well remarked of that time, 
"The Jews now constituted themselves into a church. 
The chief concern of their leaders was to develop their 
religious life and character. The policy of exclusiveness 
saved Judaism. This is an application— though a 
very harsh and formal application— of the principles of 
separation from the world, which Christ and His Apostles 
enjoined upon the Church, the neglect of which has at 
times nearly resulted in the disappearance of any trace 
of truth and life, like the disappearance of a river that, 
breaking through its banks, spreads itself out in lagoons 
and morasses and ends by being swallowed up in the 
sands of the desert." 

Dr. Peloubet says of this time, "The exiles brought 
together the representatives of the divided kingdom and 
made one nation where there had been two, welding the 
twelve tribes together like iron in a furnace." God represented 
this union through Ezekiel (37:15-28) by two 
sticks. On one was written "Judah" and on the other 
"The House of Israel." These sticks were joined together, 
"And they shall become one in thine hand." This 
was done in the presence of the people to show that the 
exiles of Israel, carried to Babylon, B.C. 722, when Samaria 
was destroyed, were to unite with the captives of 
Judah. "And I will make them one nation, and one king 
shall be king over them all; and they shall be no more 
two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms 
any more at all." Thus we see that there were no 
"ten lost tribes," for whom there has been so much 
seeking. 



R4894 : page 379 

THE SECOND TEMPLE'S FOUNDATION 

-EZRA 3:1-4; 5. -OCTOBER 22.- 

"Enter into His gates with thanksgiving, and 
into His courts with praise."— Psa. 100:4. 

THE JOURNEY from Babylon to Jerusalem 
required about five months. Ezra, with his 
smaller company, subsequently made the 
journey in four months. We can well imagine 
the enthusiasm of this company of 



captives, of all the tribes, people of all ages. 
A few of the very aged remembered having 
seen the land and the city in their childhood. 

Arrived at their destination they found 
terrible dilapidation. The crumbling hand 

of time had co-operated with the destructive fires of Nebuchadnezzar's 
army, seventy years previous. To live in 
the city was scarcely practicable. The people scattered 
in the country round about for a distance of twenty miles. 
First, attention was properly paid to making themselves 
comfortable, preparing dwellings, training olive trees 
and vines. But shortly after, the religious sentiment 
stirred them to prepare for offering formal worship to 
the God whose favored people they were delighted again 
to be. 

First, the altar was built on the height of Mount Moriah, 
supposedly the very spot where Abraham offered his 
son Isaac— the very spot which was the site of the altar 
in Solomon's temple. Divine worship began, and the 
Feast of Tabernacles was observed in the seventh month. 
By the next spring they felt ready to begin the reconstruction 
of the temple, and a start was made by laying 
its foundations. The enthusiasm of the people for the 
worship of the true God is noted in connection with this 
service; namely, a foundation celebration was held, and 
the people shouted and wept by turns as they thought of 
God's goodness and sought again to apply to themselves 
the Divine promises. 

In this connection we read that some of the very aged 
of the company who had knowledge of the original temple 
of Solomon, wept, perhaps in appreciation of the fact 
that the one they were founding would be much less 
glorious than Solomon's. 

The news of the return of the people and of their 
start to rebuild the temple of the Lord spread amongst 
the people of the land, who, in some respects at least, 
had been recognized as Israel's enemies. Now, however, 
they desired to join hands and become participators in 
the building of the new temple. They made overtures to 
this effect, saying, "Let us build with you, for we seek 
your God as ye do; and we do sacrifice to Him since the 
days of Esar-haddon, king of Assyria, which brought us 
up hither." 

However, this kind offer was refused, with the 
answer, "Ye have nothing to do with us, to build a house 
unto our God; but we ourselves will build it unto the 
Lord, the God of Israel, as King Cyrus, the king of Persia, 
hath commanded us." Then these people, repulsed, 
sought to delay the work and to hinder its building. They 
even hired attorneys to frustrate the matter at the court 
of King Cyrus in Persia, and through the days of his 
son, Cambyses, until King Darius came to the throne. 
The latter followed out the original policy of Cyrus and 

R4894 : page 380 



gave full authority to proceed with the work at 
Jerusalem. 

WAS THE PROPER COURSE TAKEN? 

Many have said that the Jews in this matter showed 
themselves narrow-minded and bigoted; that they should 
have been glad to have the assistance and the co-operation 
of their neighbors in the building of the temple, and 
in all the arrangements for God's worship; they should 
have had the missionary spirit. 

Not so, we reply. Their course was the only proper 
one when we understand the terms and conditions under 
which God was dealing with Israel. It was not their 
commission to make Israelites out of all nations; they, as 
one nation, had been elected or selected by God to establish 
and to offer the sacrifices and worship which God 
had ordained through Moses. They were not at liberty 
to change or amend the Divine proposition and to bring 
others into the "elect" nation. There was indeed a 
method by which outsiders, non-Israelites, might become 
Israelites— by becoming "proselytes of the gate"; but in no 
other than in such an open, public renouncement of their 
wills and by devotion to Jehovah could any one become 
a participator in the Divine promises made only to the 
Seed of Abraham. 

The Jews are still following the Divine arrangement 
for them in keeping aloof from other religions and by refraining 
from inter-marriage with other peoples. God 
has thus preserved this nation separate from all others; 
and He tells us why. For them He has a great place in 
the Divine programme. They are again to become God's 
people, God's representatives in the earth, after the Elect 
Church shall have been completed and shall have been 
glorified on the heavenly plane. The latter will constitute 
the Spiritual Seed of Abraham and the Spiritual 
Kingdom of God, while the former will constitute the 
earthly seed of Abraham, and be the earthly representatives 
of God's Kingdom to the world. These two Seeds 
are referred to in God's promise to Abraham, saying, 
"Thy Seed shall be as the stars of heaven and as the 
sands of the seashore." And through these two Seeds, the 
spiritual and the natural, God's blessing of restitution is 
shortly to be showered upon mankind in general, under 
the reign of Messiah for a thousand years. 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S POLICY 

The same policy should be observed by Spiritual Israel 
—"The Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are." No 
outside, unconsecrated stones are wanted in this Temple. 
Let the world build its own. God Himself is the Builder 
of the Church, which is the Body of Christ, the Temple 
of the Holy Spirit. God permits his consecrated ones 
to be associated with Himself in the building of this 
Temple; as St. Paul declares, the saints, under the guidance 



of the Holy Spirit, are to "build one another up in 
the most holy faith." (Jude 20.) There is absolutely 
no place for worldly workers in conjunction with this 
great work of God now in progress. 

Incalculable harm has resulted from the failure to 
note this matter properly. The children of this world 
and the children of the Kingdom of God too frequently 
join, after the manner suggested in our study. The effect 
always is to bring in worldliness and to give the worldly 
mind a measure of control in respect to spiritual things, 
of which they have no real knowledge— "The natural 
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, neither 
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.' 
-I Cor. 2:14. 



R4892 : page 380 

"SONGS IN THE NIGHT" 

-PSALM 85.-OCTOBER 29.- 

"The Lord hath done great things for 
us whereof we are glad."— Psa. 126:3. 

WE ARE STILL in the night of weeping. Sickness, 

sorrow, sighing and dying continue, 

and will continue until the glorious morning 

of Messiah's Kingdom. How glad we are 

that we have learned that then the glorious 

change will come to earth! The Prophet 

David expresses this thought, saying, 

"Weeping may endure for the night, but 

joy cometh in the morning." (Psa. 30:5.) 

St. Paul breathed the same sentiment when 

he declared, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth 

in pain together until now, waiting for the manifestation 

of the sons of God." (Romans 8:22.) The sons of God 

in glory will, with their Lord, constitute Emmanuel's 

Kingdom. 

At present these sons of God are comparatively little 
known or recognized amongst men; frequently they are 
considered "peculiar people," because of their zeal for 
righteousness and truth and for God. "Beloved, now 
are we the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what 
we shall be, but we know that when He shall appear we 
shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is"; and 
we shall share His glory, honor and immortality and 
with Him scatter Divine blessings to all the families of 
the earth. 

"A SONG OF DELIVERANCE" 

Our lesson, the 85th Psalm, may properly have several 
applications. The first of these would be to Israel's deliverance 



from the Babylonian captivity, when Cyrus 
gave permission that all who desired might return to 
Palestine. About fifty-three thousand availed themselves 
of this privilege and of his assistance. The people rejoiced 
in this manifestation of the turning away of Divine 
disfavor and the return to them of Divine favor and 
blessing. The pardon of their transgressions as a nation 
was here evidenced in this privilege of returning to God's 
favor. 

A secondary application of the Song is just before us. 
Israel has been in a far greater captivity to Christendom 
during the past eighteen centuries. She has the promise, 
nevertheless, of a mighty deliverance. The Cyrus who 
gave them liberty to return from literal Babylon was a 
type of the great Messiah who is about to give full liberty 
for the return of God's ancient people to Divine 
favor— to Palestine. St. Paul refers to this coming 
deliverance of Israel in Romans 1 1:25-29. The Deliverer 
will do more than merely regather them. He will do that 
which the 85th Psalm has predicted; as the Apostle says, 
"This is My Covenant with them when I shall take away 
their sins." See also Jer. 31:31-34; Heb. 8:8-11. 

Israel's sins have not yet been taken away, even as 
the world's sins have not yet been taken away. The great 
Redeemer indeed has died for sin, and He is the sinner's 
friend, but as yet he has only appeared in the presence of 
God for us— the Church— not for the world. He is the 
Church's Advocate only; He advocates for none except 
those who desire to approach to God, and these are the 
saintly only— such as love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

R4892: page 381 

The world is enslaved by Sin and Death, the twin 
monarchs which are now reigning and causing mankind to 
groan. We were born in this enslaved condition; as the 
Scriptures declare, "Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, in 
sin did my mother conceive me." Our race, groaning 
under the weaknesses and imperfections we have thus 
inherited— mental, moral and physical— longs for the 
promised deliverance from the bondage of sin and death. 
The majority of mankind undoubtedly feel the gall of 
their slavery, and will be glad to be free. 

The great Deliverer is the antitypical Cyrus. Soon 
He will be victorious and will establish His kingdom 
under the whole heaven. Soon the Church class, the 
saintly, "the elect," will be glorified, and then the time 
will come for the blessing of the non-elect— for their 
restitution to human perfection and to a world-wide 
Paradise, which Messiah's kingdom and power will produce. 
"He must reign until He hath put all enemies 
under His feet; the last enemy that shall be destroyed 
is death." Death will be destroyed; sheol, hades, the 
grave, will be destroyed, by the resurrection of the dead 
therefrom— "Every one in his own order." 



"SONGS IN THE NIGHT HE GIVETH" 

While the whole creation groans under its load of sin 
and sorrow, the saintly few may sing, may rejoice, even 
in the midst of all the sorrows of life, and even though 
they share the results of sin as fully or even more fully 
than do others. The secret of their joy is two-fold: 
(1) They have experienced reconciliation to God. (2) 
They have submitted their wills to His will. They obtained 
this new relationship by the way of faith in the 
Redeemer— faith in His blood of Atonement. They entered 
by the "strait gate" and "narrow way" of consecration 
to God— surrendering their own wills and covenanting 
to do the Divine will to the best of their ability. 

This submission of the will to God and the realization 
that all their life's affairs are in God's keeping and under 
His supervision gives rest to the heart. They have a rest 
and peace in this surrendered condition which they never 
knew when they sought to gratify self-will and ignored 
the right of their Creator to the homage of their hearts 
and the obedience of their lives. 

Similarly, these have joy and peace and songs of 
thankfulness to God because to them He grants a knowledge 
of His Divine purposes, and shows them things to 
come. These see beyond the trials and tribulations of 
the present time— they see the glories that will follow the 
present time of suffering. These see that the Church, the 
saintly few of all denominations and of all nationalities, 
are prospective heirs of God— heirs of glory, honor and 
immortality and association with the Redeemer in His 
glorious Kingdom. This encourages them. They see 
also the outlines of the Divine Programme for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. When they thus perceive 
that God is interested in their dear ones who are 
not saints, and interested in the whole human family, 
very few of whom are saints, it causes them rejoicing. 
When they perceive that God has arranged that through 
Christ and the glorified Church all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed, it makes them "joyful in the house 
of their pilgrimage"— while waiting for their own change 
from human to divine nature. 



R4894: page 381 

KNOWLEDGE NECESSARY TO GROWTH IN GRACE 

"Ye have put off the old man with his deeds and have put on 
the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image 
of Him who created him."— Col. 3:9,10. 

IN OUR TEXT the expression "put off" suggests 
the additional thought of putting out. 
As an illustration, let us consider Congress. 
When by a vote the party in power is put 



out of power, we do not understand that 
they are put out of Congress. One party 
which has been in control is to be superseded 
by the other party. Such a transfer 
would, in some respects, mean a new line 
of policy altogether. 

So it is in the change of becoming New Creatures in 
Christ, members of the Body of Messiah. In many 
things a radical change takes place. The new will must 
regulate what we shall eat, what we shall wear; in fact, 
it must be the ruling power over everything after we have 
become New Creatures, begotten of the Holy Spirit; for 
we have elected a new Head. The change of headship 
is an instantaneous work. There was a time when we 
were on the other side of the question. Finally we decided 
to come on the Lord's side, and accepted Him as 
our Head. At the moment we accepted the change the 
will of the flesh was put out of control and the new will 
installed in power. Then we became New Creatures. 
But we were undeveloped in character. 

As when a new party comes into power in Congress 
that party cannot regulate things all at once, but by degrees 
effects the changes desired, so with the new mind. 
It gradually makes change after change, and thus the 
renewing work, the transforming work, goes on, the new 
mind gaining more control and bringing the thoughts, 
words and deeds under the supervision and direction of 
the Lord. As we come to know God better, we come to 
see His will better. More and more we come to see 
things from the Divine viewpoint and to regulate every 
word and every act of our life therefrom. 

Through knowledge, as well as in knowledge, the New 
Creature is renewed or refreshed, built up, made strong. 
The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. What 
the old mind had was the wisdom of this world. What 
the New Creature receives is the wisdom of God. The 
development of the different powers of the New Mind 
is a gradual work, dependent upon knowledge. With the 
new will the knowledge becomes the energizing and 
strengthening power, and finds opportunities by which 
the New Creature can accomplish its purpose. This 
knowledge is that which cometh from above. It is not 
merely the knowing how many chapters there are in the 
Bible, nor how many verses there are in the Bible and 
being able to quote them; but by the various providences 

R4895 : page 381 

of God in life, it is to come to such a knowledge of God 

that it is sufficient for His will to be made clear to us, 

to insure obedience. Our knowledge is increased in proportion 

as we give heed to the things which God has 

spoken; in proportion as we set our affections on things 

above and not on things on the earth. 

THE TERMS UPON WHICH WE ARE CALLED 



All Christians should know the terms and conditions 
upon which "God hath called" them, namely, (1) To 
suffer with Christ in the present time, and (2) To be 
glorified and reign with Him in the coming Age to bless 
the world. These should know both the reason for their 
suffering and the character which God would develop in 
them, without which they could not be "fit for the 
Kingdom." It is concerning these characteristics, "putting 
on the new man," necessary to those who would 

R4895 : page 382 

make their "calling and election sure," that our present 
lesson treats. Let us consider some of them. 

"Let love be without dissimulation." St. Paul had 
already explained the necessity for love, but now he puts 
us on guard against a merely feigned love, which would 
only outwardly appear kind and polite. The true spirit 
of love, the holy spirit, will not be a dissimulating one, a 
hypocritical one; the love will be genuine, heart-felt, as 
well as mouth-expressed. This love is to be toward 
God and toward all, in proportion as they are God-like, or 
striving to be so. It is to be a love of that which is good, 
right, pure, true. 

"Abhor that which is evil." We are not merely to 
avoid doing that which is evil, not merely to have no love 
or affinity for evil, but more than these, we are to hate, 
to abhor evil. As the love for God and for all things 
true and pure and making for righteousness is to be cultivated, 
so the abhorrence of sin and impurity of every 
kind is to be cultivated. Thus, the stronger we become 
in Christian character the more intense will become our 
love for the good, the pure and the true; and the more 
intense will be our opposition to the untrue, the impure, 
the sinful. The more we learn of the beautiful harmonies 
of this heavenly grace of love, and the more they 
become the melodies of our own hearts, the more distressing 
and repugnant and abhorrent will sin and selfishness, 
"the spirit of the world," be to us; just as discords in 
music grate upon our ears in proportion to our knowledge 
and appreciation of musical harmonies. 

As holiness and sin are opposites, so our feeling 
toward these must be represented by the sentiments of 
love and hatred. To grow cool in love for righteousness 
is to lose some of the abhorrence for sin. Let us, therefore, 
cultivate in ourselves hatred for sin, selfishness, impurity 
and every evil way, that we may find it the easier to 
cultivate in our hearts the beautiful graces of the Spirit. 

Only in our minds have the old things passed away 
and all things become new. Actually, this change will be 
accomplished when we become spirit beings. Meantime, 
if we shall be counted worthy of a place in the First 
Resurrection, it is required of us that we shall demonstrate 
our willingness of mind, our earnest desire, to be 
all that the Lord would have us be. In no way can this 



be better demonstrated to the Lord or prove more helpful 
to ourselves than in keeping a strict surveillance of our 
hearts and of our thoughts. 



R4893 : page 382 

SHOW ME THY FACE 

Show me Thy face— one transient gleam 

Of loveliness Divine, 
And I shall never think or dream 

Of other love than Thine; 
All lesser lights will darken quite, 

All lower glories wane, 
The beautiful of earth will scarce 

Seem beautiful again. 

Show me Thy face— my faith and love 

Shall henceforth fixed be, 
And nothing here have power to move 

My soul's serenity. 
My life shall seem a trance, a dream, 

And all I feel and see, 
Illusive, visionary— Thou 

The one reality. 

Show me Thy face— I shall forget 

The weary days of yore; 
The fretting ghosts of vain regret 

Shall haunt my soul no more. 
All doubts and fears for future years 

In quiet trust subside; 
And naught but blest content and calm 

Within my breast abide. 

Show me Thy face— the heaviest cross 

Will then seem light to bear; 
There will be gain in every loss, 

And peace with every care. 
With such light feet the years will fleet, 

Life will seem brief as blest, 
'Till I have laid my burden down 

And entered into rest. Selected. 



R4895 : page 382 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

FURTHER WORD FROM INDIA 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
I praise the Lord for granting me another 



opportunity to inform you, our Pastor and 
beloved Brother in the Lord, of the glorious 
harvest work that is going on in Travancore. 

Sectarian missionaries and their agents are 
very active, yet the glad tidings appeal to the 
hearts and minds of the poor, and they gladly 
hear the message and accept it heartily, and 
soon they themselves become preachers of the 
message to the aristocratic clergy. 

You will be glad to know, dear Brother, 
that the Present Truth which the Lord has 
given to longing hearts everywhere through 
your instrumentality (though it seems "devilish" 
and "anti-Christian" to nominal Christians), 
is making great impression in the hearts 
of even orthodox Hindoos and Mohammedans. 

I wish you could have heard the preaching 
by one of the latter who is interested in the 
Truth. He spoke of the coming Kingdom of 
Christ in such a way that I could hardly believe 
my own ears and eyes. There were some 
Orthodox Hindoos also present in the meeting. 

Many of the Mohammedans ask me why 
they are not mentioned by you in your writings. 
They claim that they are the descendents 
of Abraham through Ishmael. They want to 
know particularly whether they, as a nation, will have any 
special message from you on a Scriptural basis. I don't wish to 
say anything until I hear from you about the same. 

I am very sorry to say that the $200 you mentioned in your 
last letter has not reached me yet. This has put me into much 
difficulty, as all our Pilgrims and Elders are to be helped. 
I admire their loyalty to God and the Master; though they 
starved, they went and preached the Gospel without murmuring. 
I borrowed 200 rupees in order to help me carry on the 
Lord's work. I am very anxious to hear from you, dear 
Brother, in regard to this. 

[In original Tower there is a photograph inserted here entitled:] 

TWENTY WORKERS OF THE "LB.S.A." IN TRAVANCORE DIST., INDIA. 

R4895 : page 383 

Every week we have new congregations added. People 
from far and near beg me to go and present the Truth to 
them. Already they are well informed that our society does 
not pay any salary to anybody, yet they do want to hear the 
Message. What shall I do? Truly the Harvest is great! 

Again, the difficulty re tracts: I placed the order and paid 
75 rupees in advance and now I am unable to go and get the 
printed tracts. We submit everything to the Lord's will. 

Enclosed please find the statements for June and July, and 
the list of payments made to the brethren. Statement of the 
local fund and the work summary for July will follow. 

The Friends all send their love to you, dear Brother, and 
they all pray that if it be the will of God they may be permitted 



to see you in person in due time. With my love and 
prayers, Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
S. P. DEVASAHAYAM. 



THE VIEW FROM IRELAND 

MY DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I am sure you will be pleased to learn that there are good 
results in evidence from the last meeting you held here. Two 
persons have become deeply interested and others are investigating. 
The class here numbers from 25 to 30, with bright 
prospects of an immediate increase. 

The public meeting held last night was attended by about 
100 earnest hearers, several of whom seemed deeply interested. 

The attendance was good for a week night, particularly 
when taking into consideration that the meeting was not very 
extensively advertised. The hall was not large enough to 
warrant very extensive advertising. We used the hall in 
which the class now meets regularly; which is, indeed, a very 
suitable room for the purpose. 

Our opinion is that the Lord's work will advance considerably 
in northern Ireland during the next two or three years. 
The Irish people, like the Welsh, are naturally religious. 
Prejudice against the Truth has been, and still is, very strong 
in Ireland, but it has begun to give way. We strongly believe 
that many religious people in Ireland, Scotland, England and 
Wales will be prepared to accept the Truth as a result of the 
labor troubles, which are prevailing so generally in these 
countries. There are three Colporteur sisters canvassing 
here and they informed me that the situation above mentioned 
has already been beneficial to their work. 

The unrest and dissatisfaction in Great Britain are terrific, 
and the people seem on the verge of general anarchy. But 
we are sure the Lord will continue to "hold the four winds 
of heaven" until the harvest work shall be consummated. Apparently 
three years will be quite sufficient to bring on the 
awful climax of trouble in Europe. The more severe the 
"spasms" of trouble grow, the more favorable seem to be the 
opportunities for prosecuting harvest work. 

Prior to my visit to Britain it was my opinion that the 
climax of trouble might first be reached in America, but my 
opinion has undergone a radical change since traveling in 
Britain. In America the working people are paid "living 
wages," and many of them own their own homes, and have 
money in the banks, while over here the working people are 
nearly all wofully underpaid and own no property. 

In America many of the working people would be heavy 
losers should anarchy prevail; while over here they have practically 
nothing to lose. Think of men performing hard dock 
work for 17 shillings ($4.08) a week, and people working in 
factories for from 8 to 15 shillings ($2 to $4) a week! These 
poor people have no real incentive to preserve the present 
order of things. The distress resulting from poverty over 
here is appalling. Praise God for the blessed Restitution work 



soon to begin. 

The cost of living is only about 25 per cent, less than in 
America. Rents, clothing, shoes and a few other things are 
cheaper here than in America, but luxuries and most necessities, 
in the line of groceries, are as high here as in America, 
and some are higher. Most meats, as well as butter and eggs, 
are higher than they are in the United States. Am pretty sure 

R4896 : page 383 

that on the whole the cost of living here is not more than 25 
per cent, cheaper than in America. This is doubly offset by 
the great difference in wages, which are from two to three 
times greater in America than they are in Britain. 

The striking spirit has become epidemic all over Britain. 
Even the rag-pickers of Belfast are striking. They want a 
penny more per stone (14 pounds) for their rags. The striking 
newsboys and "hoodlums" created a riot at Dublin recently. 
A large number of striking newsboys paraded the 
streets of Belfast. They resembled an army of "ragamuffins." 
Poor creatures ! 

I am informed that the operators can illy afford to advance 
wages— taxed to keep up an army, navy, etc. 

Dear Brother, I am so glad that the dear Lord permitted 
me to visit Europe at this time, because it has greatly increased 
my appreciation of the Truth generally. You have 
warm, noble friends here in Belfast who dearly love you. And 
the writer loves you more than ever, and more than ever 
esteems the blessed privilege of association with you in the 
Lord's work. Much Christian love to all. 

Your brother in Him, FRANK DRAPER. 



page 383 

LABOR TROUBLES IN GREAT BRITAIN 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Many thanks for your letters safely received and which 
have careful attention. I have been north for a short tour and 
stayed a little to rest my body through the kindness of 
Brother and Sister Tait, of the Glasgow Church. They have 
the use of a country house about 40 miles from Glasgow. We 
had some meetings in the neighborhood, one for the public 
in Rothesay, which seemed to arouse some interest. The 
work in the country goes on well, and the friends generally 
are quick to seize opportunities of service. 

You will have heard of the sharp time we have had of 
late; the transport workers— railway men, dockers, carters 
throughout the country— "struck" work. Then there came a 
sort of fever in many different branches of labor, and a general 
desire to strike for better wages and lesser hours; and the 
recognition of unions was manifested. For a few short but 
very lively days the country seemed on the verge of an internal 
war which would have been far more disastrous than 



an invasion by the Germans. At present things are quieted 

down, but there is no telling how soon they may be again inflamed. 

All this is sharpening not only the brethren, but 

others who know something of our literature, and I believe 

the Lord will use this to the benefit of the work. The books 

continue to sell well, though just now the holiday season is 

on and sales are not quite so brisk as during the past few 

weeks. 

The strike has delayed our work considerably, and the 
shipment of sewn sheets was held up quite a time. We hope 
soon to get quite up to date with the binding, for we have 
now succeeded in getting delivery to Aylesbury. The work in 
the office goes all right. 

You probably have my letter about the financial position. I 
hope it demonstrated to you just how we have been short of 
money. I am glad you are soon to be with us. The Lord continue 
to bless you in all your ways to His praise and glory! 

Ever yours in His grace and service, J. HEMERY. 



R4896 : page 383 

FOURTEEN YEARS AGO 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In a WATCH TOWER of fourteen 
years ago, after giving the Syriac rendering of Heb. 10:22, 
you say: 

"Here the Apostle mentions five conditions: (1) Honesty 
of heart; (2) an undoubting faith; (3) a blood-sprinkled 
heart (Heb. 9:14), a heart, or will, that has been justified, 
not merely through faith "'[tentative justification], but also 
through the application of the blood "'[vitalized justification], 
the virtue of the ransom given once for all by our Redeemer; 
(4) a clean conscience; (5) washed, or purified, bodies, i. e., 
with the outward man in the process of cleansing by the purifying 
Word of Truth and grace. 

"The purifying, or cleansing, of the heart, through faith 
in the precious blood, seems to be much better understood by 
Christians than the purifying of their bodies, their flesh, 
through obedience in the application to themselves, in daily 
life, of the promises, precepts, warnings and illustrations of 
Scripture— as water, or cleansing truths, etc., etc." 

Brother Russell, I thought until I read this that the two 
justifications were something that you had never seen until 
very recent years. Truly, as another said in regard to some 
similar discovery over which we were wondering and rejoicing, 
"Brother Russell has been years ahead of us all the time; 
and when he would tell us things, none of us ever saw but 
half, and when various things came up we considered them 
new, because we had not been able to assimilate them when 
they were first given to use," or words of similar import. 
I am so glad. 

The first thing I ever read was old "Food for Thinking 
Christians." I had forgotten all about the Three Covenants; 
but when you began to write about them it seemed all right, 



and as if I had always had that idea; though I could not explain 
it, nor say where I got it until I re-read that old 
pamphlet. I. P. W. 



*These bracketed words are not in the 1897 TOWER. 



page 386 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES L, "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German, five 



vols; in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, four vols.; 
In Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform 
with English edition, prices the same. 
Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 each. 



page 385 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

Feeding on the Words of God 387 

Obedience the Test 388 

The Spirit of Discontent 389 

Tendency Not to See Our Own Faults 389 

What the Church Sacrifices 390 

God's Providence Re Two Queens 391 

"Mene, Tekel, Upharsin" 392 

The New Covenant 393 

Justification by Faith 394 

The Co-Operative Church Movement 395 

"The Issues of Life" 396 

"The Peace of God" 397 

Pride of Heart Abominable 397 

Questions on Our Lord's Life-Rights 398 

The Merit and the Life-Right 398 

Actually No Life-Rights to Sacrifice 398 

Failure Releases Imputed Merit 399 

Life-Rights Represented in New Covenant 399 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 399 

page 386 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 



FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4898 : page 386 

FRIENDS LIVING NEAR ESPERANTO CLUBS 

We have some leaflets in Esperanto (the well recommended 
international language) consisting of a portion of the "Do 
You Know?" tract. For friends living in cities where there 
are Esperantists there is an opportunity for service in ascertaining 
the time and place of their study-room and in serving 
them with the literature. On account of their interest in the 
language, some would read who would not otherwise do so, in 
their native tongue. Write us, saying how many of these 
Clubs you could serve and how many leaflets are desired. 



INDIA MISSION 

The good work progresses favorably in the India Mission. 
The last word is that the native teachers number twenty-four 
and that they are serving, with more or less regularity, thirty-two 
congregations. The work done for July is as follows: 

277 general meetings In attendance 8,180 persons 

315 cottage meetings " " 2,527 " 

280 meetings with the sick.... " " 1,684 " 
Class meetings for Bible 
study, 63 " " 2,878 " 

935 total " " 15,269 " 

page 386 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR NOVEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for November follow: (1) 165; (2) 259; (3) 331; (4) 188; 
(5) 7; (6) 293; (7) 260; (8) 307; (9) 91; (10) 99; (11) 197; 
(12) 110; (13) 170; (14) 198; (15) 105; (16) 130; (17) 217; 
(18) 93; (19) vow; (20) 95; (21) 117; (22) 119; (23) 211; 
(24) 299; (25) 12; (26) 307; (27) 53; (28) 176; (29) 209; 
(30) 87. 



R4896 : page 387 

FEEDING ON THE WORDS OF GOD 

"Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word 
that proceedeth out of the mouth of God."— Matt. 4:4. 

WE READ that these words were a part of our 

Lord's answer to Satan when the Adversary 

exhorted Him to command the stones to be 

turned into bread, in order to satisfy His 

hunger, after fasting forty days in the wilderness. 

The Lord knew, however, that it 

would be unlawful for Him thus to use the 

superhuman power which came to Him as 

a result of His consecration to the Father's 

service. That power was not to be used 

for His flesh. Hence our Lord refused to use His superhuman 

powers for the gratification of the flesh, even 

though He hungered. Then Satan suggested, How do 

you expect to live if you do not exercise your power to 

live? Our Lord's answer, as we see, was that man shall 

not live by bread, merely, but by every word, every promise 

that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. 

Our hope of eternal life, therefore, rests upon that 
obedience to God which would entitle us to eternal life, 
according to His arrangement. If our Lord had gratified 
the flesh He might have satisfied His hunger, but He 
would have violated His covenant of obedience to God. 
Whoever would have eternal life must seek to be obedient 
to God, to all that God has commanded, all to which He 
has directed the individual. Of course, He might have 
one command for the angels, another for man, and a third 
for the Church. But since we find that we are not able 
to obey perfectly every command of God, we cannot hope 
for eternal life by perfect obedience to the letter of the 
Word of God. Even though God has accepted us as His 
children, we can hope for life only by having the spirit of 
obedience to His Word. 

One of the lessons to be learned in the School of Christ 



is that a "man's life consisteth not in the abundance of 

the things which he possesseth"— food and raiment, etc.— 

but that his life, in the fullest, highest, grandest sense, is 

dependent upon his complete submission to the Divine 

will. Careful attention to every word that proceedeth out 

of the mouth of God, to every admonition, every encouragement, 

every promise, is necessary to the development 

of those whom God is now calling to eternal life as joint-heirs 

with His Son in the Kingdom. Let us, then, more 

and more, as the disciples of the Lord Jesus, keep in 

memory the words of the text, and act upon them. 

LIVE BY EVERY WORD FROM THE MOUTH OF GOD 

But how is it possible for us to live by the words that 
proceed out of the mouth of God? What did Jesus 
mean? How can God's words give life? 

He meant that all hope of attaining eternal life depends 
upon God— upon the Divine Plan and its promises. 
Looking into these promises we can see distinctly that the 
Divine Plan, dating from before the foundation of the 
world, is that all of God's creatures, created in His likeness 
and abiding in faith, love and obedience in harmony 
with Him, shall have life everlasting. This is God's 
Word upon the subject, namely, that obedience is the condition 
of life everlasting. This is, undoubtedly, what our 
Lord had in mind in the words of our text. He may 
also have had the thought that He had come into the 
world upon a special mission, to do the Father's will, and 
that His understanding from the beginning was that His 
perfect obedience to the Divine will would insure Him 
glory, honor and immortality with the Father, eventually; 
but that any disobedience would mean the forfeiture of 
Divine favor and would involve the sentence of disobedience 
—death. 

Our Lord's prompt decision, therefore, was that to disobey 
the Father's will and thus to secure bread for the sustenance 
of His body, would be a great mistake; that food 

R4897 : page 387 

thus secured could sustain life for but a little while; that 
His better plan would be to trust in the Word of God, the 
Divine promise, that those who love and serve and obey 
Him shall ultimately come off conquerors and more, and 
have eternal life with God. And this, our Master's conclusion, 
is full of instruction for us who are His disciples, 
seeking to walk in His footsteps. 

DISCIPLINE AN EVIDENCE OF SONSHIP 

One "word of God" which is very comforting to His 
children is His assurance of Parental care and discipline. 
"If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with 
sons; for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth 
not?" (Heb. 12:7.) In this statement the word "chastening" 



should not be understood as meaning disapproval 

on the part of our Father, and sin on the part of the individual, 

but rather instruction. We are guided in the matter 

by remembering that although our Lord was a Son 

in whom there was no sin, yet He received, in the Father's 

providence, as a part of the "cup" poured for Him, various 

trials, disciplines. All of these experiences were very 

profitable, showing that the Father loved Him; that the 

Father had something which He was desirous that our 

Lord should do that He would not have been qualified 

to perform without some of these educational instructions 

and experiences. 

Some disciplines, some chastisements, come as a result 
of our own mistakes and the natural consequences flowing 

R4897 : page 388 

from those mistakes and the apologies and heartaches 
which may necessarily follow them. God could save us 
from these experiences and so seclude and shelter our 
lives that we would not have anything to tempt us. But 
such is not His proposition. He wishes us to have these 
experiences that we may be guided in the right way and 
learn of our own weaknesses. 

If we did not come into contact with various testing 
experiences we should not know where we are weak. 
Thus we learn where we can strengthen our characters 
and how we can be thoroughly developed as New Creatures. 
The Scriptures speak of our Lord Jesus as "enduring 
such contradiction of sinners against Himself." 
(Heb. 12:3.) Our trials, or disciplines, in meeting every 
opposition that can come to us, should bring more or less 
of correction in righteousness. Even if this would not 
mean outward stripes, we, in any event, would have our 
mental regrets as New Creatures, and thus we would get 
a form of correction, or discipline. Additionally, the 
Lord causes His children to come into peculiar trials as 
an example either to the brethren or to the world. In 
many of these, whatever the cause, we may understand 
them to be also corrections or instructions in 
righteousness. 

TRIAL-DISCIPLINE-NECESSARY TO THE PERFECTING 
OF OUR CHARACTERS 

Character cannot be developed wholly without trial. 
It is like a plant. At first it is very tender; it needs an 
abundance of the sunshine of God's love, frequent watering 
with the showers of His grace, much cultivating with 
the applied knowledge of His character as a good foundation 
for faith and inspiration to obedience. Then, when 
thus far developed under these favorable conditions, it is 
ready for the pruning hand of discipline, and is also able 
to endure some hardness. Little by little, as strength of 
character is developed, the tests applied to it serve only 
to develop more strength, beauty and grace, until it is 



finally developed, perfected, fixed, established, through 
suffering. 

This great work of developing and training character 
is necessarily a slow and tedious one, and not infrequently 
it is a painful process. But the Apostle plainly tells us 
that such things are necessary for the development of 
steadfast and enduring character. Consider how your 
own experience has verified this, you who have been for 
some time under the Lord's special care and leading. 
How much richer you are for all the lessons of experience, 
and for the patience and other spirit-fruits that 
experiences have developed in you ! 

Although, like the Apostle, you can say that "No 
chastening for the present seemeth joyous, but grievous; 
nevertheless, afterward, it yieldeth the peaceable fruits 
of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby." 
(Heb. 12:11.) The lessons of experience and discipline 
have made you stronger. They have increased your faith 
and drawn you into closer communion and fellowship with 
the Lord. They have made you feel better acquainted 
with Him and enabled you to realize more and more His 
personal interest in you and His love and care for you. 
And this in turn has awakened a deeper sense of gratitude 
and an increasing zeal to manifest that gratitude to Him. 
This also deepens the sense of fellowship with God, and 
gives confidence to the hope of final and full acceptance 
with Him as a son and heir, made worthy through Christ. 

OBEDIENCE THE TEST 

Another helpful "word of God" is found in I John 2:5: 
"Whoso keepeth His Word, in him verily is the love 
of God perfected." Here we have a test by which to determine 
our development as a New Creature. Only those 
who have received the Word of God can keep it, can retain 
it and comply with its requirements. The text suggests 
that it is a difficult matter to keep the Word of God. 
On all sides we hear various reasons why we should 
retain, hold fast the world, the flesh, rather than that 
which the Lord's Word holds out to us. There are many 
allurements to entice us from the "narrow way." Hence 
these who hold fast to the Word of God are 
"overcomers." 

The Scriptures intimate that to live righteously and 
godly in this present time will cost us our very lives. 
"Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) Under present conditions 
faithfulness means faithfulness even unto death. The 
intimation is that unless we have the love of God we will 
not undertake to be obedient to His Word; that otherwise 
we can neither retain the Word of God nor be in accord 
with it, serving it even unto death. 

Our Lord Jesus illustrated the perfection of obedience 
to the Word of God when He said, "I come to do Thy 
will, O God!" Everything written in the Book; everything 
that was God's will, He was glad to do at any cost. 



Our Lord Jesus could not have reached this degree of 
submission to the Divine will unless He had had love for 
the Father. And so with us. Unless we have love for 
God and the principles of righteousness we cannot continue 
in this way. 

Consequently, only those who so love God that they 
would surrender life to do His will, are properly keeping 
His Word. We may say that this condition is reached 
when we first make consecration, for the heart has given 
up its will and surrendered itself fully to the Lord— "Not 
my will, but Thine, be done." All those who are complying 
with the conditions of self-sacrifice have reached the 
mark of perfect love. Of course, there is another sense 
of perfecting which we shall attain in the resurrection. 
But only those who will keep God's Word by faithfulness 
even unto death will secure the prize and become partakers 
of the divine nature. 

The test is OBEDIENCE. In proportion as we keep the 
Lord's Word, in like proportion the love of God is perfected 
in us; for if we have received the mind of Christ, 
the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, the effect will be to 
cause us both to will and to do His good pleasure to the 
extent of our ability. And this ability should be continually 
on the increase year by year. Although we may not 
hope to be perfected until we shall be "changed" and be 
granted our new resurrection bodies, nevertheless, we may 
keep so closely in touch with the Lord in the spirit of our 
minds that we may have continual fellowship with Him; 
and by confessing our faults daily and seeking his forgiveness 
we may continue to the end of our journey clean 
from sin, even though we must still acknowledge the infirmities 
of the flesh, that in our flesh dwelleth no 
perfection. 

THE WORK OF RESURRECTION 

A further word from the mouth of God assures us that 
He knoweth our frame, He remembereth that we are 
dust— weak, imperfect, dying; and that it is not His 
purpose that we shall continue always to be in conflict 
with ourselves— perfect will against imperfect body; but 
that He has provided that, in the resurrection, we shall 
have new, perfect bodies, in full accord with our new 
minds. 

He assures us that He is able and willing to do all this 
and that He purposes to give to His elect, bodies of a 

R4897 : page 389 

much higher order than the human— that He will give 
us spirit bodies— and that of the highest rank. We shall 
have part in the First Resurrection, and will thenceforth 
be able to do the Father's will perfectly in every respect, 
as we now show ourselves desirous of doing His will so 
far as we are able. O gracious provisions! O wonderful 
words of compassion, inspiring us to wondrous hopes of 



eternal life and glory! It will be to such as thus overcome 
in spirit, in faith (I John 5:4), that the Lord will give 
the final Word of His mouth— "Well done, good and 
faithful servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord!" 

"A little while; now He has come; 

The hour draws on apace— 
The blessed hour, the glorious morn, 

When we shall see His face. 
How light our trials then will seem! 

How short our pilgrim way! 
The life of earth a fitful dream, 

Dispelled by dawning day!" 



R4899 : page 389 

THE SPIRIT OF DISCONTENT 

"So far as lieth in you, live peaceably 
with all men."— Rom. 12:18. 

THE SCRIPTURES speak of the hour of trial 
coming upon all men. (Rev. 3:3,10.) We 
believe that hour is upon us— already begun. 
To the world it means discontent, 
bitterness, evil-surmising, hatred, strife, 
robbery, murder. It is this spirit which is 
about to wreck society. The Scriptures 
seem very clearly to establish this fact. 

Let us not forget that this trial hour in 
some respects begins with us, the Church. 
God permits it. He has given us great light respecting 
Himself, His character, His glorious plans, etc. He has 
instructed us respecting our "high calling" to the divine 
nature. We have accepted His invitation and have been 
begotten of His Holy Spirit. We have entered the School 
of Christ and have been given lessons respecting the 
character we must attain if we would be accepted as 
members of the Bride company. Much advantage every 
way has been ours. Now the examination is on. Which 
of us will graduate with honors? Which will show that, 
however poor and imperfect in the flesh through heredity, 
he has attained a character-likeness of the Lord in his 
heart and mind? This is the test. 

How shall we expect this test to be applied? Dearly 
beloved, we see how it is being applied. We perceive 
from observation and through correspondence that the 
examination is going favorably with some and very unfavorably 
with others. In some places the entire Class 
of Bible Students seems to be involved. Petty questions 
respecting authority and methods are causing distraction 
and tending to arouse contentions. This detracts from 
service of the Truth. It cools the ardor of some; it makes 
others positively bitter. Anger, malice, hatred, envy, variances, 



strifes— all fruitages of the evil spirit— appear to 
some extent to gain control. 

EACH SHOULD JUDGE HIMSELF 

We are not judging nor condemning anybody, but with 
the Apostle are saying to all that each should judge 
himself. Each should see to it, not only that he has the 
graces of the Spirit— humility, gentleness, meekness, patience, 
long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love— but that 
he manifests these qualities in his conduct, in his words. 
We should remember, too, that the Lord's test is not 
merely along the lines of love for the beautiful, the good 
and the gentle, but a patient, kind and loving forbearance 
also for those who are out of the way, and even for enemies. 
We should bear in mind that justice is as elementary 
a feature of the Divine character, as love itself. 
Hence if we would be god-like, if we would be copies of 
God's dear Son with His likeness, we must have the principle 
of justice firmly established in our character. We 
should be generous, benevolent, loving toward all; but 
we should be just even before we are generous. If we 
love not our brother whom we have seen, how can we 
show that we love his Father and our Father whom we 
have not seen? 

This same spirit of discontent is testing God's people 
in their homes. Keener perceptions of right and wrong, 
justice and injustice, enable us all to see wherein we have 
ourselves been either just or unjust, and also where 
others have been either just or unjust toward us. This 
increase of knowledge brings a responsibility upon us 
individually, to see to it that any injustices of the past 
shall be fully, quickly, heartily apologized for and undone 
and henceforth avoided. This work thoroughly done will 
keep us thoroughly occupied— straightening ourselves, 
bringing the conduct and thoughts of our mortal bodies 
into full submission to the Divine standards, as we now 
more fully discern these. 

TENDENCY NOT TO SEE OUR OWN FAULTS 

But there is a tendency in an opposite direction— not 
to see our own faults and rectify them, but to see the 
faults of others, to note the injustices which they have 
practised upon us and to resolve that they must toe the 
mark of our new appreciation of our rights and that right 
quickly, or otherwise be forced so to do. This is the 
very spirit of the world, which is rapidly precipitating 
the great time of trouble. Those in power feel that they 
must use force. Labor realizes as never before its own 
power and is thereby tempted to exercise it and hastily 
enforce upon the world its convictions of right and 
justice. 

As we urge the world not to undertake the matter by 
force, but to hearken to the Word of the Lord— "Wait 
ye upon Me, saith the Lord, until that day"— so we urge 



upon the Church of Christ: Do not attempt to force 
husbands, wives, parents and children up to the line of 
perfect justice toward you. Be sympathetic, forbearing, 
even as God has been sympathetic and forbearing toward 
us and toward all mankind. If the injustice has been 
long-standing, that is not a reason why it may not be 
quickly rectified, but, on the contrary, it is a reason why 
we should suffer long and be kind, while trying to show 
the erring one his fault, speaking the Truth in love, and 
in meekness instructing those who oppose us. 

There is no doubt about it that more than half of 
humanity live in gross violation of the principles of 
justice, as well as contrary to the principles of love. 
Sometimes it is the husband, who, while loving his wife 
and children, rules them in so arbitrary a manner as to 
cause them to doubt his love and sympathy. Such a 
course on the part of a brother in the Lord is probably 
owing to some misconception of the Divine order. He 
knows the Bible teaches that the husband is the head of 
the family, but does he know how, properly, to take and 
to hold this noble headship? Apparently many have not 
learned that the chief function of headship is not merely 
to be the provider for the temporalities of life nor merely 

R4899 : page 390 

to be the responsible head who must finally decide in respect 
to the family's interests. Rightly seen, man's 
headship means much more. It is his duty to look out 
for the health, the happiness, the morals, and the spiritual 
interests of his family. And this includes a reasonable 
consideration of their natural weaknesses and imperfections, 
mentally and morally, as well as for their physical 
weaknesses and imperfections. 

DUTIES OF THE HEAD OF THE HOME 

A true head of a happy home must of necessity frequently 
ignore his own preferences and tastes in many 
things, because his duty to his family and to their happiness 
would so demand. Man's headship, then, from 
the Scriptural standpoint, means much more than to be 
the "boss," the judge, the decider of affairs. And this is 
further proven by the Scriptural declaration and illustration 
in which Christ and the Church and their mutual 
relationship are made a pattern of the proper love and 
respect and co-operation between husband and wife. 

Our Lord is indeed Head over the Church, and to 
whatever extent we, His Church, recognize this Headship 
and follow His directions we find them wise and 
helpful and advantageous. And to whatever extent we 
do not follow them we later find that we have missed 
some blessing. Our Lord does not force us to recognize 
His headship. Our necessity forces it. So it should be 
in a properly regulated home. The conduct of the husband 
and father should be that of self-sacrificing devotion 



to those dependent upon him, rather than an attitude of 
general assertion of headship, commands or threats. 

It may take days or weeks or years for the head of 
the family to demonstrate his love and care for those 
under his supervision— before they will realize the same. 
Perhaps his devotion may never be recognized in the 
present life. All the same his duties as a father, husband, 
caretaker, etc., are fully upon him, regardless of how his 
devotion may or may not be recognized by his family. 
As with the Lord, so with the husband— meekness, gentleness, 
consideration, should always be manifest. 

We have heard with regret that some dear brethren 
of the Lord have misinterpreted STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
Vol. VI., along this line and that as a result their 
lives, instead of being made more loving and gracious, 
have become the reverse— more dictatorial, unsympathetic, 
tyrannical. We hope that these reports are overdrawn 
at least, and we hope also that the clearer knowledge 
on the subject has, at least, made some more noble 
and more loyal and more esteemed by their families. 

"WOMAN'S RIGHTS" SENTIMENTS IN THE AIR 

And how about the sisters? Alas, not all of them are 
rightly exercised by the precious truths with which the 
Lord has so highly favored us! The greater knowledge 
of justice and injustice, and of the rights of man and 
woman, become tests to the sisters, as well as to the 
brethren. They, too, are in the hour of temptation, trial. 
The "Woman's Rights" sentiment is in the air. It does 
not make for peace and harmony. On the contrary, it 
is a part of the general spirit of discontent— the spirit 
of the world, which our great Adversary is stirring up 
more and more. As in the world this is stirring up the 
time of trouble, so in the Church and in the family it is 
bringing a time of trouble in advance of the world's 
tribulation. Alas! dear brethren and sisters, what shall 
it profit us if we gain a few rights and destroy our own 
peace and happiness and the peace and happiness of those 
whom we have vowed to assist and comfort and to sustain 
while life lasts? 

As St. Paul says, "Ye were called to liberty, but use 
not that liberty for an occasion to the flesh." Our real 
liberty which brings us blessing and Divine favor and 
peace of soul is a liberty from error and superstition, 
and a liberty from the bondage of selfishness— a liberty 
to sacrifice, to serve, to lay down our lives for the brethren 

R4900 : page 390 

and for all men as we have opportunity— and particularly 
the liberty or privilege of showing to those of 
earthly relationship that we are copies of the Master and 
have His Spirit of self-denial, love, sympathy, good 
fruits. 
There are, indeed, times and places where both the 



brethren and sisters must stand for principles and the 
liberty to worship God; but, these being granted, we may 
well sacrifice all other things as trivial; or, if we must 
contend, let us contend for only such things as our Redeemer 
would have contended for. Thus let us "walk 
in His steps, as He has set us an example."— I Pet. 2:21. 



R4900 : page 390 

WHAT THE CHURCH SACRIFICES 

IN THE SCRIPTURES the word sacrifice is 

very properly used in two ways— first, to 

describe the surrender of our will in order 

to have God's will done in us; second, to 

indicate the work of our great High Priest, 

to whom we give up ourselves, and who 

makes that consecration acceptable to God. 

Primarily we sacrifice what we possess of 

the present earthly rights, privileges and 

opportunities; for this is what we possess. 

But, additionally, we give up something by faith. By 

faith we believe that God has made a provision that all 

mankind shall have the privilege of restitution to perfection 

during the Millennial Age; and by faith we forego, 

or give up, our share of Restitution privileges. Thus our 

principal giving up is our surrender of what we have; 

and our secondary giving up is that which we have by 

faith in God's great Plan. 

However, it is not necessary for one to have an appreciation 
of the coming restitution blessings in order to 
sacrifice these and thus to present himself a living sacrifice, 
as the Apostle exhorts. (Rom. 12:1.) A knowledge 
of Restitution blessings is connected with a full knowledge 
of the Ransom. We can see that others in the past 
did not have this knowledge clearly. But since those who 
consecrate to the Lord give up everything that they have, 
this would include Restitution also. So, then, while the 
saints who lived before the Harvest period did not have 
this knowledge of Restitution, yet they made an acceptable 
sacrifice through faith in the Redeemer. 

The terms offer, sacrifice, devote, etc., sometimes have 
different meanings. When, for instance, we read that 
the high priest offered the sacrifices and also that we 
offer our bodies living sacrifices, we would differentiate 
between these uses of the word offer and say that to 
devote for sacrifice is our part. This we do when we 
present our bodies. We can do no more than present 
them. This is shown in the type by the bringing of the 
two goats to the door of the Tabernacle and the tying 
of them there. In this sense we sacrifice— that is, we 
give up our own will and our own rights to everything. 
But the Heavenly Father does not deal with us in the 
sense of accepting a sacrifice from us, except through the 



Redeemer. As our great Advocate He stood ready to 
impute His merit to our offering; and as the High Priest, 
the representative of God, He sacrificed it. We had already 

R4900 : page 391 

presented ourselves; and our offering was completed 
when the High Priest accepted the sacrifice and 
began the killing of the antitypical goat. But this is a 
gradual work. In the type, the life was accepted instantly 
when the High Priest thrust the knife into the goat; but 
the sacrifice was not actually completed until the blood 
was taken into the Most Holy. And so in the antitype. 

OUR WORK NOT COMPLETED AT CONSECRATION 

This work of sacrificing the Church our Lord is continually 
accomplishing in one way or another all through 
the Gospel Age. When we received the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit we became New Creatures. And this actual 
dying, and all the sufferings in the "narrow way," and 
our continuing to yield ourselves to the guidance of the 
Lord, are all parts of the work of sacrifice. When we 
sacrifice our will we should not entertain the thought, 
Now I have done my part, let the High Priest do the 
rest! This is not the right thought. At any moment 
we may cease to will and thus cease to present ourselves; 
at any moment we may sit down and say, "We will take 
our ease." We must not do so; but we are to continue to 
fill up the sufferings of Christ. 

It is not all over when we consecrate. Then we gave 
up all of our rights and interests. It requires a great 
deal of grace to be dead to the world and alive to God. 
This the Apostle represents when he says, For the bodies 
of those beasts whose blood is brought into the Most Holy 
by the high priest, wherewith to make atonement for 
sin, are burned outside the camp. (Heb. 13:11.) In one 
sense of the word that "goat" is dead. Our experiences 
represent the actual suffering and going outside the camp 
—all that happens to us while we are reckoned dead 
according to the flesh. 



R4900 : page 391 

GOD'S PROVIDENCE RE TWO QUEENS 

-NOVEMBER 5. -ESTHER 4:1-5:3.- 

"The Lord preserveth all them that love Him."— Psalm 145:20. 

TODAY'S STUDY has Queen Esther for its 
topic. She was a Jewess, noted for her 
beauty, and on this account she was chosen 
of Ahasuerus, King of Persia, to be his 



queen. It is presumed that she received 
the name Esther, which signifies a star, 
because of her beauty, Hishtar being the 
Chaldaic equivalent for Venus. She succeeded 
Vashti, the former queen, who had 
displeased the king and been divorced. 

In the opposite course of these two queens we find a 
lesson bearing on the Suffragette question of today. The 
king had a banquet with the lords of his empire. It may 
be assumed that it was a revel, and that the king and his 
guests, at the height of the revel, were more or less 
under the influence of wine. Giving Queen Vashti the 
benefit of the doubt, this was probably her reason for 
ignoring the king's request. 

Many will say that she did just right in asserting her 
womanhood, in "standing up for her rights," etc. We 
will not dispute that all women have rights, and that 
Queen Vashti had hers and that she exercised them. We 
merely offer the suggestion that in a question of "rights," 
along lines of force and compulsion, Queen Vashti won 
a victory which cost her dearly. 

In Queen Esther's procedure, which is the subject of 
this lesson, we see the opposite course pursued— the queen 
won a great victory with happy results by a totally different 
procedure, and one which in our judgment recommends 
itself to the wisest and best of men and women. 

Vashti could have taken a similar course but did not. 
However much she might have felt that the king's requirement 
of her presence would expose her to jest or 
rudeness, she should have relied upon her charm and 
tact and purity and upon her husband's love and care. 
While it was not hers to intrude into the banquet, once 
invited, her presence should have been a hallowed one, 
a sweet perfume, a rebuke to any immodesty. Like many 
another well-meaning woman, Queen Vashti was unwise; 
she abandoned the most potent defense of pure womanhood 
when she met command with refusal. But then 
we must remember that Vashti was neither a Christian 
nor a Jewess, and was therefore without any Divine instruction 
or guidance. 

ESTHER STOOPED FOR VICTORY 

Queen Esther was not a suffragette. When invited to 
become the queen she did not decline and see to it that 
she stood on the same ground as Vashti. She accepted 
her accession as of Divine providence. She clothed herself 
with humility and with the most becoming of her 
fine apparel. She made herself as agreeable to the king 
as possible. It is presumed that at this time she was in 
her fifteenth year. Haman, the king's favorite, took a 
dislike to the gate-keeper of the palace, Mordecai, a Jew, 
because the latter did not bow before him, as did others. 
Mordecai was so faithful that Haman could not hope to 
find a fault with him, and thus to cause his removal. His 
hatred extended to the entire Jewish race. He prevailed 



upon the king to issue a decree that all the Jews of his 
kingdom should be set upon and killed as enemies of the 
country. This, of course, would include Mordecai, his 
special enemy, whom he would then feel free to kill. 

As the time for the enforcement of the decree drew 
nearer and nearer, Mordecai and all the Jews throughout 
the empire were in great distress and fear, yet not without 
hope that their God would work some deliverance. 
This matter is detailed in our lesson. 

Queen Esther was cousin to Mordecai, although the 
latter was old enough to be her father. She was, indeed, 
his adopted daughter. He appealed to her to use the 
influence of her position to have the king rescind the 
order. She delayed because, strangely enough, at this 
very time, the king had shown a coldness toward her, and 
had not called for her for a month. 

R4901 : page 391 

LOVE AND BEAUTY CONQUERED 

Mordecai pressed the matter more urgently, assuring 
her that she was about to lose a great privilege of service 
for her people; that God had evidently raised her to 
this position in the kingdom for this very hour and for 
this very purpose of bringing to the Jews relief and that, 
if she failed to note and to use the privilege, God doubtless 
would use some other agency and still bring deliverance 
in harmony with His promises. The appeal was 
sufficient. The queen merely delayed for three days more, 
requesting that Mordecai and all the Jews of the royal 
city join with her in a three-days' fast before God, which 
of course included petitions to God for the deliverance of 
His people, and for wisdom to guide Esther in her endeavor 
to use her talent and opportunity wisely. 

Queen Esther risked her station, and even her life 
in going into the king's presence without a summons; 
but, attired in her royal apparel, she risked everything 
for her race. She charmed the king, who extended to 
her his royal scepter, which she touched. He perceived 

R4901 : page 392 

that she had a request to make, and urged her to speak. 
Wisely she refrained and asked the king and Haman, his 
prime minister, her enemy, to partake of a special dinner 
with her in the court garden. After the visit the king 
again urged her to say what wish of his attractive queen 
he could gratify. This was Queen Esther's opportunity, 
and she replied, asking why, if he loved her, he would 
issue an edict that she should be killed, and all of her 
race, the Jews. 

Her case was immediately won. The king perceived 
that he had been inveigled by Haman into making an 
unjust decree. A bad law stipulated that no decree of a 
Persian king could be changed. This decree had been 



stamped with the king's seal, and the king, angry at 
Haman, made another decree, namely, that Haman should 
be hanged, and that the Jews everywhere should be 
notified that they had royal consent to use force against 
their enemies in defending their lives. 



R4901 : page 392 

"MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN" 
--NOVEMBER 12. -DANIEL 5.- 



"For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret 
thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil."— Eccle. 12:14. 

A LAW OF RETRIBUTION operates. Good 
thoughts, good words, good deeds, are sure 
to bring good results— sooner or later. Evil 
thoughts, evil words, evil deeds, are sure to 
bring evil results— sooner or later. This 
Divine Law operating in the world, rewarding 
good and evil deeds, save in exceptional 
cases, now operates only amongst the Jews 
and amongst Christians. This is because 
only Jews and true Christians have come 
into covenant-relationship with God. The Apostle's 
declaration is true— "The world lieth in the Wicked 
One"; "The god of this world hath blinded the minds 
of them that believe not." The time promised in the 
prophecies has not yet come when "all the blind eyes 
shall be opened and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped." 
(Isa. 35:5.) Nevertheless, in a general way God exercises 
a supervision of the world's affairs, restraining evil from 
going to such lengths as would be irreparable; restraining 
it also from working real injury to those who are in 
covenant-relationship with Him— Jews and Christians. 

Sodom and Gomorrah, Nineveh, Nebuchadnezzar and 
our lesson of today tell of exceptions to God's rule of 
dealing merely with His covenanted peoples. In our 
lesson the fall of Belshazzar's kingdom was not merely a 
judgment upon it, but a part of the great type of the 
fall of antitypical Babylon at the hands of an antitypical 
Cyrus. 

The king of Babylon, feeling secure in the great walls 
of his capital, three hundred and fifty feet high, revelled 
with his generals and nobility. To renew the memory of 
their great victories of the past, he brought forth for the 
occasion the golden vessels taken in the pillage of Solomon's 
temple— a triumph over the Jews and, as was generally 
supposed, over Jehovah, the God of the Jews. 

In the midst of the banquet a horror came over the 

R4902 : page 392 



assembled dignitaries as a human hand was beheld writing 

on a wall of the banquet room in letters of fire, "Mene, 

Tekel, Upharsin." The wise men and astrologers were 

unable to read the writing or give its significance. Daniel 

was remembered and sent for. He not only showed the 

reading but its meaning. The secret evidently lay in the 

manner in which the letters were arranged, the characters 

themselves being Chaldaic. The Prophet Daniel declined 

the rewards and honors offered for the interpretation. 

He told the king plainly that the writing signified that 

he was "tried in the balances and found wanting." The 

Babylonian kingdom, so far from advancing human interests, 

had really retrograded from the original type. 

Another nation— Medo-Persia— would be given a trial. 

Later, the Grecians were given universal empire; still 

later, the Romans; and finally God permitted what was 

styled the "Holy Roman Empire," or the reign of Christ. 

Each of these has proven its insufficiency— its inability to 

bring to the world the blessing which God declares shall 

ultimately abound when Messiah's true reign shall be inaugurated, 

and the blessing and uplifting of mankind will 

become the "desire of all nations." 

EVERY MAN'S WORK TO BE TRIED 

We have said that Jews and Christians, because of 
covenant-relationship with God, are now on trial— being 
judged. This has been God's repeated declaration to the 
Jews. Their shortcomings are punished in a manner that 
the shortcomings of others, not in covenant-relationship 
with God, are not punished, but their punishments and 
stripes are intended to work out blessing for them eventually. 
Had it not been for the persecutions which have 
come to the Jews they would not today be a separate and 
distinct people as God designed, and hence they would 
not be ready as a people to receive and be the first to 
participate in the glorious blessings of the Messianic 
Kingdom. In proportion as they maintain loyalty to their 
Law and confidence in the promises of God they will 
be prepared for the fulfilment of these great promises 
which are still theirs— earthly promises of restitution, etc. 
-Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

While God's promises to the Jews pertain to the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom and its blessings, His promises 
to covenanted Christians are spiritual, heavenly. 
These respond to God's invitation, "Gather together My 
saints unto Me," saith the Lord, "those who have made 
a covenant with Me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) That 
covenant to sacrifice earthly things will be rewarded with 
heavenly things. In proportion as they are faithful to 
their covenant of sacrifice they will be spiritually refreshed, 
strengthened in the will and in the power of 
His might and rich toward God in faith and in works. 
Those riches of grace and spirit, the full attainment of 
which will come in the First Resurrection, are often associated 
now with poverty and sorrows of an earthly kind. 



The heavenly things are to be attained only by those who 
sacrifice earthly things. Hearken to the Master's words, 
"Whoever will live godly shall suffer persecution"; "Be 
thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of 
life. "-2 Tim. 3:12; Rev. 2:10. 

ALL REAP AS THEY SOW 

During Messiah's thousand-year reign of righteousness 
the world will be dealt with and brought to its judgment, 
its testing, its crisis. But it will be a righteous 
testing or crisis, giving to all mankind a fair test as to 
loyalty to God. The result of this opportunity, or trial for 
everlasting life or everlasting death, will come as a result 
of the great redemption work accomplished at Calvary. It 
is the will of God "that all men should be saved [recovered] 
and come to a knowledge of the Truth." (I Tim. 2:4.) 
In that glorious Epoch Satan will be bound and 
the fetters of sin and death now upon our race will be 
broken, and all will be granted the full opportunity of returning 
to the blessed conditions and favors enjoyed by 

R4902 : page 393 

Father Adam in his perfection— but refusing this favor 
they will be destroyed, and that without remedy, in the 
Second Death. 

But while that future time will be the actual testing 
period of the world for life or death everlasting, we 
are not to forget that every good deed and every evil 
deed committed now will have a bearing then. Every 
good deed, every good thought, every good word, has 
its uplifting and beneficial influence upon character; and 
every evil word, thought and deed has its injurious effect 
upon character. Every kindness done to one of the Lord's 
saintly, elect members, will be rewarded. Every evil deed 
done to one of the least of these will be surely punished. 

Thus the world of mankind is now laying up in store 
helps or hindrances as respects their own everlasting interests. 
The honorable, the upright, even though they 
do not become Christians or saints, will have proportionately 
a better standing in the future time of trial. 
The dishonorable will have proportionate degradation in 
the future, and will come forth proportionately more degraded, 
and will need proportionately more stripes in 
order to rise up out of sin, degradation and death, by the 
assistance of the Savior and the glorified Church.— 
I Cor. 6:2. 



R4902 : page 393 

THE NEW COVENANT 
"They, like Adam, have transgressed 



the Covenant."— Hosea 6:7. 

AFTER THE CREATION of Adam, God entered 

into Covenant relationship with him 

to the effect that through obedience he 

might have eternal life. Adam failed; and 

thus that Covenant was broken. The relationship 

between God and man was changed. 

God no longer sustained the life of man and 

gave him everything for his happiness, but 

the Divine sentence of death passed upon 

the entire human race. Because of the undeveloped 

condition of the earth at that time, everything 

was favorable for man's death, as unworthy of life. God 

intimated, however, that He had compassion upon humanity; 

and that at some later time He would grant a 

blessing. This promise implied reconciliation to Himself. 

Later, God made a special promise to Abraham— 

"In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 

(Gen. 12:3.) During all this time God had in view the 

great Plan which He is now carrying out, the establishment 

of a New Covenant through a great Mediator between 

God and man who would sacrifice His life to satisfy 

Divine Justice. 

The time not having come for the development of the 
great Mediator, God made a typical arrangement with the 
nation of Israel. That nation was made to represent the 
world. Moses was made to represent the world's Mediator. 
At Sinai God entered into a Covenant with Israel, 
not directly, but through Moses, the Mediator of that Law 
Covenant. God was bound to give Israel eternal life if 
they would keep that Law. (Ex. 19:3-9.) Moses was the 
Mediator, the counselor and the instructor of the people 
to bring them to the place where they could keep the Divine 
Law and have eternal life. In due time it was discovered 
that the Law gave eternal life to none. What 
would God do? There was perplexity. 

"In due time" God sent forth His Only Begotten Son, 
qualified to be the Redeemer of Adam's race. In due 
time Jesus, as the Son of God, became the Redeemer, in 
that He gave His life to be the ransom-price for the 
world, and began the redemption work. As the man 
Jesus He could not redeem and restore the world, for it 
would require His death as a man to furnish the redemption-price. 
Hence His first work was to lay down His 
life as a ransom-price, to lay it down in the sense of putting 
it into the hands of Divine Justice. In harmony with 
the Divine arrangement, the Father raised Him from the 
dead to a new nature; and He still had this ransom-price 
to his credit. 

During the Gospel Age He has been imputing the merit 
of this to the Church class in order that they may join 
with Him in a covenant by sacrifice, in harmony with the 
Scripture which says, "Gather My saints together unto 
Me; those that have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice." 
(Psa. 50:5.) Christ's sacrifice and the sacrifice 



of His members constitute the "better sacrifices" than 
those of Israel in the type. These "better sacrifices" began 
with our Lord's experiences at Jordan and will continue 
down to the time when the last member of His 
Body shall have shared in His suffering, and shall have 
been made partaker of His glory in the resurrection. 

MEDIATOR COMPLETE WILL INAUGURATE NEW 
COVENANT 

By that time, the great Mediator complete, our Lord 
and His members, will be ready to inaugurate the New 
Covenant which God has promised, through the Prophet 
Jeremiah. (Jer. 31:31.) This New Covenant is intended 
to bless all the families of the earth, as God said 
to Abraham. (Gen. 12:3.) The promise is that this 
New Covenant will be made with Israel. In order to 
avail themselves of this Covenant, therefore, all other 
nations and peoples will be obliged to become a part of 
Israel. Thus eventually Abraham will become the father 
of many nations. All who will come into harmony with 
God will be the children of Abraham, in the sense that 
they will attain to that faith which Abraham had. Both 
the faith and the obedience will be necessary. As soon 
as the New Covenant shall have been sealed it will become 
operative. The Christ will then stand forth to be 
the Mediator of the New Covenant. 

R4903 : page 393 

This Covenant will be like unto the old Law Covenant; 
but it will be better, superior, the one of which the Law 
Covenant was a shadow. God will not then deal with 
Israel directly, but through the Mediator. Primarily, the 
Ancient Worthies will be fully received and will gladly 
accept the Mediator and all the terms and conditions of 
the New Covenant. Since they will be perfect they will 
be entirely able to comply with its conditions. They will 
have no weakness of the flesh, as they will be raised from 
the dead perfect human beings. During the period of 
the Mediatorial reign the Mediator will stand ready to 
help and assist all who will come back into harmony with 
God. None will be brought immediately into communication 
with God, however, but they will be dealt with 
through the Mediator until the close of the Millennium, 
when they will be turned over to the Father. During the 
Messianic Age all will be subject to the Mediator's arrangements 
and the Father's arrangements through Him. 
Gradually the effect will be to take away the stony heart 
out of all flesh and to restore all mankind to that which 
was lost— perfection, mental, moral and physical. Those 
who refuse to participate in this blessing, we are told, 
will be destroyed from amongst the people. (Acts 3:22,23.) 
Those who continue to progress will reach the 

R4903 : page 394 



condition of perfection of heart, of mind and of body 
which God requires. 

MANKIND WILL BE RESTORED TO PERFECTION 

At the close of the Mediatorial reign all mankind will 
be ready to profit by the experiences of the Millennium 
and will be turned over to God, to Divine Justice. Then 
they will be actually on the same plane that Adam was 
before his fall; and it will be for them to maintain this 
Covenant relationship with God. If they fail, as Adam 
did, then they will die the Second Death. But if they are 
faithful they will be passed on to eternal life. The test will 
be made by God, who will loose Satan for a little season, 
to demonstrate who will yield to his seductions. (Rev. 20:7-9.) 
God wishes those to have eternal life who 
can stand all kinds of tests and whose loyalty to Him 
will be above the power of temptation. 

So we see that preparations for the inauguration of 
the New Covenant began at the time when Jesus came 
into the world, and are still going on. These preparations 
are; first, the development of the Priesthood, the 
Head and the Body, the High Priest and the underpriests; 
second, the offering of "the better sacrifices." 
Thus we have the entire picture— the New Covenant 
about to be inaugurated, the people about to have the 
blessing, just as they would have if God had received 
them to Himself and had dealt with them personally, 
with compassion and mercy. But He will receive and pass 
as satisfactory none except those who are perfect. His 
dealing with the Church now as perfect is in view of the 
fact that their imperfections are made up for by the Advocate; 
and they, as the Royal Priesthood, have their 
standing as New Creatures in Christ. 

We understand that the New Covenant goes fully into 
operation at the beginning of the Millennium and that it 
brings blessings all through that Age. Under this New 
Covenant the Lord will take away the sins and stony 
hearts of mankind. (Ezek. 36:26,27.) But the New 
Covenant does not become personal between God and 
mankind until the Mediator steps out of the way. 
(I Cor. 15:24.) After He steps out of the way, Covenant 
relationship with God will be established just as with 
Adam, and God will guarantee eternal life to all who 
continue obedient to the Divine Law. 



R4901 : page 394 

JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH 

IN ROMANS 5:1, where the Apostle says, 
"Being justified by faith we have peace 
with God," his thought is that our peace 



or harmony with God began with our faith 

and led on to this condition of grace 

wherein we stand as sons of God, begotten 

of the Holy Spirit and rejoicing in the 

hope of Kingdom glory, honor and immortality. 

Our justification by faith began 

with the first element of our faith; that is 

to say, when first we saw the Lord even imperfectly. 

From the time we first approached God we began to 
have a measure of peace, which continues with us as 
long as we are walking in the right direction, growing 
in knowledge and obedience. Those whose faith or obedience 
stops find their peace with God diminishing. If the 
faith and obedience extend to the point of full consecration 
and begetting of the Holy Spirit, it becomes the 
"Peace of God which passeth all understanding," ruling 
in our hearts. (Phil. 4:7.) The latter text refers to the 
perfected peace imparted by the Holy Spirit, which results 
from a full consecration to the will of God. 

After trust and obedience had increased to the point 
where we were willing to present our bodies living sacrifices 
to the Lord, then we entered into this fuller blessing, 
wherein we now stand. But in order to enter, we must 
first have our faith vitalized by the great High Priest, 
who imputes to us as much of the merit of His sacrifice 
as is necessary to perfect us; and secondly, we must be 
accepted as sacrifices by our Heavenly Father, who indicates 
His acceptance by begetting us of the Holy Spirit 
to newness of life. 

The vitalization is that which makes justification complete 
and unchangeable. The person whose justification 
has been vitalized has received his full share in the merit 
of Christ. To such there would remain no more an interest 
in the great atonement if he were to turn back, like 
the sow to the wallowing. If he fails to go on to perfection 
as a New Creature, the only thing for him would 
be a "certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery 
indignation which shall devour the adversaries."— 
Heb. 10:27. 

By way of illustration, let us consider a person not 
in harmony with God, but feeling after him. Typically 
he recognizes the Divine Presence as represented in the 
Tabernacle. He draws near to God. As he approaches 
the Tabernacle he finds but one gate for entrance from 
the Camp to the Court. After he enters that gate he 
beholds the brazen altar with its sacrifices, representing 
the Redeemer's meritorious sacrifice. Passing the altar 
implies faith in the redeeming work. From the time he 
enters the "court" condition of faith his faith continues 
to increase with each onward step of obedience. Next 
the first veil is seen, representing consecration to death. 
If the stoop of full consecration to pass under the veil 
be made, the result is full or perfect peace, such as our 
Lord referred to when He said, "My peace I give unto 
you."— John 14:27. 

His faith is no longer merely a faith in the Redeemer's 



work; more than this, it has become "peace, the gift of 
God's love," the begetting of the Holy Spirit, which passeth 
all understanding, ruling in his heart. But if, after 
the first veil is reached and seen to represent the sacrifice 
of all earthly interests, that step is not taken, the 
result will be a lessening of the peace, and possibly a 
more or less retrograde movement toward the gate, toward 
the world. 

The difference between the justification of those now 
justified through faith in our Lord Jesus Christ and that 
of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the other Ancient Worthies 
who were said to be justified by faith is this: The 
Ancient Worthies lived at a time when their faith could 
not be vitalized. Hence, nothing that they could do would 
give them more than the privilege of having the Divine 
approval and a better hope for the future, according to 
the amount of knowledge they enjoyed. They could never 
gain eternal life actually, except through the Redeemer. 
Hence they received only the promise of eternal life. 
Their full justification will come when the Redeemer 
shall have made application of His merit to the world. 

During the Gospel Age matters are different. Whoever 
would be justified by faith and similarly approved 
of God now, must present His body a living sacrifice. 
Those who do so, in this "Acceptable Time," will be accepted 
of the Lord and begotten of the Holy Spirit. 
Such then cease to be of the earthly, and get their reward 
with the heavenly class, with our Lord, on the spirit 
plane. 



R4903 : page 395 

THE CO-OPERATIVE CHURCH MOVEMENT 

NEWSPAPER items advise the world that 

Mr. J. Pierpont Morgan, financier, and 

other prominent men are backing and 

financing a great religious movement for 

this fall— a religious revival to be simultaneously 

launched in every part of the 

United States by the active co-operation 

of Christians of all denominations. Realizing 

that few except women attend the 

usual Church services, this movement is to 

be specially directed toward men. It is styled, "The 

Men and Religion Forward Movement." 

Each Christian should properly ask himself, what 
should be my attitude toward this movement? We therefore 
offer some suggestions to WATCH TOWER readers, 
but they are merely suggestions. Each child of God, of 
course, is free to follow his own judgment respecting 
the Divine will. The Editor will merely express his own 
convictions, his own mental attitude, and such as like 
may copy the same wholly or in part. 



OUR SYMPATHY SHOULD GO OUT TO THEM 

Our sympathy goes out toward the good people who 
are launching this movement, even though we have every 
reason to believe that probably only a few of them may 
be devout Christians in the deepest sense of that term. 
We sympathize with those who are not Christians at all 
in the Biblical sense, who are merely well-meaning moralists 
and who, not understanding the Divine Plan, consider 
the real, saintly Christians to be merely extremists 
and freaks. Going about to establish a righteousness of 
their own (Rom. 10:3), they are in deep earnest in desiring 
the welfare of humanity. We surely rejoice that 
their intentions toward their fellowmen are good and 
not evil, not injurious. 

This kind of sympathy with their methods should 
lead us to speak to them and of them in most kindly 
terms, whether they be ministers or laymen, rich 
or poor. God is on the side of everything that is good 
and sympathetic with everything that is good and right- 
to the extent that it is good-intentioned. And so His 
children should be. Thus the Master taught: When 
the Apostles told Him that they had forbidden others to 
cast out demons because they followed not with them, 
He said, Forbid them not, for whosoever is not against 
us is on our part. In other words, there should be a 
bond of sympathy between all who are right-minded, 
just, kind, well-meaning, whether or not they can see 
eye to eye theologically. 

A HOUSE-TO-HOUSE CANVASS 

It is a part of this general revival scheme to visit 
every home and to make inquiry respecting the attitude 
of every citizen as respects the Church relationship, attendance 
at meetings, etc. These visitors will call at our 
homes. The fact that we see that they are attempting 
an impossible work, and the fact that we believe that 
they are ignoring the Divine methods, should not blind 
us to the fact that some of these dear people are spending 
time and energy in what seems to be a valiant fight for 
the Lord. 

Our sympathy should go out toward them and 
they should be received by us in the most kindly and 
generous manner. But we need to be on guard lest our 
zeal should outstrip our wisdom, and we should do them 
and the cause harm rather than good. We should be wise 
as serpents at all times and as harmless as doves. 

For instance, our sympathy with their good intentions, 
uniting with our knowledge of a more excellent way, 
would incline us to use such an opportunity for instructing 
them in this more excellent way. In our zeal we might 
forget that a certain preparation of the heart is necessary 
before the Truth can be received into even a good and 
honest heart and that it will do no good to others. Instead, 



therefore, of attempting to delay these visitors and 
apparently to hinder their work by engaging in theological 
discussions, the wiser course would seem to be 
to give in a dignified and kindly manner and unobtrusively 
our little witness for the Truth and to leave the matter 
there. If their hearts be in right condition the Truth 
itself will appeal to them. And if they hunger and thirst 
after righteousness, they will seek more of it, either at 
the time or later. 

A SUPPLY OF "PEOPLES PULPITS" 

Each reader should have a supply of PEOPLES PULPITS 
covering interesting topics, for wise use on such occasions. 
After answering the questions kindly and very 
briefly and without any attempt to convert, some free 
reading matter on the subject might be suggested, with 
the intimation that if he would read it you could get it 
for him, but without any attempt to thrust it upon him 
or to unduly urge him to accept it. If he has no ear for 
the Truth, it would be better to save the reading matter 
for another less likely to waste it. 

Again, if the gentleman manifest an interest, do not 
thrust upon him a great amount and thus make it appear 
common and valueless. Rather make a selection of one, 
letting him know that there are many so good that you 
scarcely know which one to give him. Select the one 
which, in your judgment, would be most likely to help 
him and tell him that, should he want more, you would 
be glad to hear from him. Show him also the SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES and in a very few, moderate, well-chosen words 
let him know your estimation of them and how you wish 
that all Christians could have them and obtain from them 
the same blessing which you and thousands of other 
Christian men and women have experienced. 

YOUR CARD AND CHURCH RECORD 

Below we print a little statement which may be used 
by those who please as their card. It bears answers to 
nearly all the questions likely to be asked you. Of itself 
it will be a witness for the Truth that may seem foolish 
—even silly— to some who are not spirit-begotten, but 
will prove powerfully enlightening to such as are Spirit-begotten 
—which is the only class we expect to reach 
anyway. 

We have arranged this so that it may be clipped and 
handed to your inquirer with as little inconvenience as 
possible:— 



MY CHURCH CONNECTION 
IS WITH 

"The Church of The Living God 
Whose Names are Enrolled in Heaven. 



Hebrews 12:23. 



I joyfully recognize as members of the same Church all who 
profess faith in Christ's redeeming sacrifice and full consecration 
to death with Him— whether in or out of earthly sects and 
parties. 

I am not a member of any earthly sect, believing that they 
are all of human organization. I love all who love God and 
are seeking His ways, but I abominate the creeds of the "dark 
ages," which did so much to misrepresent the Divine Character 
and Plan and which so seriously enslaved so many of God's people 
in the chains of ignorance and superstition. 

I meet regularly with other Bible students for the study of 
God's Word, regardless of creedal limitations and colorings. 

We give our children religious instruction at home, believing 
this to be the Divine arrangement set forth in the Bible. We 
have found God's way helpful, both to them and to us. 

[OVER] 



R4904 : page 396 



[OVER] 
Name 



One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism 

One God and Father of All 
One Church of the First-Borns, and 
One Hope of Glory, Honor and Immortality 
Eph. 4:5,6; Heb. 12:23; Rom. 2:7. 



R4904 : page 396 

"THE ISSUES OF LIFE" 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out 
of it are the issues of life."— Proverbs 4:23. 

ORIGINALLY man was created in God's 
image and likeness. As a result of the 
fall our hearts are not perfect, but are 
prone to sin. The Lord invites us to give 
our hearts, our affections, to Him: "My 
son, give Me thine heart." (Prov. 23:26.) 
God has provided the Channel whereby He 



can restore us to the relationship of sons, 

that Channel being the Lord Jesus. After 

we have accepted the Lord's proposition and 

given Him our hearts, we become the Lord's dear children, 

as the Apostle expresses it. The next thing is to 

keep the heart in loyalty, in full submission to the Divine 

will. The necessity for thus keeping the heart is manifest. 

Even though our hearts are loyal to the Lord, yet 

we are surrounded by adverse conditions. The world, the 

flesh and the Devil are assailing our hearts, which need, 

therefore, to be watched continually. As the Apostle 

says, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels." (2 Cor. 4:7.) 

We have these adverse tendencies, or conditions, 

to deal with. 

God is not judging His people merely in respect to 
their flesh, in respect to the deeds of life. These are 
more or less imperfect. He has so fixed the matter that 
the result of that which springs from the heart, for 
which the heart is responsible, is life or death. If the 
issues are right, the result will be life eternal. If the 
issues are wrong, the result will be death, unworthiness 
of life. It is not merely the issues of our conduct that 
determine the everlasting result, life or death, but the 
issues of our hearts. They not only affect the present 
life, in the cleansing or polluting of those with whom 
we come in contact, but they determine or settle the matter 
as to whether or not we shall have life. 

Thus the issues of the heart constitute the decisive 
test. The statement does not say that the antithesis of 
life is death; but the question is, Shall we have life? 
We have already been in death. We can have life only 
through the appointed Channel, the Redeemer. If we 
accept the issue of life and receive God's favor of life 
everlasting, we avoid the other issue, death everlasting. 
Not only is this question decided by the issue of our 
hearts, but it is also true that those who attain the condition 
of life during this Age will attain either the glory 
of the divine nature or membership in the "great company." 
They will be either of the Royal Priesthood or 
the servants of this priesthood. Hence, a great deal depends 
upon the issues of the heart. Therefore, we 
should desire the things approved, the things of God. 
We should seek to have the very best achievable issue, or 
result, to attain to the prize of our calling in Christ Jesus! 

MUST ROOT OUT OF OUR HEARTS ALL LOVE OF SIN 

It is not sufficient that we acknowledge sin in its various 
forms to be evil, and that we resolve that we will 
strive against it because it is under the Lord's ban; in 
addition to this we are to root out of our hearts every 
longing, every desire for everything not thoroughly approved 
by the Lord. Oh, what a cleansing this would 
mean in the hearts and lives, and especially in the 
thoughts of many who have named the name of Christ! 
Many who fail to note this point find themselves continually 



beset with temptations because, while outwardly 
avoiding gross immoralities, they secretly harbor sympathies 
for things condemned, desiring that they might 
have them, if only they were not forbidden. 

The more attention we give to this subject the more 
we will be convinced from our own personal experiences 
of the truth of the Scriptural declarations respecting the 
beginnings of sin as secret faults in the mind, the heart; 
and the more we will appreciate the statement of our 
text, "Keep thy heart [mind, affections] with all diligence, 
for out of it are the issues of life." 

We are not to wonder that God has so constituted us 
as to permit temptations to come to our minds, nor are 
we to pray that we may have no temptations; for if there 
were no such presentations, no such temptations, there 
could be no victories on our part, no overcoming of sin 
and of the Wicked One. We know that for this very 
reason we are now in the School of Christ; not that we 
shall there be shielded from all temptation, but that we 
may learn of the great Teacher how to meet the Tempter, 
and by our Master's grace and help come off conquerors, 
victors in the strife against sin. The degree of our success 
in this conflict will depend largely upon the keenness 
of our faith and trust in the great Teacher. If we have 
confidence in His wisdom, we will follow closely His instructions 
and keep our hearts, minds, with all diligence. 
Faith in the Lord's wisdom and in His help in every time 
of need is necessary to us in order that we may be thoroughly 
obedient to Him; and hence it is written, "This 
is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith"; 
that is, it will be by the exercise of faith and the obedience 
which flows therefrom that we will be enabled to 
come off conquerors and "more than conquerors" through 
Him that loved us and gave Himself for us.— I John 5:4; 
Rom. 8:37. 

We are not to seek Divine aid far in advance; as, for 
instance, to ask to be kept throughout the year to come, 
or month to come, or week to come; rather we ought to 
know that if we have made a covenant with the Lord 
and are His, He is near us at all times, in every trial, 
in every temptation; and that His assistance is ready to 
our use, if we will but accept it and act accordingly. 
Hence our prayers should be for help in the time of need, 
as well as general prayers for the Lord's blessing and 
care for each day. 

The difficulty with many is that they are looking for 
some great battles instead of averting the great battles 
and keeping their minds cleansed from secret faults. 
The little battles, which are much more numerous, are 
principally the ones in which we gain the victories, with 
their ultimate rewards. "Greater is he that ruleth his 
own spirit [mind, will] than he that taketh a city."— 
Prov. 16:32. 

Finally, the grand results of obedience to this counsel 

R4904 : page 397 



of the Lord, the grand attainment of those who have 
faithfully kept their hearts with diligence, is expressed 
in the words of the Psalmist, and may well be the repeated, 
earnest prayer of all the sanctified in Christ Jesus: 
"Cleanse Thou me from secret faults. ...Let the 
words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be 
acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord, my Strength and my 
Redeemer. "-Psa. 19:13,14. 



R4898 : page 397 

THE PEACE OF GOD 

"The peace of God which passeth all understanding shall keep 
your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus." "Great peace 
have they which love Thy Law: and nothing 
shall offend them. "-Phil. 4:7; Psa. 119:165. 

GOD'S LAW represents God's will. All who 
are right minded, rightly disposed, will rejoice 
in having God's will well done. Originally, 
God's will was written in man's 
nature. After sin had effaced it there, God 
wrote it upon tables of stone for Israel. 
It is the righteousness of this Law that 
Christians obey (the Divine regulations, 
the Divine requirements, whatever they 
may be) so far as possible. We delight to 
do God's will. 

To love God's Law, then, would be to appreciate the 
fact that God has a great purpose; to take delight in finding 
out what God's will is; and to have full confidence in 
His Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power. Great peace have 
all those who so do. They do not understand every dealing 
of Divine Justice, but their faith holds to the fact 
that He is too wise to err. Thus they have peace in confiding 
their interests to Him. 

In this text the Apostle differentiates between the mind 
and the heart. The heart represents the affections. The 
Apostle urges not only that we should have good feelings 
in the matter, but that our minds should be at rest. If 
after we have made a consecration of ourselves to the 
Lord we should do something to violate our conscience 
in some respect, we would feel estranged from Him. 
Then our hearts should know that we might draw near 
to the Lord again; and we should endeavor by prayer 
to get back into harmony with God and thus to effect 
a reconciliation. Our Lord has made provision on our 
behalf, that we should have an Advocate with the Father. 
(I John 2:1.) He who appeared in the presence of God 
for us at first is the same One who ever liveth to make 
intercession for us. So we come to the Lord through the 
arrangement which He has made; and we rejoice that we 



may obtain forgiveness and grace to help in time of need. 

The text does not refer to our own peace, but to the 
peace of God, the peace which comes to us through a 
realization of God's power, of His goodness and willingness 
to hold us by His right hand as His children. This 
peace stands guard continually, as a sentinel, to challenge 
every hostile or worrying thought or fear. It so keeps 
the Christian's mind that he at heart has peace with the 
Lord, fellowship, communion; and it guards his mind also, 
his reasoning faculties, instructing him and assuring him 
respecting the Divine power, wisdom and love. 

We should make request increasingly for grace and 
wisdom and the fruits of the Spirit, for opportunities 
for serving the Lord and the brethren, and for growing 
more and more into the likeness of God's dear Son. Under 
these conditions the promised "peace which passeth all 
understanding" will guard our hearts and our thoughts. 
Selfishness and ambition would find little room in hearts 
so filled. Even when in "deep waters" Divine peace can 
dwell in our hearts and keep them. 

The Apostle's thought seems to be that those whom he 
addresses have come into harmony with God through 
acceptance of His terms. Turning from all opposition, 
they have become the children of God through faith, 
obedience, self-sacrifice and consecration to death. The 
Apostle urges that God's peace should be in these and 
should continue. They should be guarded by that peace. 
The expression, "through Christ Jesus," suggests that, 
as we entered into this peace through our great Advocate, 
so we can continue in this peace only by His continuing 
to be our Advocate; otherwise, through imperfections of 
the flesh, we would get out of harmony continually. 

"Let us, therefore, come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help 
in time of need." (Heb. 4:16.) Thus as we come daily 
and say, "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those 
who trespass against us," we abide in the peace; for we 
have this great Advocate. Therefore, this peace abides— 
a continuing supply of grace through the great Advocate. 



R4898 : page 397 

PRIDE OF HEART ABOMINABLE 

"Every one that is proud in heart is an 
abomination to the Lord."— Prov. 16:5. 

PRIDE MUST take its stand with the other 

reprehensible qualities of the fallen human 

mind, character. The Scriptures recognize 

two conditions of heart, the right and the 

wrong. The one that God approves is 

called Love; the other, the one that He disapproves, 

is Selfishness. All selfishness is 



opposed to God's Law. Anything selfish is 
contrary to the Divine purpose. The quality 
of pride is specially abominable to the 
Lord, because there is not a creature in the Universe 
that has anything to be proud of. Everything that anyone 
has is a gift; it is not of his own manufacture or creation. 
God gives the blessing. "Every good gift and every perfect 
gift is from above, and cometh down from the 
Father of lights." (James 1:17.) It is of His fulness 
that we have received. Everyone, therefore, who is 
proud, is certainly very reprehensible in God's sight, for 
he has been only a recipient of favor, blessing. All God's 
creatures are dependent upon Him. 

Worldly pride challenges faith in God and obedience 
to Him. Only those of the Lord's people who are of good 
courage and full of confidence in the Lord can overcome 
this giant of pride. It is necessary that the victory should 
be made complete. Pride, in its every form, should be 
so thoroughly humiliated, killed, that it can never rise 
again to destroy us. This battle each one has to fight; 
and the only proper weapon with which to overcome 
is the "Sword of the Spirit," showing us what is pleasing 
and acceptable in God's sight. "He that exalteth himself 
shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted. "--Luke 18:14. 



R4905 : page 398 

QUESTIONS ON OUR LORD'S LIFE-RIGHTS 

SPIRIT LIFE-RIGHTS NOT SACRIFICED 

QUESTION.— What rights did our Lord possess 
when He was a spirit-being, before He 
became a man, and what became of those 
rights when He became a man? 

Answer.— Our Lord was rich and for 
our sakes became poor (2 Cor. 8:9) by 
exchanging the heavenly rights and perfection 
for the earthly rights and perfection. 
This exchange was not a sacrifice [not an 
offering]; for it was the man Christ Jesus 
who became a ransom. There is no statement in the 
Scriptures that He sacrificed any pre-human rights. He 
did, however, resign these for the "joy that was set before 
Him."-Heb. 12:2. 

The rights that man needs are earthly rights, human 
rights; and it is those rights that Jesus redeems through 
giving His earthly life sacrificially. As a spirit being He 
could not have sacrificed the rights of a spirit being; for 
there were no spirit beings condemned to death. It was 
the man Adam whom He was to redeem. "Since by man 
came death, by man comes also the resurrection of the 
dead. For as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall 



be made alive."— I Cor. 15:21,22. 



RANSOM-PRICE FURNISHED AT CALVARY 

Question.— What did our Lord accomplish at Calvary? 

Answer.— The laying down of life on the part of our 
Lord did not ransom the race, as we have shown, but it 
furnished the ransom-price which is to EFFECT THE RELEASE 
of humanity, in God's due time and order; He gave 
Himself an antilutron [a corresponding price]."— 
I Tim. 2:5,6. 

Our Lord's sacrifice, His willing resignation of His 
life to death, was meritorious in the Divine sight and was 
rewarded by the Father's giving Him a new life on a 
higher plane. The new life was started in His begetting 
at Jordan and was completed in His resurrection. This 
right to earthly life, not having been forfeited by sin, still 
belongs to our Lord. This earthly life-right He purposed 
to give to Justice as an offset [counterbalance, or equivalent] 
for the sin of one man, which involved the race. 
He was put to death a flesh-soul. He was rewarded as a 
spirit-soul. He has the right to His flesh-soul yet, to 
appropriate for Adam and his race, sealing for them the 
New Covenant. 



THE MERIT AND THE LIFE-RIGHT 

Question.— How shall we distinguish between the 
merit of Christ which He will appropriate for the sins of 
the world, and the life-right of Christ which He will give 
for the sins of the world? 

Answer.— Our Lord's righteousness on the human 
plane of course appertained to Him while He was a man. 
He has no righteousness as a man now. He has merely 
the credit of that righteousness in the Father's sight, in 
the sight of Justice, constituting a merit which is to be 
appropriated to the world in due time, but which is loaned 
to the Church during the Gospel Age. 

The human life-rights Jesus had need for up to the 
moment He died. In dying He committed them to the 
Father, according to the Father's arrangement. He said, 
"The cup which My Father hath given Me, shall I not 
drink it?" (John 18:11.) When a man, those life-rights 
were His to use; but He does not need them now; for He 
has better rights. But He has a right to human life, which 
He does not need personally— but which He needs in 
order to give for the world of mankind, that they may 
have life everlasting if they will. 

The Lord is to be viewed from the standpoint of His 
own personality. First of all, He was a spirit-being; 
secondly, He was made flesh— holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners; thirdly, for permitting the earthly 



life to be taken from Him, God rewarded Him personally 
with a high exaltation.— Phil. 2:9. 

God has arranged that this glorious Personage shall 
do certain things for the world of mankind. The power 
to do these things lies in the fact that He still has a right 
to earthly life, which He does not need. He holds it over 
to give to the world in the Millennial Age, gradually, as 
they will come into harmony with the terms of the New 
Covenant. He imputes now a share of that value to such 
as desire to become His members— to cover their blemishes 
and make their sacrifices acceptable to the Father. 

Christ's merit was in doing the will of the Father. 
That merit the Father rewarded with the new nature on 
the other side of the veil. And, of course, that merit still 
persists; and He will always have, in God's sight, a personal 
merit, irrespective of anything that He may do for 
mankind. Therefore we cannot suppose that He would 
give away His merit; in that case He would be left without 
merit. But having obtained His reward, He has a right 
to human life, which is so recognized by God. And this 
constitutes a thing of merit in God's sight— a value for 
the redemption of Adam and his children— his purchase-price, 
so to speak. This He is to use for the world shortly 
and this He is now imputing to us. 



THE IMPUTATION OF CHRIST'S MERIT 

Question.— What is meant by the expression, "Christ's 
imputed merit"? 

Answer.— When speaking of Christ's imputed merit 
we should keep distinctly in mind that He has a personal 
merit, a righteousness of His own, which He has never 
given away. He needs His own righteousness. In this 
sense of the word He could not give us His righteousness, 
without being bereft of righteousness. The same would 
be true of His life-right. He has a right to life; but it 
is not that right to life which He imputes to us; for He 
needs it Himself. He needs His own personal merit. 

In what sense, then, do we say that He will give to 
mankind during the Millennial Age and impute to the 
Church during the Gospel Age, a life-right and righteousness 
respectively. In this way: He will give to mankind 
His human life-right, the merit that was His as the reward 
for His obedience as the man Christ Jesus, namely 
the privilege, or right, to live as a human being. That 
right was secured to Him by obedience to the Law. (Rom. 10:5; 
Gal. 3:12.) Now He is highly exalted, a partaker 
of the divine nature, and no longer needs that right to 
human life and the righteousness which goes with that 
right. He is quite satisfied and complete in His present 
condition. He has, to give to the world, by and by, the 
right to human life and the righteousness which goes 
with that right, the merit of that earthly sacrifice. Of 
this, He imputes to the Church at the present time a 



sufficiency to make good for their imperfection. We are 
complete in Him, so that our offering of ourselves may 
be, through Him, an acceptable sacrifice to God and 
reckoned holy. 



ACTUALLY NO LIFE-RIGHTS TO SACRIFICE 

Question.— Do the under-priests sacrifice their earthly 
life-rights? 

Answer.— Since God purposes to give eternal life only 
to those who are perfect, and since we of Adam's race 
are all imperfect, therefore, we had no life-rights to sacrifice. 
But Jesus appeared as our Advocate and purposes 
to help us if we are desirous of becoming followers 
in His steps, and thus of being sharers with Him in His 

R4905 : page 399 

sacrifice, and afterwards in the glories of His Kingdom. 

To enable us to do this, He purposes to make up for 
us a sufficiency of His merit to compensate for all of our 
blemishes and defects. But we do not present this 
merit imputed to us by our Lord. Our whole part is faith 
that our great Advocate is able to make up for our shortcomings. 
He makes up that which is imperfect, and then 
offers us in sacrifice; and the Father accepts the sacrifice. 
Really, we never had any life-rights to sacrifice. 



FAILURE RELEASES IMPUTED MERIT 

Question.— In the case of one who makes utter failure 
and who dies the Second Death, is the imputed merit released 
at the time his failure is determined or at the time 
when he actually dies? 

Answer.— The merit of Christ is imputed to those who 
come unto the Father through Him. Those who repudiate 
this earthly merit of Christ have it no longer from the 
moment of their repudiation; from the moment of their 
rejection of the Lord; all the merit that they had is released, 
forfeited, gone. This does not mean that they 
must die actually at that moment. But they fall into the 
hands of the living God; that is out of the hands of 
Mercy, into those of Justice. And we know that no one 
can stand in the presence of the living God and Justice 
without perfection. Those who repudiate the Ransom 
seem to have no longer a sense of sin. This is illustrated 
by the parable of the man who takes off the "wedding 
garment"; from the moment of his repudiation, no longer 
is it his in any sense of the word. 



LIFE-RIGHTS REPRESENTED IN NEW COVENANT 

Question.— During the Millennial Age where will be 
the life-rights that Jesus laid down at Calvary? 

Answer.— That which we speak of as the life-right of 
the great Redeemer is, we understand, that which is typified 
by the blood of Atonement. According to the type, 
in the end of this antitypical Day of Atonement, that 
blood of Atonement will be applied to Justice on behalf 
of the whole world of mankind and will be accepted on 
their behalf— that is to say, as the Apostle expresses it, 
"to make reconciliation for the sins of the people." (Heb. 2:17.) 
As soon as the people shall have been released 
from their death-condemnation they will be in a position 
to begin to receive blessings, but not before. As the great 
High Priest, our Lord undertakes, at the close of the 
Gospel Age, to seal with the Blood of Atonement a New 
Covenant between God and the seed of Abraham, natural 
Israel; and He, together with the "Church, which is His 
Body," undertakes to stand as the Mediator of that Covenant. 
All who come into full accord with that Law will 
have eternal life. Through all those years the Mediator 
will merely carry out the provisions of that Covenant, 

R4906 : page 399 

which promises that they shall have the privileges of 
Restitution. If they avail themselves of the opportunity 
they shall have eternal life. 

At that time, the right to human life will have passed 
out of the hands of our Lord as Redeemer, and will all, 
thenceforth, be represented in the Covenant itself, which 
guarantees all the things that God declared man should 
have. The stony heart of mankind will give place to a 
heart of flesh; and all who will live up to the terms of 
this Covenant shall have eternal life. During the Millennial 
Age the New Covenant will represent the life-rights 
laid down by our Lord. Whoever fails to observe 
that Law will receive chastisements. By this arrangement 
Christ, as Mediator of the New Covenant, will for 
a thousand years dispense the blessings. During this 
Gospel Age our Lord keeps the right to life under His 
own control in order to give it to Justice as the ransom-price 
for the world's sins, for the redemption of the 
world. As soon as He gives up this right at the end of 
this Age, Justice relinquishes it, and mankind receives it, 
as shown foregoing. 



page 399 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study VI., Order and 
Discipline in the New Creation. 



NOVEMBER 5 

(38) In case the trouble does not cease after a personal 
appeal, and further proceedings become necessary, what course 
of action should be strictly followed by all concerned? 

P. 292, par. 1. 

(39) What is the object of withdrawing fellowship from 
those who "walk disorderly"? P. 292, par. 2. 

ACCUSATIONS AGAINST ELDERS. 

(40) What two principles are recognized by the Apostle in 
1 Tim. 5:19, R.V.? P. 293, par. 1. 

(41) What should faithful Elders as well as other members 
of the New Creation expect, if they follow closely in the 
Master's steps? 

(42) Should hearsay evidence be considered at all? If not, 
what kind of evidence should be required? and what course 
of action followed? P. 293, par. 2; P. 294, par. 1,2. 

NOVEMBER 12 

MISTAKEN CALLS TO PREACH. 

(43) What is the popular impression respecting a call to 
preach? P. 294, par. 3. 

(44) How are all the members of the New Creation called 
to preach? Give Scriptural proof. P. 295, par. 1. 

(45) With respect to teachers, what should the Church 
expect of the Lord, and how should self-seeking and ambitious 
brethren be regarded? P. 295, par. 2; P. 296, par. 1,2. 

(46) Distinguish between a proper and an improper ambition 
among the members of the New Creation. P. 296, par. 3; 

P. 297. 

(47) Is 1 Thess. 5:14,15 applicable only to the Elders, or 
to the entire Church? P. 298, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 19 

"WARN THEM THAT ARE UNRULY." 

(48) How should we chiefly consider our own defects, 
rather than each other's? P. 298, par. 2. 

(49) What method of reasoning should be used with the 
unruly? P. 298, par. 3. 

(50) While sympathetically regarding disorderliness as 
perhaps inherited, should it be permitted to injure the Church 
or hinder the service of the Truth? P. 299, par. 1. 

ADMONISHING NOT A GENERAL ORDER. 

(51) Why is admonishing the special duty of the Elders? 
P. 300, par. 1. 

(52) What is the application of 1 Thess. 5:12,13, in this 
connection? P. 300, par. 2. 



NOVEMBER 26 

(53) What conditions would necessitate a public rebuke? 
and how and by whom should it be administered? P. 301. 

(54) To what extent may the Church as a whole admonish 
the disorderly, or exclude them from the assembly? P. 302, 
par. 1 , first half. 

(55) What is the "sin unto death," how does it manifest 
itself, and what are the Apostle's injunctions to us respecting 
those who commit this sin? P. 302, par. 1, last half. 

(56) How apply our Lord's words, "Let him be unto thee 

as an heathen man and a publican," to those who "walk disorderly"? 
P. 303. 

"COMFORT THE FEEBLE-MINDED." 

(57) How shall the Elders and the Church in general 
follow this exhortation? P. 304, par. 1,2. 

(58) How does the Lord regard the feeble-minded or 
faint-hearted ones, and what lesson does this teach us? 
P. 305, par. 1. 



page 402 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 401 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

Was Judas a Hypocrite? 403 

"Better for That Man if He Had Not 
Been Born" 404 



Peter the Impulsive— Judas, the Disloyal 405 

Why Judas' Case is Hopeless 406 

"Ye Have Need of Patience" 408 

Patience Necessary to Fruit-Bearing 409 

A Great Reformer 410 

The Way of Transgressors 410 

The Value of Prayer 411 

The Soul's Sincere Desire 41 1 

Co-Laborers With God 412 

"Stand Fast in the Faith" 413 

Oh! To Be Willing! (Poem) 413 

The Royal Diadem 413 

Interesting Questions 414 

The Church the Body of Christ 415 

Gifts and Sacrifices for Sin 415 

Shows How Merit of Ransom Is Applied 415 

page 402 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, NY., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 

AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 



FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



NEW HAVEN, CONN., NOVEMBER 26 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony. 
Discourse for the interested at 10:30. Discourse for the 
Public, 3 o'clock, at the Hyperion Theatre, Chapel St. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., DECEMBER 3 

Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30 a.m. Discourse 
at 3 o'clock and a Question Meeting in the evening. The 
Academy of Music not being available for this Sunday, all 
meetings will be held in the Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks St. 

DALLAS, TEX., DECEMBER 6 

SAN ANTONIO, TEX., DECEMBER 7 

LOS ANGELES, CAL., DECEMBER 10 

Time and place for Morning Rally and Discourse for the 
interested will be announced later. Discourse for the Public 
at 3 p.m., Shrine Auditorium, West Jefferson St. 

FRESNO, CAL., DECEMBER 11 

Time and place for Rally and Discourse for the interested 
is to be announced later. Discourse for the Public at 3 
o'clock, Armory Hall, J and Fresno Sts. 

OAKLAND, CAL., DECEMBER 12 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30. 
Discourse for the interested at 3 o'clock, Hamilton Auditorium, 
Jefferson and 13th Sts. 



A COLORED PILGRIM BROTHER 

Brother Walton is engaged in Colporteuring, but is pleased 
to serve classes composed wholly or mainly of colored people, 
when requested. Additionally we have other colored Brethren 
of good education, good address, and as clear in the Truth 
as white Brethren who might give some of their time similarly. 
We invite classes of colored friends who so desire to send 
in applications for such service. 



R4906 : page 403 

WAS JUDAS A HYPOCRITE? 

IT IS DIFFICULT for any noble minded person 

to read the account of Judas' course 

without feeling a sense of righteous indignation 

—a disgust for the baseness of character 

which could thus betray, for thirty 

pieces of silver, the one whom he recognized 

as the noblest of men, whether or 

not he was sure that Jesus was the Messiah. 

It may not be amiss here to reflect 

that Judas did not reach this depth of iniquity 

suddenly, but rather that the disposition toward 

unrighteousness had grown upon him during the three 

years of his intimacy with the Master, when the reverse 

disposition should have had control. 

At the time he was chosen to be an Apostle he was 
evidently a good man, so far as outward appearance, at 
least, was concerned; and his name, which signifies 
"Praise," would seem to indicate that his parents had been 
of a religious cast of mind and had wished and, so to 
speak, had prophesied of him that he would be a messenger 
of God to sound forth His praise. And what a 
privilege and opportunity he enjoyed in this direction! 

From the meager mentionings of the Gospel records 
we may reasonably infer that the beginning of his downfall 
was the harboring of a love of money. Instead of 
rebuking this wrong spirit and seeking, on the contrary, 
to cultivate generosity, love and benevolence, he permitted 
selfishness to have control, more or less, in his heart and 
life. We may surmise that he chose the office of treasurer 
for the little company, whereas, had he been sufficiently 
alive to his own weakness, his proper course would 
have been to refuse it, realizing that already he had too 
much love of money, and that the handling of the funds 
might prove a temptation to him. But on the contrary, 
he sought and obtained the office, and carried the bag 
with the money put therein; and the Apostle John tells 
us that he was a thief. (John 12:6.) This passion for 
money, like all other abnormal propensities of our fallen 
nature, grew stronger as it was encouraged and cultivated, 
until finally it knew no bounds and he was ready 
to sell his loving Master, Messiah, for thirty pieces of 
silver! 

Probably Judas had made the same profession of consecration 
as did the other disciples: "Lo, we have left 
all to follow Thee; what, therefore, shall we have?" 
And, with the others, he had left all, and perhaps, in a 
certain way, was very sincere and recognized that this was 
the Messiah. But Judas had a business turn of mind. He 
wished to be associated with such a great Kingdom as 



the Messiah would set up. So there was a measure of 
selfishness connected with his consecration. Perhaps 
this is true with all of us. We are all sure that the Lord 
has a Kingdom and we hope to have a share in it. But 
this thought should be secondary. Our merit should be 
of a higher order than merely a desire for reward for 
service. 

As treasurer of the disciples Judas looked out to get 
a good share for himself, to "feather his own nest." In 
the case of the ointment used for our Lord by Mary, he 
said, That ointment is worth a great deal of money, and 
it should have been put into the treasury instead of being 
poured on Jesus' head. "This he said because he was a 
thief and carried the bag." 

So it seems that this spirit of avarice grew upon him. 
As matters progressed he began to see that things were 
not reaching the culmination for which he had hoped and 
looked. Probably he was one of those who said, at least 
in his heart, "If Thou do these things, do them publicly, 
so that others may see." This would seem to have been 
the spirit of Judas and of many others. They wanted 
Jesus to do the things that would establish Him with the 
people. We can imagine their saying, "Ask some thousands 
to come and see the raising of some one from the 
dead, and have a good demonstration," etc. But nothing 
of this kind was done. Each miracle was performed by 
our Lord in a quiet way. 

Probably Judas began to think that Jesus could not 
manage affairs nearly so well as if He would allow Judas 
to "coach" Him a little. As time passed, he began to 
keep some of the money. Perhaps he thought, "Now 
things are not coming out very well. I will keep some 
of this money for the disciples and Jesus for a rainy 
day." But he was really thinking about Judas. 

THE NECESSITY OF JUDGING OURSELVES 

By following a similar course of reasoning many people 
persuade themselves that they are trying to help 
others, when really they are looking out for their own 
interests. Hence there is a necessity forjudging ourselves. 
The new creature should get the old creature 
into a corner and cross-question him: "Why do you act 
thus and so? Are you sure that you did not have some 
selfish motive in this matter?" If Judas had thus examined 
himself it would have been better for him. But 
not having done so, he drifted farther and farther away 
from a right spirit. Finally he went to the chief priests 
and said, "What would you give me if I were to give 
Jesus over?" They said, So much. Then he turned the 
matter over in his mind for several hours. So when he 
was in the "upper chamber" his mind was abstracted, 
and he sat quietly watching what the others were doing. 

R4906 : page 404 



When our Lord washed the feet of His Apostles, before 
partaking of the Passover Supper, He intimated that 
as they had bathed (in accordance with the Jewish requirement 
of the putting away of all filth at the beginning 
of the Passover season) they merely needed now the 
rinsing of their feet, the cleansing of the members that 
had come in contact with the earth. "He that is bathed 
needeth not save to wash his feet to be clean every whit." 
(R.V.) Our Lord added, referring to Judas, "Ye are 
clean, but not all." This expression shows us very clearly 
that He had in mind a higher cleansing, of which this 
washing of their feet and their previous bath were but 
the figures. 

The Lord knew that the hearts of His disciples were 
loyal. He had accepted them as His disciples and had 
reckonedly imputed to them the merit of His sacrifice as 
a covering of their blemishes, the full testimony of which 
would be given them by and by at Pentecost, the Holy 
Spirit testifying that the Father had accepted the Lord's 
atoning sacrifice on their behalf. There was one, however, 
of the number whose heart was not clean. Our 
Lord did not pass him by, but washed the feet of Judas 
with the rest, knowing the while of his perfidy, and that 
he had already bargained with the chief priests and was 
merely awaiting the opportune moment for the carrying 
out of his malevolent scheme. 

Our Lord's words, although not understood by the 
rest, must have been appreciated by Judas, as were His 
subsequent words. Our Lord went so far as to quote the 
very prophecy which marked Judas and his disloyalty, his 
violation of even the common hospitality. (Psa. 41:9.) 
None of these things moved Judas; none of these things 
appealed to his heart in such a manner as to change his 
course. We have thus strong evidence of the wilful intention 
which marked his crime and makes clear the 
meaning of our Lord's words when He called him the 
"son of perdition," and declared that it would have been 
better for him if he had never been born. 

"MINE OWN FAMILIAR FRIEND HATH LIFTED UP HIS 
HEEL AGAINST ME" 

While they were at supper Jesus, appearing very sorrowful, 
gave as an explanation that it would be one of 
His own chosen twelve that would betray Him and thus 
become accessory to His death— one of those who dipped 
with Him in the dish, partaking of the same supper, the 
same bread, the same roasted lamb. Then He pointed 
out that although this was all written (Psa. 41:9), and 
thus no alteration would be made in respect to the Divine 
Plan, nevertheless it signified a very gross breach of 
friendship— one sad to contemplate. It really made no 
difference to the Lord, so far as His intention and His 
consecration were concerned, whether He were apprehended 
by the rulers without any betrayal, or whether betrayed 
by a comparative stranger or by a disciple. The 



fact would make no change in the Divine arrangement; 
but it was a cause of great sorrow to the Lord that the 
traitor should be one who had been a bosom friend and 
disciple. 

R4907 : page 404 

Amongst the Jews and Arabs deceit and betrayal were 
not uncommon; but there was a code of honor recognized 
according to which no one would eat the food of the person 
whom he sought in any wise to injure. As food was 
seasoned with salt, it was probably this custom, of being 
faithful to those with whom one ate, that was known as 
the "covenant of salt"— the covenant of faithfulness. To 
succeed in having an enemy eat at one's table or partake 
of one's food seasoned with salt was amongst that people 
equivalent to a pledge of lasting friendship— that he 
would never do his host injury. Apparently Judas was 
so lacking of a proper spirit that he did not even acknowledge 
and obey the custom of his time— to be loyal and 
faithful to the one whose bread he ate, of whose salt he 
partook; hence our Lord's words, "He that dippeth his 
hand with Me in the dish, the same shall betray Me." 

When Jesus passed the sop to Judas, he perhaps understood 
in some measure our Lord's meaning; but the 
other disciples did not understand. They thought that 
Jesus was telling Judas to get in his proper provisions 
before the stores would be closed. But Judas may have 
thought thus: "Jesus has intimated that I will betray 
Him. I had not intended to do this, but now I will show 
Him. I know, of course, that He can get away from 
those officers; but I am treasurer of this company, and I 
will show Him something. While I do not believe they 
could ever take Him, yet the experience will be a good 
lesson. He will see henceforth that it will be better for 
Him to go ahead. This thing has been dallying too 
long. It needs a business push behind it. So here goes!" 
Thus Judas reasoned, and he carried out his part. No 
doubt Judas expected that Jesus would escape. Not for 
a moment did he expect that Jesus would suffer; for when 
he found that his plan had carried out and that Jesus 
would be crucified, he went and hanged himself, and then 
fell headlong, at the breaking of the rope. 

"BETTER FOR THAT MAN IF HE HAD NOT BEEN BORN" 

Jesus testified that His death would not be a victory 
on the part of His betrayer and His enemies, but in harmony 
with what had been written of Him by the Prophets. 
Nor are we to consider that Judas was simply fulfilling 
a prophecy irrespective of His own responsibility, his 
own wilfulness in the matter. Such a thought is negatived 
by our Lord's statement, "Woe unto the man by 
whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It would have been 
better for that man if he had not been born." 

This statement implies to us that, from the Lord's 



standpoint, Judas had already experienced so large a 

measure of knowledge and opportunity for better things 

that his responsibility for his act was complete, and that 

there would be no hope for him at any time in the future. 

These words leave no question, we think, that Judas had 

already enjoyed his full share of the great atonement 

work through the intimate association with our Lord and 

the abundant opportunities he had of coming into a clear 

knowledge of the truth, and the corresponding responsibilities. 

From our standpoint Judas sinned against great 

light. Evidently his was the "sin unto death"— the "Second 

Death." Hence, aside from any future existence, 

we are to consider that his life was a useless, 

wasted one, and that its joys did not overbalance its sorrows 

and anguish when to the latter were added his despair 

and suicide. Judas' end was a sad one. Every 

suicide, by his act, confesses his wish that he had never 

been born. 

While Judas lived prior to Pentecost, we are to remember 
that he was one of the twelve upon whom Jesus 
had specially conferred a measure of His spirit— such a 
measure as enabled him, with the others, to perform 
miracles of healing, casting out devils, etc., in the name 
of the Lord, as His representative, using His power. The 
position of Judas, therefore, was one of special closeness 
to the Lord and to His personal instruction, both by 
precept and example. We remember our Lord's words 
to His disciples, "To you it is given to know the mysteries 
of the Kingdom; but to them that are without these 
things are spoken in parables." 

All this privilege, opportunity, knowledge, contact, 
made Judas specially responsible. But his crime would 

R4907 : page 405 

have been inexcusable had it been against any ordinary 
person, and it was seriously intensified by being a crime 
against Him who spake and acted as never man spake or 
acted before. From this standpoint our Lord's declaration 
that Judas was the "son of perdition" seems to have 
special import or weight, as implying that Judas had enjoyed 
a sufficiency of light and knowledge of righteousness 
to constitute a trial, and that his deliberate sin 
against such light and knowledge meant the Second 
Death. 

But while hating such a character, loathing it, despising 
it, and seeking to go as far as possible in an opposite direction 
in our own characters, we are not to overlook the 
fact that there are amongst the Lord's professed disciples 
some who, in a less degree, commit a crime very similar 
to that of Judas; they sell their Lord, they betray Him, 
while professing to love Him! True, this cannot today 
be done in the same literal and personal manner, but the 
spirit of it may be seen occasionally, we regret to say; 
we find some who really believe in Jesus, some who have 
consecrated their lives to be His followers; some who 



have been engaged in the ministry of His Truth, as Judas 
was there, but who are willing to sell the Lord for a mess 
of pottage— for good things of this present life— for a 
salary, for social position, for honor amongst men, for 
popularity and titles; who are willing to sell even their 
lips, as Judas did; so that while professing to honor and 
serve the Lord they are willing to join with those who 
misrepresent His character, His Plan, His Word— willing 
to join with those who seek to assassinate the Lord. 

Ah, how well it is that each one ask himself the question 
raised upon the night of the Supper, "Lord, is it I?" 
And let none be too ready to excuse himself; but let each 
search earnestly his own heart and life and conduct to 
see that He is not in any way sacrificing the Truth and 
the Life for any consideration whatever. 

More than thirty years ago we were inclined to think 
that all must come to a full knowledge of all truth ere 
they could be liable to the Second Death; but we have 
come to the conclusion from the general tenor of the 
Scriptures that this is not the Lord's view and plan. On 
the contrary, deliberate and intelligent rejection of the 
first principles of the Gospel seems to imply an unfitness 
for further favors, on the ground that he that is unfaithful 
in that which is least would be unfaithful also in more. 

Adam's knowledge of the Divine Plan was very slight; 
yet his disobedience brought the death penalty. The real 
grounds for sympathy and hope for the masses is the 
Apostle's statement that Satan has blinded their minds, 
misinterpreted the facts. (2 Cor. 4:4.) All such will 
by and by "see out of obscurity" when Satan shall be 
bound— during the Millennium. 

We confess little hope for the Scribes and Pharisees 
who, when they could find no other fault, ascribed our 
Lord's good works to the Devil. As for Judas' tears— 
they were no better than those of Esau. (Heb. 12:17.) 
His remorse led him, not to a renewed or reformed 
life, but to self-destruction.— Heb. 6:6. 

PETER, THE IMPULSIVE-JUDAS, THE DISLOYAL 

While Judas betrayed our Lord, another disciple, an 
intimate friend and companion, denied Him. Peter's case 
we remember well. A good man, of strong character, he 
realized not his danger, and hence was not prepared for 
the arts of Satan, by which he was placed in so trying a 
position that his boasted courage fled, his wonted strength 
of character vanished, and he denied his Lord even with 
profanity! What a lesson to us of human frailty! How 
we ourselves might be overtaken and ensnared by the 
wiles of the Devil! How much each one needs to watch 
and pray lest he enter into temptation— lest he succumb 
to temptation! How much we need to remember the 
prayer the Lord gave us for an example: "Abandon us 
not in temptation, but deliver us from the Evil One!" 

That was a fateful time for Judas ! If the Adversary 
could so juggle, deceive and mislead the true-hearted 



Peter, because he was off his guard in watching and 
praying, what might we not expect he would be able to 
accomplish with Judas, whose heart was not right, who 
was selfish, self-seeking, ambitious, covetous! We do not 
wonder that Satan's victory over Judas was soon accomplished 
—that he fell quickly into the snare of the Adversary, 
and lent his heart and energy to the betrayal of the 
Master, for thirty pieces of silver! His case was very 
different from that of Peter, the loyal, the true, for the 
moment bewildered, off guard and fearful. Although 
the danger was the same in either case, their hearts were 
in different conditions. 

Is it not so with all the Lord's followers? Is not this 
the secret of the results of temptation as they surely come 
to each one of us? The Judas class of today and always 
are those who, when temptation comes, receive it, entertain 
it, enter into the spirit of the ambition or otherwise 
strong allurement, and are swallowed up by it. The 
Peter class has also been with us ever since; and today 
even the true-hearted, not sufficiently watching and praying 
and on guard against the Adversary's allurements, are 
at times taken unawares, and for a moment dishonor, not 
only the Lord, but their own hearts and consciences also. 

The difference between these two classes is in the 
heart condition; the Peter class do those things which 
they do not wish to do, and their difficulty lies evidently 
in the weaknesses of their flesh, in the power of the Adversary, 

R4908 : page 405 

and in their failure to lay hold upon the help 

which the Lord has promised, the succor in their time of 

need. 

The Judas class, on the contrary, are those whose 
hearts are not loyal, but selfish, and who, therefore, enter 
into the Adversary's schemes heartily, and are not, in 
their wrong course, going contrary to their own wills, but 
in harmony therewith. The difference in God's sight is 
seen in that, although both Peter and Judas were penitent, 
the one was accepted back to Divine favor, but the other 
was not. The one who was merely entrapped, but who 
at heart was not disloyal, was restored and blessed; the 
other, though not without conscience, as shown by his 
later remorse, was without the genuine loyalty of heart 
which in the Lord's sight is indispensable, and the absence 
of which, considering Judas' intimate acquaintance with 
the Lord, was inexcusable. 

The Lord's words to Peter, "Simon, Simon, behold, 
Satan hath desired to have you, that he might sift you 
as wheat; but I HAVE PRAYED FOR THEE, THAT THY FAITH 
FAIL NOT" (Luke 22:31,32), give us the assurance that, 
because of this difference in the hearts of the two men, 
our Lord could properly be the Advocate of the one before 
the Father, but not the Advocate of the other. He 
could stand for and represent the one who at heart was 
loyal to Him, however weak his flesh, however careless 



he might have been of the Divine provision for his protection. 
He was still one of the Lord's sheep, and therefore 
subject to the Shepherd's care. He was still of the 
Lord's members, subject to the oversight and interest of 
the Head. He was still a member of the Lord's espoused 
virgin Church, whom our Lord loved and for whom He 
gave His life and for whom, therefore, He might properly 
make supplication as the betrothed Bridegroom. 

But in the case of Judas, his heart being alienated 
through selfishness, any appreciation and love which he 

R4908 : page 406 

possessed for the Lord at the beginning of His ministry 

had evidently died, swallowed up of selfishness and ambition; 

and into that heart, thus fully withdrawn from the 

Lord, we are told that Satan entered. By thus willingly 

withdrawing his heart and strength and consecration 

from the Lord, and lending the same by deliberate intention 

to self-seeking, he became a tool of the Adversary. 

As our Master said, "It must needs be that offenses come 

(that He should be crucified), but woe unto that man 

by whom the offense cometh!" 

THE HARVEST A TIME OF SEPARATION 

Although we know in advance that none of the Lord's 
disciples, true at heart, will be plucked out of His hands 
by the Adversary, nevertheless we fancy that we can 
sympathize to some extent with our Lord's feelings when 
He exhorted the disciples, "Watch and pray lest ye enter 
into temptation." 

True, Jesus knew who it was that should betray Him, 
and was, therefore, neither surprised nor disconcerted because 
of Judas' course; and yet, undoubtedly, the thought 
that one who had eaten bread with Him should "lift up 
his heel against Him" (John 13:18) must have had a saddening 
effect upon our dear Master, who could assuredly 
have pity for even His bitterest enemies as well as those 
who, Peter like, fail at first to withstand the Adversary's 
assault, but who subsequently are recovered by Divine 
mercy and aid. 

Since the Body of Christ is one, and since our Lord 
declares that whatsoever is done to one of the least of 
His members is done unto Him, it follows that the Judas 
class and the Peter class, all down through the Gospel 
Age to the present moment, have been betraying or denying 
the Lord in proportion as they have betrayed or denied 
His members. We, therefore, should note the significance 
of His statement to Peter, "I have prayed for 
thee, that thy faith fail not! " 

For all of the Peter class the Lord is the Head, the 
Representative, the Advocate before the Father. Without 
His aid, without His appearance for us and the application 
to us of the merit of His own sacrifice, none of 
us could stand; all would be judged unworthy, unfit to 



have part or lot in the great blessings which the Lord has 
invited us to share with Jesus. And as the Master prayed 
for such, and now intercedes for such, and makes good 
their unwilling imperfections, so should all who have His 
spirit feel kindly, generously, sympathetically, and speak 
helpfully to the Peter class. But as the Master had no 
such words of sympathy for Judas, the open and premeditated 
enemy and traitor, so likewise, whatever our 
sorrowful feelings for such may be, there is no room for 
any expression of sympathy or co-operation in their evil 
work, as for any of the Apostles to have co-operated with 
Judas would have meant a share in his evil deeds. 

However much sympathy we may feel with Peter and 
others of similar character and experience, however much 
we may rejoice with him that the Lord prayed for him 
so that his carelessness in watching and praying for himself 
did not result in his undoing and his loss of relationship 
to the Lord— nevertheless, we should strive not to 
be of the Peter class, but of the class represented by the 
Lord Himself. Let us be of the watching, praying, faithful 
kind, who will not be overtaken by the Adversary's 
temptations of the present time. 

We are in the Harvest of the Gospel Age; the separation 
of the wheat from the tares is due; and, more than 
this, the separation of the chaff from the wheat is also 
due— a sifting process. While this figure may to some 
extent have fit the experiences of the Church in the past, 
we are sure that it specially applies to the Church in the 
"ends of the Ages"— to those who were living in the end, 
or harvest, of the Jewish Age, and to those who are now 
living in the end, or harvest, of the Gospel Age. And 
our Lord is pleased to permit these siftings; they are necessary, 
apparently, that the Judas class may be entirely 
sifted out, and that the Peter class may be so thoroughly 
stirred up by the trials and difficulties and realization of 
their own weaknesses, and the knowledge that they would 
utterly fail without the Lord's sustaining grace, that these 
lessons may prove profitable to them, developing in them 
more of meekness, watchfulness, prayerfulness and trust 
in their All-Powerful Head. 

WHY JUDAS' CASE IS HOPELESS 

Heretofore we have pointed out that during this present 
Age (the Gospel Age, or Spirit Dispensation), the 
world of mankind is not liable to the Second Death: (1) 
Because this Age is for the Church's trial and not for the 
world's judgment, or trial; (2) Because now the world 
has not that degree of enlightenment which would involve 
the full, extreme penalty of God's Law, the Second 
Death; (3) Because the inspired Apostle declares that 
now Satan is exercising a blinding, deceiving influence 
upon all except true believers (2 Cor. 4:4; Rev. 20:3), 
and that "the natural man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 



discerned."— I Cor. 2:14. 

These conclusions from the Scriptures in general are 
so abundantly confirmed by the statements of Heb. 6:4-8 
and 10:26-31, in which the Apostle warns the Church that 
wilful sin, or apostasy, on the part of those who have enjoyed 
the privilege of consecrated believers— those who 
have tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers of 
the Age to come, and who have been made partakers of 
the Holy Spirit— as to leave hopeless the case of such. It 
will be found impossible to renew such, for there remaineth 
no longer any part for them in the sacrifice for sin. 
They have had and have misused their share in the great 
"ransom for all." 

We have called attention to the fact that the world 
in general, even in civilized lands, has had no opportunity 
to sin after the example of wilful apostasy, described by 
the Apostle. And it is well to note that this sin unto 
death on the part of believers is not at all the same as the 
missteps and stumblings which may occur in the path of 
any through weakness of the flesh (Gal. 2:11-14), and 
which are among the sins which may be repented of, reformed 
from, and forgiven.— I John 2:1; 5:16. 

In view of the above, and of our further claim that 
the Spirit Dispensation began at Pentecost, after our 
Lord was glorified (John 7:39), some have wondered 
that we teach that Judas' case is a hopeless one, since 
his sin and death were before Pentecost. We are asked 
to explain this seeming inconsistency. 

We answer, the period of the Lord's presence at the 
first advent— from His baptism to His ascension— differed 
from the period after Pentecost, throughout this Age, in 
which believers walk wholly by faith and not by sight, 
even as the Millennial Age will differ from the Gospel 
Age. 

In the Millennium knowledge and responsibility will 
no longer be confined to the spirit-begotten, for it is written, 
"The earth will be full of the knowledge of the Lord 
as the waters cover the sea [knowledge ocean-deep]"; 
"All shall know Me [Jehovah] from the least unto the 
greatest."— Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34. 

It will no longer be the rule that the consecrated must 
"walk by faith and not by sight," for the consecrated of 
that time, while no doubt still having room for the exercise 

R4908 : page 407 

of faith, will, to a very considerable degree, walk by 

sight. It will no longer be true that Satan, the god of 

this world, will blind and deceive all except believers, for 

Satan will be bound and can deceive the world no longer; 

and "this world" [Age] shall then have given place to 

"the world [Age] to come," "wherein dwelleth righteousness"; 

and "all the blind eyes shall be opened."— Heb. 2:5; 

2 Pet. 3:13; Isa. 35:5. 

When knowledge is thus general, the possibility of 
sinning wilfully against great light will be general. Whosoever 



will may then accept the Divine favor and use the 
Divine aids, and attain to perfection and life everlasting; 
and whosoever will may intelligently reject God's favor in 

R4909 : page 407 

Christ, and die the Second Death— the everlasting death, 
the hopeless death. 

Now let us return to the case of Judas, and consider 
the conditions which obtained at the time of his trial and 
failure, in the period of the Lord's presence in the Jewish 
harvest. The circumstances of that time differed from 
those of the present Age and also those of the Millennial 
Age in the conditions, and hence the responsibilities differed 
also. Our Lord was present and performed marvelous 
works, illustrative of "the powers of the world 
[Age] to come." The truth was presented to the people 
in such a manner that the Lord declared that its rejection 
would bring "stripes" and "woes" upon those who, 
after hearing, loved darkness rather than light. He declared 
that some of those, because of their rejection of 
the Truth, would be counted worthy of "many stripes"; 
and that it would be, therefore, more tolerable for Sodom 
and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment than for those. 
Our Lord's declaration was, "If I had not done among 
them the works which none other man did they had not 
had sin. "-John 15:22,24. 

And if the people had such responsibility because of 
what they heard and saw, how much greater was the responsibility 
of the twelve chosen Apostles! They had 
professed much, saying, "We have left all to follow 
Thee." They were always with Him; and not only beheld 
many of His mighty works, of which the multitudes 
in various places saw but few, but more; He communicated 
to them, severally, a measure of His spirit and 
power, and sent them out to proclaim Him and His Kingdom 
and to work miracles— to heal the sick and cast out 
devils in His name. 

The Apostles received also a special insight into the 
Divine Plan, an enlightenment not granted to the people, 
the equivalent to much that is now granted to the spirit-begotten 
ones of this Age. The Lord addressed the multitudes 
in parables and dark sayings, but these He interpreted 
to the Apostles, saying, "Unto you it is given to 
know the mystery of the Kingdom of God; but to them 
that are without [outside of the twelve and other special 
disciples], all these things are done in parables." Again 
He said to them, "Blessed are your eyes, for they see, 
and your ears, for they hear; for verily I say unto you 
that many prophets and righteous men have desired to see 
those things which you see, and have not seen them; and 
to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard 
them."-Matt. 13:11-17; Mark 4:11. 

If, then, the people, who saw a few of our Lord's 
mighty works and heard a few of His words of life, under 
parabolic cover, were declared "worthy of stripes" for 



not receiving the light, what shall we say of the responsibility 

of the twelve who not only saw much more, but 

by His power in them performed His miracles; who not 

only heard the parabolic words of life, but who had them 

expounded to them by the great Teacher? (Matt. 13:36-43; 

Mark 4:10-20.) And what punishment less than 

death— hopeless extinction— shall we suppose was merited 

by one of these who, after all this, according to his own 

confession, "betrayed innocent blood"? 

We judge that if Pilate and Herod and the Roman 
soldiers had some responsibility for Christ's death, the 
multitude who clamored, "Crucify Him! His blood be 
upon us and on our children!" had much more responsibility; 
that the better educated, envious Pharisees and 
Priests who incited the illiterate, common people, had yet 
a greater responsibility (Matt. 23: 15-33), and that Judas, 
His betrayer, was the chief, the real crucifier, because of 
his knowledge and wilfulness. 

Upon him alone, of all who had to do with His death, 
our Lord placed the full responsibility, the full guilt, 
when He said: "The Son of Man goeth [to death] as it is 
written of Him [prophetically], but woe unto that man 
by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It had been good 
for that man if he had not been born!" (Matt. 26:24.) 
Should Judas be granted eternal life, under any circumstances 
or after any experience, his birth could not be 
considered a disadvantage to himself. See also Psa. 109:6-8; 
John 6:70,71; 17:12. 

So, likewise, those who (with good knowledge of 
God's grace in Christ) sin wilfully and count the precious 
blood of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified 
[set apart], a common thing, "crucify Christ afresh and 
put Him to an open shame." And, like Judas, they often 
accompany this denial of His ransom-sacrifice with the 
words, "Hail, Master!" and a deceitful kiss. All such 
should be an abhorrence to every one who possesses to 
any degree the true, noble, Christ-like spirit. 

"BE NOT WISE IN YOUR OWN CONCEITS!" 

Some of the dear friends feel very loath to "give poor 
Judas up," and some seem to feel that their sympathy for 
him is an evidence that they have "more love than others." 
Those who come to Christ are not selected because they 
are the least blemished amongst men; they are oftener 
the more blemished; the less blemished often feel a self-complacency 
and satisfaction which hinders them from 
coming to God as repentant sinners and from realizing 
that they can be justified only through the imputed merit 
of Christ. But those who come to Christ and hear Him, 
soon learn how imperfect are their depraved conceptions, 
and they seek and obtain His mind, that it may be theirs 
thenceforth, as instead of their own judgments. "We 
have the mind of Christ," says the Apostle. It is our 
"new mind"; we are "transformed by the renewing of our 
minds," so as to be able to "prove [know] what is the 



good, acceptable and perfect will of God."— Rom. 12:2. 

Those whose hearts go out so strongly to Judas seem to 
indicate by their questions that, however much they have 
submitted their judgment to God's will on some questions, 
they have not submitted them on this point. The 
reason seems to be that they deceive themselves into 
thinking that their sympathy with Judas is the true love 
which the Scriptures everywhere enjoin as the essence of 
Christian character. But they are deceiving themselves. 
To love an evil thing is on a par with hating a good 
thing. Both are wrong; both are sinful; both are evidence 
that the depraved mind is not renewed, remodeled, 
transformed into the mind of Christ. 

The mind of the Lord, inculcated by His Word, 
teaches that we are to love the beautiful, pure, true, 
noble; we are to love (in the sense of sympathizing with) 
the weak, the penitent and oppressed, who are seeking 
for the paths of righteousness and truth; but we are to 
"hate iniquity" and "every false way," and all the meanness 
and sin which is wilful, against light and of the 
Devil. 

R4909 : page 408 

Cease to pride yourself upon love for one of the most 
detestable characters known to the pages of history, of 
whom our Lord, who so loved (sympathized with) the 
world that He laid down His life for it, said, "It had 
been better for that man if he had never been born." 
Adopt God's standpoint. As the Apostles say, "Be not deceived; 
God is not mocked;" "He that doeth righteousness 
is righteous [and approved of God], but he that 
practices sin [knowingly, wilfully] is of the Devil."— Gal. 6:7; 
I John 3:6,7. 

For our part, we have no thought of ever becoming 
more loving than the Lord; we accept His definitions 
and seek to be conformed mentally to His standard— the 
image of God's dear Son. We want to love just as He 
loves and just what He loves, and we want to hate what 
He hates. Of Him it is written, "Thou hast loved righteousness 
and hated iniquity; therefore, God, even Thy 
God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above 
Thy fellows." (Heb. 1:9; Psa. 45:7.) "Do not I hate 
them, O Lord, that hate Thee?. ..I hate them with a 
perfect hatred."-Psa. 139:21,22. 

We are glad that neither Satan nor Judas nor any 
other creature will ever be tormented to all eternity. We 
are glad that a full, fair opportunity for coming to a 
knowledge of the Lord and of the way of righteousness 
will be granted to every member of Adam's race; and we 
are glad that, on the contrary, all who rejoice not in the 
Truth, but rejoice in iniquity, will be utterly and everlastingly 
destroyed in the Second Death. We abominate 
Satan, who, for over six thousand years, has wrought 
unrighteousness and gloated over the evil and pain and 
sorrow which he has wrought, and who with clear knowledge 



of the redemptive work has for eighteen centuries 
opposed the Kingdom and the great salvation. The person 
who could believe in Satan's conversion after all this 
battling against the Light and the Truth has a perverse 
mind, very sadly blinded by the "god of this world"— a 
mind thoroughly out of harmony with the Word. 



R4909 : page 408 

"YE HAVE NEED OF PATIENCE" 

"Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may 
be perfect and entire, wanting nothing."— Jas. 1:4. 

THERE ARE two quite distinct words in the 

Greek which, in our English Scriptures, 

are translated "patience." One of these is 

a word that in a general way corresponds 

to the common thought of patience as we 

speak of it in connection with the everyday 

affairs of life, meaning merely forbearance, 

or long-suffering. Indeed the 

Greek word is generally translated long-suffering. 

It is the other word with which 

we are more particularly interested in the treatment of 

our text, and which is the one most frequently translated 

patience by the New Testament writers. 

This word has a much deeper and fuller significance 
than attaches to our English word patience. It signifies, 
rather, constancy, the thought being an endurance of evil in 

R4910 : page 408 

a cheerful, hopeful, willing, patient manner. It represents, 
therefore, an element of character, and not merely a temporary 
condition or restraint of feeling or action. It 
signifies that development of heart and character which 
manifests itself in an endurance of wrong or affliction with 
contentment, without rebellion of will, with full acquiescence 
in the Divine Wisdom and Love, which, while 
permitting present evils, has promised to overthrow them 
in God's due time. 

This grace of patience smooths the way for every 
other Christian grace, because all must be acquired under 
the process of patient and continuous self-discipline. Not 
a step of progress can be gained without this grace of 
patience; and not one of the graces more beautifully 
adorns the Christian character, or wins the approval of 
the world's conscience, or glorifies the God of all grace 
whose Truth inspires it. It is enduring meekness, striving 
to stem the tide of human weakness, and endeavoring with 
painstaking care to attain to the Divine likeness. It is 
slow to wrath and plenteous in mercy; it is quick to 
perceive the paths of righteousness, and prompt to walk 



in them; it is mindful of its own imperfections and sympathetic 

with the imperfections and shortcomings of 

others. 

The importance of endurance in the Christian's character 
is fully borne out by the Apostle Paul's use of the 
word; for on more than one occasion he places patience 
above and beyond love, which we have seen is the "mark" 
of character for which we are to run— the "mark for the 
prize." For instance, in writing to Titus (2:2), enumerating 
the characteristics of the advanced Christian, the 
Apostle uses the following order: "Vigilant, grave, temperate, 
sound in faith, in charity [love], in patience." 
Though we have all the other qualities, this final test of 
patient, cheerful endurance must be passed before we can 
be accepted of the Lord as members of the very elect. 

Again, in writing to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:10) respecting 
himself, the Apostle puts this quality of patient endurance 
in the place beyond love, saying, "Thou hast fully 
known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering 
love, patient endurance." 

"THE LORD YOUR GOD DOTH PROVE YOU" 

One might ask, if "Love is the fulfilling of the Law" 
and "the mark for the prize of our high calling," how 
can patience rank higher than Love? The answer is that 
patient endurance does not come in merely at the close 
of our race, but it is a requisite all the way along the 
race-course. We need this cheerful endurance of the 
earliest trials in the Christian way; and as we speed along 
in our race for the "mark," the spirit of cheerful endurance 
should be growing stronger and stronger at every 
step of the journey. Some might be faithful for a few 
days or a few months or a few years, yet be unworthy 
of the great Kingdom blessing of Christ. 

In the Parable of the Sower, our Lord gave an illustration 
of this fact, saying that some seed fell on stony 
ground and sprang up; it grew; but finally, when the 
burning heat of persecution came, the tender plants 
withered away. In choosing the members of the Kingdom 
class the Lord is looking for a depth of soil, a depth 
of character, a depth of heart that will be patient to endure. 
Those who lack this one quality will not be fit for 
the Kingdom. Patience is necessary as an element of 
character on any plane of being; but with the Christian it 
is specially important to have it developed from the beginning 
of the race. We need it with us at the first quarter 
mark, and at the second quarter mark, and at the third 
quarter mark, and still with us at the fourth quarter mark, 
the mark for the prize— perfect Love. 

And when we have reached this mark of the race 
where we love, not only our friends, but our enemies, it 
is required of us that we stand up to the mark faithfully, 
cheerfully, patiently enduring the tests which the Lord 
will even then see fit to have come upon us. God subjects 



R4910 : page 409 

His people to testing, long testing, sometimes for months 
and years. As it is said, "The Lord your God proveth 
you."— Deut. 13:3. 

Hence it is that the Apostle Paul exhorts us, "Having 
done all, stand"— endure. Having reached the 
"mark," "Let patient endurance have her perfect work," 
or "perfect her work." Let patient endurance demonstrate, 
not only that you have the character, the qualifications 
of Love, demanded in the race for the prize, but 
also that you have love as an element of character, deep-rooted, 
immutable, so that you can endure opposition 
cheerfully. 

St. Paul tells us that we have need of this patient 
endurance that, after having done the will of God [after 
having brought our own will into complete subjection to 
the Divine will], we might receive the promise. (Heb. 10:36.) 
The thought in the Apostle's mind seems to be 
that there is a certain work for us all to do in ourselves 
—"Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling." 
(Phil. 2:12,13.) It is God who is working in us 
to will and to do— to co-operate in this work. Let us 
make sure that rebellion of any kind in our heart be 
thoroughly killed, mortified; and that we bring the will 
into perfect submission to the Divine will, so that we may 
have no other will than His. Even then, after we have 
overcome to this extent, we have need of patience. The 
Lord will not accept us merely because we are consecrated. 
He requires that the consecration shall be proven. 
To begin with, He accepts the consecration; then He 
tests us to demonstrate to what extent we really love Him. 

PATIENCE NECESSARY TO FRUIT-BEARING 

Patient endurance is also mentioned in the Scriptures 
as being the Lord's Word, or teaching. Our Lord says, 
"Because thou hast kept the Word of My patience I will 
also keep thee." (Rev. 3:10.) Twice in the Gospels also 
we note that our Lord brought to the notice of the disciples 
the importance of the quality of patient endurance. 
Once was in the Parable of the Sower above referred to. 
(Luke 8:11-15.) He said, "That [sown] on the good 
ground are they which in an honest and good heart, having 
heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with 
patience [with cheerful endurance, constancy]." The 
thought here is that in order to be of the fruit-bearing 
class, which the Lord will approve and accept in His 
Kingdom, it is necessary to do more than receive the 
Word of His Testimony, even though we receive it with 
joy; for that class in the parable is represented by the 
stony ground, which at first gave evidence of great fruitfulness 
and vigor, but withered under the sun of persecution, 
because of lack of depth of soil. That stony, 
shallow ground represents, the Lord explained, a class 
of hearers who rejoice greatly in the Truth, but do not 



endure; they are such as cannot withstand persecution or 
opposition, but wither under it, become discouraged. Such 
cannot be of the Kingdom class, all of whom must be 
overcomers. 

In this parable our Lord shows us that patient endurance, 
constancy, is the final test, following after the readiness 
of preparation to receive the seed; following after 
the seed has been received and has sprouted; following 
after love and hope and joy and faith have caused it to 
spring forth and to give promise of fruitage. Patient 
endurance, then, is necessary in order that the grain may 
be developed and thoroughly ripened and made fit for the 
garner. How important patient endurance, cheerful endurance, 
seems to be, in the light of the Lord's Word! 
for we cannot suppose that He who judges the thoughts 
and intents of the heart would be pleased with His children, 
even if He saw them enduring much for His sake, 
if they endured in an impatient or unhappy frame of 
mind. They would not in that event be copies of God's 
dear Son, whose sentiment is expressed in the words, "I 
delight to do Thy will, O God!" 

Our Lord at another time was telling His disciples that 
as the result of being His followers they must expect 
opposition, trials, tribulations. Perhaps it may assist 
some to realize the strength of the meaning of the word 
tribulation when they know its origin. It is derived from 
the Latin word "tribulum," the name of a roller, or threshing-machine 
used in olden times for cleaning wheat, removing 
from it the outer husk, or chaff. How appropriate 
the term when applied to the Lord's consecrated people, 
who in the Scriptures are symbolized by wheat! Our 
new natures are the kernel, the real grain; yet this treasure, 
or valuable part, is covered with the husk of earthly 
conditions. In order that the wheat may be made properly 
ready for the "garner" and for usefulness, it is necessary 
that each grain shall pass through the tribulation necessary 
to remove those qualities which, until separated, 
render us unfit for the future service to which we are 
called of the Lord. 

In proportion as we are able to realize our own imperfections, 
and the perfect will of God concerning us, 
we shall be enabled to bear patiently, and even with a 
certain kind of rejoicing, all the tribulations which the 
Master may see best to let come upon us. Our Lord explained 
to His disciples that so long as they lived in this 
present Age, when sin abounds, and when Satan is the 
prince of this world, they must expect tribulation from 
various quarters; but He assured them that they would, 
nevertheless, be fully and completely under Divine care 
and protection, even though the persecutions would be 
permitted to reach and to affect them. Then follow the 
words, "In your patience [patient endurance, cheerful, 
hopeful constancy] possess ye your souls."— Luke 21:19. 

"HE THAT OVERCOMETH SHALL INHERIT ALL THINGS" 



One object of the test of patient endurance is that we 
may be "strong in the Lord," that we may have the 
character-likeness of the Lord Jesus— not merely the 
firmness, but also the gentleness. All this must be developed 
before we can receive the things promised, the things 
which God has in reservation for those that love Him. 
(I Cor. 2:9,10.) These things are spiritual and might 

R4911 : page 409 

be apprehended by our minds, but could not be comprehended. 

The promise that we are to be like our Lord 

includes not only the spiritual and heavenly conditions, 

to which we shall attain in the First Resurrection, but 

also the blessing of sharing in the uplifting of the world. 

"If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs 

according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) But to "be 

Christ's" means, not only that we shall accept Him, join 

Him and His standards, but also that we shall be good 

soldiers. Those who would not be good soldiers would 

not be worthy of being members of the Body of Christ, 

for such could not be conquerors and "more than conquerors" 

through Jesus Christ our Lord.— Rom. 8:37. 

We already have the "promise," but it has not yet 
been received in the sense of being fulfilled. The promise 
is a conditional one. "He that doeth these things shall 
live by them." (Lev. 18:5; Rom. 10:5.) So in our Lord's 
arrangement, the condition of the promise is that we shall 
abide in His love, His favor. Whoever accepts of Christ's 
death and trusts in Him and seeks to follow the Divine 
commandments, walking not after the flesh, but after the 
Spirit, will receive the promise, for the promise is made 
to "overcomers." All the promises of the Gospel Age are 
made to the "overcomers." Such shall sit upon the 

R4911 : page 410 

Throne. Such shall become the Bride of Christ. Such 
shall be joint-heirs with the Redeemer and participate in 
all His great work as the great Messiah, to bless Israel 
and through Israel the world of mankind. 

By faith the Church now begins to enjoy this conditional 
promise, which depends upon their faithfulness to 
the end— their patient endurance. Such loyal ones have 
the earnest of the promise and shall be joint-heirs in 
the Kingdom. All others will be cut off from that membership. 
"Every branch in Me that beareth not fruit He 
taketh away; and every branch that beareth fruit, He 
purgeth [cleanseth, pruneth] it, that it may bring forth 
more fruit." (John 15:2.) We are on trial; and the 
trial is to prove our loyalty. If this trial time, or probation, 
is satisfactory, the membership is made permanent. 
Those who fail to live up to the conditions, are not 
counted worthy to be members of the Body of Christ and 
joint-heirs in the Kingdom. 



LET US ABIDE IN HIS LOVE 

Who can consider the importance of becoming copies 
of our blessed Lord and Head without feeling that to 
attain to this character-likeness will be a life-work! It 
cannot be accomplished in a day or in a year; but the 
whole life must be devoted to it; and day by day, if we 
are faithful, we should realize a measure of growth in 
grace and of development in Christian character. It is 
not enough that we know the Truth, or that we be content 
to hold it in unrighteousness. We must see to it that the 
Truth is having its legitimate and designed effect upon 
the character. And if the Truth is thus received into 
good and honest hearts, we shall have the assurance of 
the Apostle Peter that "We shall never fall," but that in 
due time we shall be received into the Kingdom. 

Hence we see the necessity of ever keeping the instructions 
and precepts of the Lord fresh in our minds, 
and of drinking deep into their inspiring spirit, although 
we are already established in the faith. To be established 
in the faith is one thing; to be established in Christian 
character and in all the graces of the Spirit is quite another. 

Beloved, "Let us run with patience [cheerful constancy, 
patient endurance] the race set before us" in the 
Gospel. (Heb. 12:1.) As already observed, the race must 
be run with this constancy if we would reach the "mark;" 
and after reaching the mark we can maintain our position 
only by the grace of constancy, patient endurance, that 
having done all, we may STAND ! 



R4911 : page 410 

A GREAT REFORMER 

-EZRA 8:15-36.-NOVEMBER 19TH.- 

"The hand of our God is upon all 
them for good that seek Him." 

EZRA WAS a learned Jew who headed a great 
reformation movement. As God's agent 
he was largely responsible for the maintenance 
of the Jewish faith and nation. His 
family had been amongst the many carried 
captive by Nebuchadnezzar. Like many 
others that became rooted in the new soil 
of Babylonia, they were not among the 
fifty-three thousand to return to Jerusalem 
when King Cyrus gave the opportunity. 
Ezra, imbued with a spirit of religious fervor based upon 
a faith in God and His Word and promises to Israel, 
headed another company bound for Jerusalem— seventy-eight 
years after the return of the exiles. 
The Jews evidently were prosperous in Babylon, and 



their exile for a time at least led them to earnest study 
of the Law and the Prophets. In fact, Judah, probably 
under Ezra as one of its chief representatives, seems to 
have prospered more in Babylon than in Jerusalem— not 
as a whole, but a certain pious few. These were vexed 
as they from time to time heard of the poverty of their 
brethren in Jerusalem, and that matters religious were 
not prosperous there, and that the rebuilding of the temple 
which represented Divine presence with the nation was 
but poorly served. 

Deeply in earnest for a revival of the true religion, 
Ezra laid the matter before representatives in Babylon 
and before the Persian king, with favorable results. 
Large donations were made for the repairs of the temple 
and the institution of its worship upon a proper basis, and 
in general to help the interests of the Jewish cause in 
Jerusalem. The donations of gold and silver totaled a 
little more than two million dollars, and the total number 
of persons who volunteered to be the company numbered 
about seventeen hundred. The donations were a public 
trust, and Ezra wisely divided the treasure between twelve 
principal men of his party, taking receipts from each. 

Before the journey proper was begun, a fast was proclaimed 
and the Almighty God was entreated to grant 
His blessing upon the undertaking and to direct the 
course of the travelers. They were not without cause 
for fear for themselves, for it must have been generally 
known that they carried a large amount of treasure with 
them, and the country through which they must pass was 
infested with robbers who might pounce upon them at 
any time to carry off their treasure, which consisted of 
large supplies of wheat, wine and oil besides the gold 
and silver. 

"IN ALL THY WAYS ACKNOWLEDGE HIM" 

The beginning of the journey with fasting and prayer 
gives us an insight into Ezra's power and efficiency. "God 
was with him"— he walked with God, he sought to know 
and to do the Divine will. Surely it is in vain that any 
would attempt to serve the Lord and yet neglect to humble 
themselves before Him and to make request for His 
blessing and guidance. We submit that fasting and prayer 
and earnest desire to know and to do the Lord's will are 
far more efficacious for good than are large donations 
of money. Perhaps there has been too great a tendency 
on the part of many to leave out the matter of religious 
work at home and abroad save along financial lines, forgetful 
in part at least that they labor in vain unless the 
Lord grant His blessing. 

The fact that notwithstanding our wonderful financial 
efforts during the past century there are today twice as 
many heathen as there were a century ago, should take 
us to the Lord in prayer to assure ourselves regarding 
the meaning of the prayer He taught us— "Thy Kingdom 
come, Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 



Seeing the futility of our efforts to bring about heavenly 
conditions on earth ought to lead all of God's earnest 
children to search His Word and to see whether or not 
it teaches that the second coming of Messiah is to unite 
to Himself His "elect" Church as His Bride and then to 
establish the Kingdom of Righteousness which, backed 
by Divine power, will bind Satan, overthrow sin and 
death, and uplift mankind and make of earth a paradise. 

THE WAY OF TRANSGRESSORS 

Ezra and his party reached Jerusalem in safety after 
a journey of exactly four months. As great a distance 
can be covered in less than four days with our modern 
conveniences, which surely seem to be precursors of the 

R4911 : page 411 

glorious Messianic Epoch, the wonderful prosperity of 
which has so long been foretold. 

Ezra has been censured as narrow and cruel because 
of the reforms at Jerusalem of which he became the 
leader and adviser. The Jews who first returned from 
Babylon were full of zeal for the Divine Law, and refused 
to inter-marry or to have social dealings with their 
heathen neighbors; but as their prosperity lagged their 
zeal slackened. Carelessness and irreligion came in. 
Hence Ezra soon found that many Jews were inter-marrying 
with their neighbors, and that a condition of 
things prevailed which, if continued, would mean the corruption 
of the nation to which God had given the promise 
of national continuity, and the promise that ultimately 
He would use them as a nation for the sending out of 
the light and truth which He has promised shall yet bless 
all the families of the earth. 

A general assembly or convocation of Israelites was 
called and held to consider this matter of mixed 
marriages and the requirements of the Law, and any 
failing to be represented were notified that they would be 
in danger of being counted out of the congregation as 
aliens. It was a time of weeping and sorrow and distress 

R4912: page 411 

amongst the people as they realized that conformity 
to the Divine Law would mean the breaking of family 
ties. The Divine Law had been broken and now the 
penalty was to be felt. The way of the transgressors 
was hard. 

This requirement of the Law can be understood only 
by those who realize that Israel was under a special 
Covenant with God by the compact at Mt. Sinai, and that 
that nation was subject to every feature of that Law. No 
such law is or has ever been put upon other nations— 
nor upon Christians, who are not under the Law but 
under Grace. We must not, however, object to the Jew's 



being faithful to his Covenant, for that Law Covenant 
is as binding upon him today as it ever was; and it will 
remain binding until it shall be superseded by the New 
Law Covenant referred to in Jeremiah 31:31. The great 
Messiah, Head and Body, will be the Mediator of that 
New Covenant, and its sealing will be effected by the 
blood of "the better sacrifices" of this Gospel Age. 

To the Christian, the next thing corresponding to this 
Law is the Apostolic injunction that the consecrated followers 
of Christ should not inter-marry with the worldly 
but "only in the Lord." (2 Cor. 6:14.) There is surely 
Divine wisdom in this injunction, yet it is not a law, and 
Christians who have married unconsecrated persons are 
not to leave them but to fulfil their marriage covenants. 
-I Cor. 7:14. 



R4912: page 411 

THE VALUE OF PRAYER 

--NOVEMBER 26TH.-NEHEMIAH 1.- 

"The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous 
man availeth much."— James 5:16. 

THIRTEEN YEARS after Ezra's company 

returned to Jerusalem, Nehemiah went 

thither with an escort and full authority 

from the king of Persia to rebuild the wall 

of Jerusalem and to restore its gates. It 

would appear that Ezra's reformation, 

while very helpful to the people, brought 

against them the violent opposition of their 

neighbors, as was to have been expected. 

The Jews, now considerable in numbers, 

were despised by their neighbors who wished to drive 

them out of the land. The wall of the city was poor and 

did not withstand the attack. 

Josephus says that Nehemiah, wealthy and favored of 
the king of Persia, resided in the king's palace at Shushan. 
He was a pious man and deeply interested in the 
land of his fathers. While walking one day he overheard 
two men talking in the Hebrew tongue, and accosted them. 

R4913 : page 411 

They had been to Jerusalem and had returned. One of 
them proved to be his own relative. He gladly inquired 
respecting the holy land, the holy city, God's temple, and 
concerning the Jews who had returned from Babylon. 
The sad story of their trials and the desolation of the 
city and its exposure to enemies touched his heart and 
led him to prayer. That prayer is the subject of this 
lesson. 



ANSWERING OUR OWN PRAYERS 

Undoubtedly, the recorded prayer of Nehemiah is 
merely an epitomized statement, for we read that he made 
the matter a subject of earnest prayer for four months 
before he reached the point of action where God used 
him in the fulfilment of his own petition. This reminds 
us of how our Lord instructed His disciples, saying, 
"Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest that He would send 
forth more laborers into His Harvest." While the disciples 
thus prayed it would imply that they would be 
laboring in accordance with their prayers, that they would 
be doing all in their own power to forward the Harvest 
work as well as to interest other laborers in the same. 
Thus it must always be that earnest effort will accompany 
prayer. Prayers not accompanied by efforts brand 
themselves as insincere. The prayer which is not of faith 
is sin— unscriptural, sacrilegious. 

THE SOUL'S SINCERE DESIRE 

The poet has well defined prayer as being "The soul's 
sincere desire, uttered or unexpressed." Another has 
well declared that it "is the Christian's vital breath"— that 
is to say, Christian character cannot be maintained 
without prayer any more than a human life could be maintained 
without breathing. Who has not noticed that all 
the great Bible characters used of the Almighty were 
accustomed to go to Him regularly in prayer and to seek 
for guidance from Him in respect to every matter. Even 
the great Redeemer, holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners, needed to pray to the Father— needed 
His fellowship and communion— needed to be in touch 
with the Infinite One. Several of His prayers are recorded, 
and we are told that He spent the entire night 
in prayer on more than one occasion. 

Some may ask, Would the Almighty change His plans 
in answer to our petitions? Assuredly He would not. 
Indeed, on the contrary, we are cautioned in the Scriptures 
to ask only according to His will. We are warned 
that if we ask amiss our petitions will not be answered. 
Hence the necessity for studying God's Word and being 
enlightened thereby respecting the Divine program that 
we may ask in harmony with every feature of it and 
receive strength and encouragement through the answer 
to our petitions. 

The Redeemer gave us the keynote to this, saying, 
"If ye abide in Me and My words abide in you, ye may ask 
what ye will and it shall be done unto you." (John 15:7.) 
Alas! how few seem to note the two limitations of this 
promise: 

(1) The one asking must be in Christ— abiding in 
Him. This means that the petitioner has turned from 
sin, has accepted Christ and the terms of discipleship. 
It implies that he has made a full consecration of his 



R4913 : page 412 

life to the Lord and become a new creature in Christ 
Jesus. Such, abiding in Christ, may pray to the Father. 

(2) After having come into membership and fellowship 
with the Head, the Messiah, these must ask in harmony 
with God's Word and promises; in order to know 
what things to ask for they must search the Scriptures, 
which are sufficient, "that the man of God may be thoroughly 
furnished." There are many things for which we 
may pray, the answer to which would not involve any 
change in the Divine plans. We are not to understand 
that all the little incidents of life are foreordained and 
predestinated. So far as the world is concerned, many 
of its affairs are purely of chance under the permission 
of natural laws with which God does not generally interfere. 
It is in the affairs of His consecrated people 
that God assures us He takes a special interest. These 
are so supervised by His providence that He guarantees 
His children that all things shall work together for good 
to them. 

WHAT TO PRAY FOR 

God is pleased to make use of the little talents possessed 
by His consecrated people, and their usefulness as 
ambassadors for God and for Christ, in their own families 
and own cities, will avail in proportion to and depend 
very much upon the earnestness of their prayers and endeavors. 
Those who pray for opportunities to serve the 
Lord and His cause and who watch for the fulfilment of 
their prayers in the open doors of opportunity will surely 
have them. "He that seeketh findeth, and to him that 
knocketh it shall be opened." 

The baptized in Christ may pray for earthly necessities, 
as in the Lord's prayer, "Give us this day our daily 
bread;" but we are not to pray for more than the bread 
and water which the Lord has authorized His people to 
pray for. The true Christian, instead of thinking about 
what he shall eat, what he shall drink, and wherewithal 
he shall be clothed— instead of making earthly things the 
subject of his prayers, will be thinking of and praying 
about his higher, his heavenly interests. More particularly 
he will be concerned respecting his spiritual food, 
spiritual clothing, spiritual growth in grace and knowledge 
and love, and for these particularly he will pray and 
strive. 

Our Lord declares, "After all these things (food and 
clothing) do the Gentiles seek; but seek ye first (chiefly) 
the Kingdom of God and His righteousness." God's 
people are consequently to attain a joint-heirship in Messiah's 
great Kingdom according to the Divine invitation 
that we should be "heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ our Lord." We are to seek possessions in 
that Kingdom with our Lord in His throne, by seeking 



to develop characters which will have divine approval and 
make us fit for that high exaltation. Our Lord speaks of 
these as seeking the righteousness of the Kingdom— that 
Kingdom which will be established amongst mankind for 
the very purpose of enforcing righteousness; and whoever 
will be a joint-heir with Christ must love righteousness 
and hate iniquity, and must develop this character 
before he dies in order to hope for a share in this Kingdom 
and its glory, honor and immortality. For this he 
will be seeking, striving, praying— above all else. 



R4912: page 412 

CO-LABORERS WITH GOD 

-DECEMBER 3RD.-NEHEMIAH 4- 

"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith; quit 
you like men; be strong."— 1 Cor. 16:13. 

NEHEMIAH'S PRAYER for Jerusalem and 

the holy interests centered there continued 

for months before the answer suddenly 

came. The king, whom he served as confidential 

secretary, prepared a banquet, the 

queen being present as well as Nehemiah 

and others. Everybody was smiling and 

joyous, attired in their silks and jewels, 

but the king noticed that his trusted secretary 

had a sadness which showed through 

his smiles. Finding that he was not ill he said that it 

must be a trouble of heart— and inquired as to what 

it was. It was a dangerous moment for Nehemiah, for 

the kings of that time were quite autocratic and capricious. 

The sadness might have been construed to mean 

a loss of interest in the king and his affairs, or a hundred 

things disapproved for such an occasion of rejoicing. 

Nehemiah's prayer instantly went up to God for wisdom 
to know how to answer, for he did not receive the 
wisdom at once, although he had prayed beforehand. He 
knew that the Almighty could hear his desires of heart, 
uttered or unexpressed. He received the needed wisdom 
for a wise and successful reply, which did not offend the 
king, but enlisted his interest. He told the king that his 
sadness of heart was because the home of his fathers was 
ruined. The result was that the king appointed him special 
governor of Judea with full authority to attend to 
the work and to call upon the governors of surrounding 
provinces for aid if necessary. 

WISDOM SHOWN BY METHODS 

That Nehemiah was a wise man and no mere dreamer 
was evidenced in the practical methods he employed. A 



man of wealth, he probably financed his own expedition, 
aside from the retinue of soldiers, etc., furnished by the 
king. A four-months' journey brought them to Jerusalem. 
The object of his coming was kept secret. He was 
merely a visitor for a few days, seeing and hearing. 
Then by night he made an inspection of the old city walls, 
particularly the broken parts and the heaps of ruins from 
which they might be rebuilt. He saw the feasibility of the 
scheme and outlined in his mind the method. Then he 
called for the elders and prominent representatives of the 
people, explained to them his object in coming, showed 
them his authority from the king and suggested a method 
for the beginning of the repair work immediately. 

He perceived the necessity for great caution, as enemies 
were on every hand as anxious to hinder them as he 
was anxious for success. The Samaritans were jealous. 
They had a rival worship of Jehovah, and Israel's success 
would seem to imply that God's favor was to the Jews 
rather than toward the Samaritans. Besides, they all 
hoped to profit by the poverty and helplessness of the 
Jews— thinking it not wrong to pillage them as opportunity 
offered. Nehemiah's plan was approved. The leading 
men in each quarter of the city joined in the work 
with the laborers, and each built the wall most nearly in 
front of his own home quarters. This was a wise plan, 
for each would be specially interested in having the wall 
strong in his own neighborhood, and a certain degree of 
proper pride would attach to the work as a prominent 
monument of the builder's skill— itself a credit or discredit. 

Nehemiah joined in the work with the others, his 
accompanying servants participating also. His spirit of 
zeal was an inspiration to the discouraged people, who 
took heart, and hope began to thrive. Then came discouragement 
and opposition from the enemies. An attack 

R4912: page 413 

was even planned, but learning of this, Nehemiah so 
directed the work that the heads of the families kept an 
armed watch while the others labored, carrying swords 
also for self-defense. 

When their enemies found that they were prepared, 
the proposed attack was abandoned and discouragements 
were resorted to. The effort was laughed at, ridiculed 
as impossible, and worthless anyhow. Those unused to 
manual toil soon grew sore and weary and discouraged. 
The higher the walls grew, the more difficult it was to 
place the stones and the mortar, and the more stones built 
into the wall, the fewer suitable ones remained amongst 
the rubbish. It was a time of testing of faith and loyalty 
to God. Trials and difficulties are permitted to come to 
all of God's people for just such testings. The overcomers 
are developed through various experiences for 
the Divine service. 

"STAND FAST IN THE FAITH" 



It may be asked why Nehemiah's faithfulness and 
courage were tested, and what reward was his. We 
reply that a reward of character-development follows 
every good endeavor. The reward of those who lived 
faithfully in Nehemiah's time differs essentially from the 
reward of the faithful amongst the followers of Jesus. 
The latter are promised a share with the Master in His 
glorious Messianic Kingdom. "Fear not, little flock, it 
is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom;" 
"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in 
My Throne. "--Luke 12:32; Rev. 3:21. 

But Nehemiah could have no share in these Kingdom 
promises because he lived before the call to the Kingdom 
—before Pentecost. He and others of his time who displayed 
faithfulness and loyalty are not personally mentioned 
by St. Paul in Hebrews 1 1, but they are undoubtedly 
included in the list. Of them the Apostle declared, "They 
had this testimony, that they pleased God." St. Paul 
declares that they will receive their reward— a share in 
the earthly phase of the Kingdom, after the Church shall 
first have her share with the Redeemer in the heavenly 
phase of the Kingdom, for "they, without us, shall not be 
made perfect, God having some better thing for us." 

St. Paul's words in our text teach the same great lesson 
of the necessity for character-development on the 
part of all who hope to be heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord. They must watch as well 
as pray, they must "stand fast in the faith" against the 
various oppositions of the world, the flesh and the Adversary. 
They must acquit themselves like men, "strong in 
the Lord and in the power of His might." They must be 
strongly developed, by trials, difficulties and obstacles 
overcome in the name of the Lord and with His 
assistance. 



R4915 : page 413 

O! TO BE WILLING! 

O! to be willing, willing, 

Thy will to do day by day, 
Obedient, humble and loving— 

O! help me, dear Savior, I pray. 
Willing that Thou mightest use me, 

As forth with glad tidings I go, 
That all who are hung'ring and thirsting 

God's mystery now may know. 

O! to be willing, willing, 
Just to be led by Thy hand; 

"A messenger at the gateway, 

Only waiting for Thy command;" 

Filled with Thy spirit and ready 



The message to tell at Thy will; 

"Willing shouldst thou not require me, 

In silence to wait on Thee still." 

O! to be willing, willing, 

Whate'er the task may be, 
To do it as thou didst, dear Jesus, 

That the world Thy spirit may see. 
Rather be willing, willing, 

That Jehovah on earth be praised, 
To surrender all earthly blessings 

And walk the appointed ways. 

O! to be willing, willing, 

Each step to salvation to take, 
To suffer with Thee in "the Holy," 

And gladly all sacrifice make. 
To walk in the way with rejoicing, 

My lamp trimmed and well filled with oil, 
And I'll soon hear the voice of the Bridegroom 

Saying, "Enter and cease from thy toil." 

DR. AGNES HAVILAND. 



R4913 : page 413 

"THE ROYAL DIADEM" 

"Thou shalt be called by a new name;. ..thou shalt also be 
a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem 
in the hand of thy God."— Isa. 62:2,3. 

IN ONE PLACE the Prophet Jeremiah declares, 
"This is the name whereby He shall 
be called, Jehovah our Righteousness." 
In another place he says, "She shall be 
called, Jehovah our Righteousness [or, the 
Righteousness of Jehovah]." And so the 
Apostle declares, "That we might be made 
the Righteousness of God through Him." 
-Jer. 23:6; 33:16; 2 Cor. 5:21. 

These statements refer to Zion. The 
typical Zion is the Jewish nation; and the antitypical Zion 
is the glorified Christ. Very properly, then, we may understand 
that the blessings which belong to the Church 
on the spirit plane will, naturally, on the earthly plane, 
belong to the Ancient Worthies, who will be in Divine 
favor forever. 

The two expressions, "a crown of glory" and "a royal 
diadem," express practically the same thought, the repetition 
making the sentiment doubly impressive. A diadem 
is a crown. Crowns are generally used to add dignity 
and honor to the individuals wearing them; but the Scriptural 
expression, "A crown of glory,. ..a royal diadem 
in the hand of thy God," does not include the thought 



of a diadem that is to be worn, as giving glory to God; 
but rather as representing a beautiful ornament in the 
Divine hand, as you take something in your hand to look 
at the beauty and workmanship. 

The jewels that will make this diadem beautiful, 
when properly tested by the great Master-Workman, are 
the Church. The Lord will come to make up His jewels, 
to secure His jewels. "God hath set the members in the 
Body." The text refers to the final setting in the future, 
in the Kingdom condition. As star differeth from star 
in glory, so shall these jewels differ in setting and position. 
This also applies to the present time. The present 
arrangement is subject to change in proportion as the 
individual will or will not be fully submissive to the 
Lord's will. There has been a selection of a jewel class; 

R4913 : page 414 

and the experiences of this class during the Gospel Age 
have been the polishing processes; and there will be a 
setting in the end of this Age, when the Church is completed. 
This began when the First Resurrection began. 

The first setting in this royal diadem was, undoubtedly, 
our Lord Jesus Himself. He is the first in this great 
diadem which Jehovah has in His hand. Next will come 
the members of the Body, as they shall be perfected in 
the First Resurrection— the Apostles and sleeping saints, 
each as he is granted his change, "in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye." Each jewel will be placed in that 
particular setting for which Jehovah has seen that it is 
prepared. 

When the mother of James and John went with them 
to Jesus and requested that her sons might sit, the one 
on His right hand and the other on His left hand, He 
said that these places would be given to those for whom 
they are intended by the Father. Those positions will 

R4914: page 414 

not be given through favor, but through justice. Any 
place will be glorious in this company. Only the Lord 
is competent to say who shall sit on the right hand and 
on the left. We shall be pleased to have His will done; 
and beyond the veil we shall have such a large sense of 
justice that we shall be glad to have the matter as the 
Father has arranged. 

The Lord is first; we think probably St. Paul is next. 
And we think St. Peter and St. John have prominent places. 
We shall all be perfectly content and pleased with whatever 
the Father will decide. We shall be glad of any 
place. And any one who would not be of that spirit, of 
that disposition, will thereby indicate that he is not of 
that class which the Lord would have there. Any who 
will be of that class will be glad to accept the Father's 
decree and to prefer it to anything they could have 
devised. 



So the Church in the hand of God is the Church in 
the hand of Divine power. That power will use the 
Church and she will be a crown of glory and a thing of 
beauty, gloriously reflecting to all eternity the workmanship 
of our God. How glorious it will be! How beautiful! 
The Lord Jehovah will have the setting of these 
precious jewels, one reflecting upon another in that crown 
of glory and diadem of beauty, with the Lord Jesus in 
the chief place, for the Father will not give to the Church 
any glory that He would not give to the Lord Himself. 
The Church is to be displayed before men as "a thing 
of beauty and a joy forever"— God's handiwork. 

He is selecting the jewels now, and is providentially 
dealing with them. When the process of polishing shall 
have been completed, He will use them in a very special 
sense for a thousand years. As a star blazes in glory, so 
the Lord will make use of each one of the Church. But 
the use of the Church which the Lord will make at that 
time will be only a part of the work which He intends to 
accomplish. The Apostle says, "That in the ages to come 
He might show the exceeding riches of His grace in His 
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus."— Eph. 2:7. 

All who are in Christ, all who are in the "elect" Body 
of Christ— to these God will show His exceeding grace. 
His grace and favor will be showered upon the Church. 
And the world will eventually see in the Church 
the culmination of all of God's creative work. The glory 
of the Church will be manifested in the sight of angels 
and of men. And so the Lord indicates the blessings 
that are to be ours if we are faithful in making our "calling 
and election sure." 

Let us never forget that we are a "peculiar people," 
separate from the great body of nominal Christians, as 
well as from the world, having higher hopes, aims and 
ambitions and favored with a clearer insight into the deep 
things of God, having been called out of our former 
darkness into His marvelous light. And if thus separate 
from the world and from Christians who partake largely 
of the worldly spirit, what wonder if we find them all out 
of harmony with us, and either ignoring or opposing us 
in the performance of the Master's will. 



R4914: page 414 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

NO MARRIAGE IN THE RESURRECTION 

QUESTION. -Do you gather from God's 
Plan that the present reciprocal love of 
man and woman is to be confirmed by the 
Lord so as to continue forever, both on 
earth and in heaven? 
Answer.— We answer, No! Marriage 



is an arrangement that God instituted for 

a very special purpose, and with the human 

family only. The object of the separation 

of Mother Eve from Father Adam [she 

was formed from one of his ribs] was, the Scriptures 

tell us, that a race might be produced. Marriage means 

merely the union of these two recognizing each other as 

one; and so the Apostle says, "I would have you know 

that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of 

the woman is the man; and the Head of Christ is God." 

There is no arrangement in God's Plan to have any 
of those on the spirit plane male and female. According 
to the productions of Art, there are no male angels; but 
according to the Scriptures, there are no female angels. 
Possibly the reason why so many artists have supposed 
that angels are females is that there are more women in 
the Church than men. But the entire idea is erroneous; 
for angels are an entirely separate order of beings from 
mankind. Man never was an angel and never was intended 
to be an angel. Man is of the earth, earthy. He 
fell from the position of king of the earth and became a 
degraded being; and the Divine intention and promise is 
that when Messiah shall reign humanity shall be lifted 
up from sin and degradation and brought back to human 
perfection.— Acts 3:19-21. 

The only ones who will become spirit beings, as are 
the angels, are the Church class— those begotten of the 
Spirit, those who in the resurrection will be given a 
change of nature. As the Apostle states, "We shall all 
be changed," for "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the 
Kingdom of God." (I Cor. 15:51,50.) Therefore the 
First Resurrection, in which the Bride only has part 
with her Lord, is different from the resurrection of the 
world. Of those who will have part in the First Resurrection 
we read that "they shall be priests unto God and 
shall reign with Christ a thousand years." (Rev. 20:6.) 
Flesh and blood cannot be a part of that Kingdom. 
Therefore they must all be changed. We do not expect 
that Jesus will be changed from spirit to human 
nature; but that the Church must be changed from human 
to spirit nature, for they "shall be like Him and see Him 
as He is" (I John 3:2) and share His glory and be His 
Bride. When the Church shall thus be changed, all the 
peculiarities of male and female will be obliterated, for 
there is neither male nor female amongst the angels; 
and the Scriptures tell us there will not be in the glorified 
Church. The perfection of spirit being will be one. 
All will be alike, sexless. 

As for mankind: We think the Scriptures clearly indicate 

R4914: page 415 

that Divine provision for mankind will be that 
they will all be sexless when perfection shall have been 
reached. That is to say, at the close of the Millennial 
Age, all having been gradually perfected, each sex will, 



in their development, have taken on more of the qualities 
of the other; during that Age the woman will gradually 
add to her womanly graces the qualities that belong 
to man; and man will likewise gradually take on 
with his manly qualities the finer sentiments and qualities 
of mind and body that belong to the female. Thus 
man will receive again that which was taken from him 
originally, represented by the rib. So all will then be 
perfect; and they will neither marry nor give in marriage; 
for all will in this respect be "like unto the 
angels. "-Luke 20:34-36. 



STILL HOLD SAME SCRIPTURAL VIEW 

Question.— Are we to understand from your remarks 
in THE WATCH TOWER of April 1, 1911, page 102, column 
2, paragraphs 2 and 3, that your opinion has altered 
respecting the "change" of the Church? 

Answer.— No; we have no different thought from that 
heretofore presented. We still believe that since 1878 
we are in the time indicated by the statement, "Blessed 
are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, 
saith the Spirit, they shall rest from their labors, and 
their works follow with them."— Rev. 14:13. 

We must all die, but "we shall not all sleep." In the 
cases of those remaining alive at the time of our Lord's 
second presence, there will be no need to sleep— the 
moment of death will be the moment of resurrection 
change. -Psa. 82:7; I Cor. 15:51,52. 



THE CHURCH THE BODY OF CHRIST 

Question.— When does the Church become the Body 
of Christ? 

Answer.— The Church may Scripturally be viewed 
from two standpoints:— 

(1) The Church in glory will consist exclusively of 
the Redeemer and His Bride class, His joint-heirs, or, 
under the other figure, "Jesus, the Head, and the Church, 
His Body"— "members in particular of the Body of 
Christ." These alone will have part in the "first resurrection"; 
these alone will reign with Christ a thousand years. 

(2) In the present time, however, the Church is 

spoken of as the Bride of Christ, in a formative or developing 
state, His espoused. Each one who makes a full 
consecration of himself to the Lord, trusting in the merit 
of Jesus, when begotten of the Holy Spirit, is counted a 
member of the Body of Christ. As a member he is to 
grow in grace, knowledge and love, putting off the former 
things of the flesh and putting on the fruits and graces of 
the Holy Spirit. These, however, develop into three different 
classes:— 



(a) A "little flock," a Royal Priesthood, who will become 
exclusively the Body of Christ, through participation 

in the "first resurrection." 

(b) A "great company" class, loyal to God and in 

the end faithful but not sufficiently zealous to be considered 
sacrificing priests, not worthy, therefore, to be 
counted of the Body of the "more than conquerors." 

R4915 : page 415 

These will ultimately come off conquerors and attain the 
plane of spirit being to which they were begotten at the 
time of their consecration. These will be the "virgin 
companions" of the Bride, serving in the Temple. 

(c) A third class, described by St. Paul as falling 
away and counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith 
they were sanctified an ordinary thing and despising the 
great favor and privilege of sanctification through justification. 
These are described also by St. Peter as "the 

sow returned to her wallowing in the mire"— as turned 
from spiritual hopes and promises to earthly. These, 
once counted members of the Body of Christ, will die the 
Second Death, as brute beasts. 



GIFTS AND SACRIFICES FOR SIN 

Question.— What is signified by the words of the 
Apostle that our Lord was ordained to offer both gifts 
and sacrifices for sin? 

Answer.— From the Scriptures it is evident that during 
the Millennial Age the world of mankind will be privileged 
to offer themselves to God as gifts, but not as sacrifices. 
Hence, during the Millennial Age, part of the work of 
the great High Priest will be to accept these gifts and to 
make them acceptable to God through His own merit and 
rights as the Melchizedek Priest. We can, however, 
apply this text very properly to the present time. The 
Apostle puts the word gifts first. We may, therefore, 
look to see whether there is not some way in which the 
High Priest offers gifts now. Surely our Lord's consecration 
of His own life was a gift on His part. The 
Father accepted that gift and ultimately permitted our 
Lord's gift to constitute a Sin-Offering for others. Likewise, 
throughout this Gospel Age, the "brethren" are invited 
to present their bodies living sacrifices— to give 
themselves to God.— Rom. 12:1,2. 

When we thus make a present of ourselves to God, we 
are not making a Sin-Offering to God; for this we could 
not do. But the Divine arrangement for accepting our 
gift is that each gift will be acceptable through the merit 
of Christ; and that then, later on, these gifts will, according 
to the same Divine arrangement, constitute the great 
Sin-Offering which the High Priest gives for the world. 
Thus the High Priest is ordained to make the ultimate 



offering of that gift as the Sin-Offering for the world. 

Amongst those who served in the office of typical high 
priest, says the Apostle, the uniform custom was that 
they should offer both gifts and sacrifices to God. Hence, 
he proceeds to point out that Jesus, as the Antitype of those 
priests, must have something to offer. He also must offer 
both gifts and sacrifices, in order to fulfil His priesthood. 
He presented Himself without spot unto God; 
and, by virtue of that presentation, He is a Sin-Offering 
unto God; and, through His merit, He makes the same 
true of His Church, who voluntarily give themselves 
to God. 



SHOWS HOW MERIT OF RANSOM IS APPLIED 

Question.— Is there anything connected with the 
Atonement Day sacrifices which corresponds to the Ransom? 
If so, what? 

Answer.— The word Ransom would more properly 
be rendered Ransom-Price, corresponding price. On the 
Day of Atonement no type of the ransom-price is given 
us, but rather a type of the Sin-Offering, showing particularly 
how that ransom-price will be made applicable. 
If we scrutinize this Atonement Day type, however, 
we shall find that which points to the Ransom, in the killing 
of the bullock; for the whole matter depended upon 
the killing of the bullock. The goat could not be killed 
first. The bullock must first be killed and the blood applied 
in the Most Holy before anything could be done 
with the goat. Hence, all that was done, not only with 
the Lord's goat, but also with the scapegoat, was based on 
the death of the bullock. So if we look for anything that 
might correspond to the ransom-price in the Day of 
Atonement sacrifices, we shall see that the death of the 
goat was not necessary, but all depended on the bullock. 



page 417 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

Is Mankind Advancing? 419 

Practical Self-Examination on Love 421 

Love the Secret of True Politeness 422 

Love Begins at Home 422 

Love Thinks No Evil 423 

Do Nothing Whereby Thy Brother Stumbleth 424 



Self-Denial in Interest of Others 424 

Our Responsibility to Our Brother 425 

Every Violation of Conscience Wrong 425 

Lord's Goat and Scape-Goat 426 

Scape-Goat Class Fail to Bear "His 

Reproach" 426 

What Does It Mean? (Poem) 427 

Nobility Conquers Meanness 427 

Evil-Speaking and Slander 428 

Ezra's Bible Class 428 

Interesting Questions 429 

Some Interesting Letters 430 

Berean Questions in "Scripture Studies" 431 

page 418 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 

AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 



FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



NEW HAVEN, CONN., NOVEMBER 26 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony. Discourse 
for the interested at 10.30. Discourse for the Public, 
3 o'clock, at the Hyperion Theatre, Chapel St. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., DECEMBER 3 

Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10.30 a.m. Discourse 
at 3 o'clock and a Question Meeting in the evening. The 
Academy of Music not being available for this Sunday, all 
meetings will be held in the Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks St. 

DALLAS, TEXAS, DECEMBER 6 

At 10.30 a.m. meeting for Praise, Prayer and Testimony 
and at 3 o'clock in the afternoon discourse for the interested. 
Both services will be held in Woodman's Hall, 414 Harwood 
St. 

SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS, DECEMBER 7 

"The New Woodman's Hall" at 1 17 North Flores St., will 
be used at 10 o'clock for Praise, Prayer and Testimony meeting 
and again at 3 o'clock for a discourse to the interested. 

LOS ANGELES, CAL., DECEMBER 10 

Time and place for Morning Rally and Discourse for the 
interested will be announced later. Discourse for the Public 
at 3 p.m., Shrine Auditorium, West Jefferson St. 

FRESNO, CAL., DECEMBER 11 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 
o'clock and discourse for the interested at 3 o'clock, will both 
be held in the A.O.U.W. Hall, Fresno St., between I and J. 
The public address at 8 p.m. will be given in Armory Hall, 
J and Fresno Sts. 

OAKLAND, CAL., DECEMBER 12 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30. 
Discourse for the interested at 3 o'clock, Hamilton Auditorium, 
Jefferson and 13th Sts. 



R4898 : page 418 



FREE LITERATURE IN TWENTY-THREE LANGUAGES 

We can supply literature on Present Truth in any of the 
following languages: English, German, French, Swedish, 
Danish, Norwegian, Finnish, Welsh, Polish, Hungarian, Hollandish, 
Spanish, Portuguese (soon), Italian, Greek, Russian, 
Armenian (soon), Arabic, Tamil, Malayalam, Zulu (soon), 
Esperanto and Maori. 

We do not always have all of these in stock at Brooklyn, 
but usually have the main supply nearest the point of demand. 
However, communicate with us if you are in the vicinity of any 
of the above mentioned peoples and we shall be pleased to 
co-operate with you by supplying the desired literature as 
quickly as possible. 



page 418 

RE CLIPPINGS 

We wish to express thanks for interesting clippings, and 
also for clippings containing attacks upon us. We request 
that you give name and date of paper each time, or, preferably, 
the whole page. If the whole paper be sent, please 
mark the article plainly and address W.T.B. & T. Society, 
File H, 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 

[CONTINUED TO PAGE 431.] 

page 43 1 

ITEMS WE HAVE IN STOCK 

(Continued from page 418.) 

COLPORTEUR ORDERS ALL FILLED 

Although for a time the printers were unable to fill all 
shipping orders for STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES they now have 
an abundant stock of the new English edition, and all orders 
to date have been filled. If, therefore, your books have not 
been received advise us at once, giving full particulars. Also 
send in your orders as far in advance as possible, as books 
sent by freight frequently require two weeks to reach destination 
after being shipped. 

CROSS AND CROWN PINS 

No. 1. Cross and Crown design in ten-karat gold, five-eighths 
inch in diameter. The crown is burnished. The surrounding 
wreath is rustic in design— brilliant gold. The cross 
is of dark red enamel, with only the outlines showing gold. 
The pin has a patent fastening. Price, $1.15. 

No. 2. This is exactly the same as No. 1, except that instead 



of the pin it has a screw clamp at the back, making it 
more desirable for men's wear. Price, $1.15. 

No. 3. Exactly the same as No. 2, except that it is three-eighths 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

No. 4. Exactly the same as No. 1, except that it is three-eighths 
inch in diameter. Price, $ 1 . 

These prices all include postage and are very much less 
than jewelers would charge, as we have them manufactured 
in large quantities for your convenience. 

POST-CARDS 

An excellent assortment of Scripture post-cards of our own 
selection, both Birthday and for general use. Price, 20c. per 
doz., $1.50 per 100 assorted, postpaid (40 birthday and 60 
general). 

SPECIALLY ASSORTED PACKETS OF WALL MOTTOES 
AND SCRIPTURE TEXTS 

For several years we have been supplying our readers with 
handsome Texts and Motto Cards for the walls of their homes. 
Their influence is excellent, for they continually and cheerfully 
catch the eye and remind the heart of our great favors 
present and to come, based upon the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of our Father's Word. We commend these 
as helps in the "narrow way"— helps in character building. 

Many of the mottoes also make splendid gifts for friends 
on all occasions. 

For your convenience and ours we put these up in packets 
of choice assortments, as below, $1 each, postpaid. So doing, 
we are enabled to give you twice as many mottoes for your 
money as you could purchase elsewhere. Besides, we select 
the styles and mottoes with great care. The following packets 
represent our assortment. Order by number:— 

No. Ma— Contains small mottoes of 22 assorted texts and 
styles; all beautiful. 

No. Mb— Contains medium and small mottoes, 1 1 assorted; 
all choice. 

No. Mc— Contains 7 medium mottoes; all handsome. 

No. Md— Contains 5 medium and large mottoes; all 
elegant. 

No. Me— Contains 4 large mottoes only; all desirable. 

No. Mal/2— Is a 50c. packet of small mottoes. 

Those who desire $3 or $5 worth can thus select several 
packages. If no designation is made we send the Ma assortment. 

These we import from London subject to custom duty, 
hence our London Office can do still better for our British 
friends. 



R4915 : page 419 

"IS MANKIND ADVANCING?" 



[FROM CURRENT LITERATURE.] 

"IN A BOOK of the above title Mrs. John 

Martin administers a stiff rebuke to the 

pride and self-confidence of our age. She 

feels, and she argues with great skill, that 

humanity is not advancing in any real 

sense. 'The world today,' she remarks, 

'is convinced that it is making rapid progress. 

In western Europe and in America 

increased wealth production, democratic institutions, 

free education, free thought, the 

opening of opportunities in new countries, the acceleration 

of travel and communication, have combined to produce 

upon our generation an exhilarating sense of expansion, 

of liberation, of growing power.' But this impression, it 

seems, is an illusion. We have not really progressed. 

Mrs. Martin likens modern civilization to a runaway locomotive 

going at tremendous speed on a wrong track. 

'We have lost our way,' she says; and adds: 'Man may 

have risen from the ape; also the ape may be a degenerate 

man. Men are headed ape-ward quite as frequently as 

angel-ward. Time runs an elevator which goes both 

ways, down as well as up.' 

'"What is progress?' asks Mrs. Martin at the outset 
of her argument. She replies: The word progress 
should, I believe, be exclusively used to express a rise 
in human capacity, the development of higher orders of 
human beings. Thus restricted, it remains, as it should, 
a strictly qualitative, never a quantitative, term. Improved 
conditions conduce to progress, and are necessary 
to progress, but may exist without producing progress. 
Progress is something more than improvement. Progress 
means movement forward.' This definition leads on to a 
wonderful picture: 

'"Looking back along the line of history, we can see 
that we (mankind) have been traveling a long, long 
road whose winding way, rising and falling century after 
century, we can trace back for a few thousand years 
until it enters a trackless desert and fades utterly from 
our view in the mists of antiquity. Immediately behind 
the spot where we now stand there seems to lie a downward 
slope; that is to say, we seem to have been ascending 
since the eighteenth, the seventeenth, yes, part of the 
sixteenth centuries. But the Elizabethan era and the 
period of the Renaissance in Italy do not lie below us. 
Life was very full and splendid then; man had climbed 
to a higher point of outlook than that upon which we 
now act out our little day. Behind those centuries the 
way becomes obscure; it seems to pass through deep and 

R4916 : page 419 

silent forests, over dim, somnolent plains, in shadowy 
twilights and through deserted wastes, until it falls away 
into a wide, cold swamp, noisome, dark, terrible, abounding 



in reptiles and the horrid monsters of sick dreams. 

'"Beyond this death-bound stillness of the Dark Ages, 
the road ascends again into the upper air. Birds are 
singing, the sunlight touches the grain fields; the bustle 
of human life appears, troops of soldiery in glittering 
armor, citizens in gorgeous raiment, all the pomp and 
pageantry of the triumphant Roman Empire. Behind 
Rome the road drops away again suddenly, a deep, sharp 
drop into a valley, beyond which it begins to rise once 
more and, becoming steeper and steeper, it lifts our gaze 
to the very mountain top, where among the clouds against 
the deep blue sky, swept by fresh breezes, enthroned amid 
snow-white temples, gleaming in the golden sunshine, 
Greek civilization sits upon the pinnacle of human greatness.' 

"Having formulated her definition of progress and 
expressed her conception of the human zenith, Mrs. 
Martin goes on to ask by what method we may set about 
to measure the degree of progress existing in any age. 
She answers this question in the spirit of Huxley's statement: 
'The advance of mankind has everywhere depended 
upon the production of men of genius.' It is by the 
number and caliber of its men of genius, she holds, that 
any epoch must be tested. 

"In the realm of practical science and pure thought, 
Aristotle and Plato are probably the two greatest intellects 
the world has ever known. Aristotle,' says Hegel, 'was 
a genius beside whom no age has an equal to place'; while 
Emerson exclaims: 'Compare Plato with other men. 
How many ages have gone by and he remains unapproached!' 
'Have we, in modern times,' Mrs. Martin 
inquires, 'any thinkers who can compare with these ancient 
Greeks? Kant may be cited, and Darwin and Herbert 
Spencer; but are they as great as Plato and Aristotle? 
Very few would seriously maintain that Plato 
and Aristotle have ever been equaled, much less surpassed. 

'"Greek sculpture, by almost universal consent, is 
unexcelled. The work of Phidias has no rival unless it 
be the work of Michael Angelo. Greek poetic genius finds 
transcendent expression in Homer, one of the four or 
five greatest figures in the world's literature, and the 
dramas of Sophocles, Euripides and Aeschylus take their 
place with the dramas of Shakespeare. Dante, of the 
thirteenth century, and Goethe, of the eighteenth century, 
have no peers today. The great story-tellers,' Mrs. 
Martin reminds us, 'appeared, as was fitting, in the childhood 

R4916 : page 420 

of the race. The writers of the Old Testament 
were delightful raconteurs. Ruth is the most lovely of 
idyls, the stories of Adam and Eve, Joseph and his 
brethren, Moses and Pharaoh's daughter, Samson and 
Delilah, are unsurpassable as tales, while the story of the 
Exodus and the adventures of the children of Israel in 
the wilderness are told with unending charm and epic 
fire. As for animal stories, fables, etc., Aesop, writing 



seven centuries before Christ, has never been surpassed 
for point and brevity as well as for practical common 
sense. Boccaccio (1313) and Cervantes (1547) can 
hardly be said to have been outdone by any of the countless 
numbers of story-tellers who in our day are pouring 
out such a flood of fiction that one is sometimes almost 
led to believe that the world is entering upon its second 
childhood.' 

"Coming next to men of action and statesmen, Mrs. 
Martin names four as being of the first rank, namely, 
Alexander, Caesar and Pericles, who lived before Christ, 
and Napoleon, who belongs to the nineteenth century. 
'We may say,' she continues, 'that there seem to have 
been in history about thirty-five men of absolutely first 
rank. These are Raphael, Michael Angelo, Phidias, 
Ictinus, Homer, Shakespeare, Demosthenes, Goethe, Aeschylus, 
Beethoven, Aristotle, Newton, Euclid, Plato, 
Dante, Kant, Saint Paul, Pericles, Darwin, Moses, Cicero, 
Alexander, Caesar, Napoleon, Jesus, Buddha, Confucius, 
Mahomet, Socrates, Columbus, Thucydides, Hipparchus, 
Hippocrates, Hannibal, Washington.' If Cicero, Thucydides, 
Hipparchus, Hippocrates, Hannibal, Columbus, 
Washington and Darwin be omitted from this list, as 
possibly not measuring up to the first rank, we have 
twenty-seven names. 'Of these twenty-seven men of 
transcendent genius,' Mrs. Martin comments, 'eleven were 
produced by one small district. Ten of them were brought 
forth by one small city about the size of Fall River, Mass., 
or Paterson, N.J. The little city of Athens produced in 
a few years more men of consummate genius than did 
all the millions of inhabitants of China, Arabia, India, 
Palestine, Rome, Carthage and all of Europe breeding for 
two thousand years!' 

"But surely, it will be objected, genius is not the only 
standard of progress. Mankind, though it may not produce 
today the equals of the intellectual prodigies of the 
past, is nevertheless advancing in industrial and scientific 
efficiency, in moral insight, in democratic culture. Mrs. 
Martin meets this objection in a series of chapters. 

"The fact that we have more things than we ever had 
before and can go to more places and 'get there' more 
rapidly, is not necessarily, she contends, a sign of progress. 
I detest,' she quotes Herbert Spencer as saying, 
'that conception of social progress which presents as its 
aim increase of population, growth of wealth, spread of 
commerce. In this ideal of human existence there is 
contemplated quantity only, and not quality. Instead of 
an immense amount of life of low type, I would far 
sooner see half the amount of life of a high type. A 
prosperity which is exhibited in board of trade tables, 
year by year increasing their totals, is, to a large extent, 
not a prosperity at all, but an adversity.' In spite of all 
our wealth, the blight of poverty, with its accompanying 
sickness, suffering, crime, insanity and vice, continues. 
The social disease manifested in 'atrophy and hypertrophy,' 
in 'extremities bleeding at the bottom, bloating at 



the top, decay in both,' is a portent of the modern world. 
It was not known in Athens. Improvements in machinery,' 
Mrs. Martin continues, 'have rendered the lot of the 
workers in some respects harder than before. Machinery,' 
she says, 'is the great disappointment of the modern 
world. We have quadruple-expansion engines which have 
a thirty-seven thousand horse-power, but they have not 
rendered less arduous the labor of coal miners. The 
sewing-machine was hailed as the deliverer of the sewing 
woman, but since its invention the sweating system has 
spread. The digging of the Suez canal brought India 
four thousand miles nearer to Europe, but India remains 
as miserable and poverty-stricken as before. Ocean 
freight rates on wheat from England to the United States 
have dropped to one-third in thirty-five years, but twelve 
millions of people, it is reported, remain in that country 
on the verge of starvation.' The argument proceeds: 

'"Many modern inventions, instead of being sources 
of pride, should be occasions to us of the deepest humiliation, 
and others are only suggestive of the varied misery 
whose existence demanded their invention. Thus ingenious 
firearms witness to burglary and need of self-defense 
and the sleepless hatred between men; varieties 
of medicine indicate new varieties of disease, while surgery 
points to the failure of the whole science of medicine, 
even as charities reveal the depth of national poverty 
and the breakdown of the national economies; the police 
force marks the extent of national crime; insane asylums, 
prisons, tell their own story, as do the mountains of false 
hair, legs, arms, and the annual consumption in the United 
States alone of twenty millions of false teeth!' 

"The real point at issue, as Mrs. Martin sees it, is 
summed up in the question: Is it possible to point to the 
modern world and say, 'Here are men of a more developed 
type, more intelligent, healthier, more moral, and 
made so by our vast improvements in the material conditions 
of life?' She herself does not see how this question 
can be answered in the affirmative. In her eyes, modern 
civilization is a Frankenstein that already threatens to 
destroy its makers. Very much of our modern activity 
appeals to her as 'sound and fury signifying nothing.' 
As she puts it: 

"The enormous number of inventions which are daily 
rendering the mechanism of our existence more complex 
may be roughly divided into four classes, those whose 
purpose is: 

'"1. To make more things. 

'"2. To get there more quickly, or to communicate 
more quickly. 

'"3. To kill men faster. 

'"4. To alleviate suffering. 

'"These, then, would appear to be the leading ideals 
of our age. To have more things; to get there quickly; 
to kill men rapidly; and to save pain. 

'"There is one element common to the first three 
classes of invention— they are designed to save time. 



The mammoth reaper which mows a county in a few 
days, the express train with its sixty miles an hour, the 
marine cable bringing an answer from the antipodes in a 
few minutes, the machine guns which cut down an army 
like a field of timothy, or the torpedo-boats which sink a 
navy— down to the latest egg-beater and corkscrew, are 
all designed to save time. We may almost say that the 
whole aim of man's ingenuity, embodied in thousands 
upon thousands of contrivances, has been directed toward 
the one sole object of saving time. His railroads, trolleys, 
canals, tunnels, cables, elevators, bicycles, automobiles, 
etc., are all for the purpose of enabling him to save time 
in getting there. His telegraphs, telephones, etc., are devised 
in order to save time in sending messages. His 
myriad machines are invented for the purpose of saving 
time in producing more things. His Gatling guns, torpedoes, 
automatic firing rifles, etc., are designed to save 
time in killing men.... 

R4917 : page 421 

'"And what is the result? 
'"The result is that men have less time now than they 
have ever had since the world began.' 

"Mrs. Martin is equally emphatic in denying any substantial 
moral progress. In the matter of ethical theory, 
she agrees with Buckle in feeling that advance has not 
only not taken place, but is not possible. To do good to 
others; to sacrifice for their benefit your own wishes; to 
love your neighbor as yourself; to forgive your enemies; 
to restrain your passions; to honor your parents; to 
respect those who are set over you— these and a few 
others, according to Buckle, are the sole essentials of 
morals, and they have been known for thousands of 
years. In the matter of moral practice, can it be contended 
that our present age is supreme? On the contrary, 
Mrs. Martin avers, we are not as honest, as temperate, 
as just, as brave, or as public-spirited as the ancient 
Greeks. 

"When she comes to the question of the diffusion of 
intelligence, she is still skeptical. Even granting that we 
have today a far larger number of good, average intelligences 
than in the past, can this fact be said to constitute 
progress in any real sense? Mrs. Martin replies: 

'"Progress concerns itself only with quality; it means 
the increased power of human faculty, not the mere numerical 
increase of human beings. 

"This is perfectly clear if one reflects a moment upon 
what took place in the past, during the march from the 
anthropoid age up to, say, Shakespeare. Suppose at any 
step of this ascent it had been asserted that to multiply the 
species in its then stage would be progress; suppose, for 
instance, that a community of apes, being fairly well fed 
and merrily engaged in pelting one another with cocoanuts 
in the forest primeval, should have decided that the 
multiplication of apes in this (to them) satisfactory condition 



should be esteemed progress. Obviously they would 
have been mistaken. Progress meant moving toward 
Shakespeare, and progress could not take place until the 
anthropoid ape passed up into a higher species. This is 
as true of our stage as it has been of any previous one.' 

"Genuine progress, in Mrs. Martin's sense of the 
word, takes place when certain individuals emerge from 
the common level and establish a higher standard of 
human capacity and excellence. The problem of progress 
is therefore synonymous with the problem of producing 
great men. She says: 

"'The ideal aim of society is the production of men of 
genius, because it is through the activities of these that 
mankind acquires the means of its highest development 
and the satisfaction of its deepest needs. A society adopting 
such an end as its goal would find all grades of labor 
falling each into its just and honorable place, being each 
contributive, inasmuch as in it lay, to the attainment of 
the consciously realized common end. 

'"The ideal of democracy is a horizontal society, but 
every day is demonstrating more and more clearly that 
this ideal is unattainable because in the nature of things 
impossible. Society is not horizontal; it is perpendicular. 
It is not flat like the sea; it grows upward like a tree toward 
the light. The Greek method of trying to discover 
justice and apply it to society, on the hypothesis that 
society was perpendicular (that is, naturally disposed in 
sections one above the other like a tree), might have led 
to success. It is becoming increasingly evident that our 
efforts to achieve justice, based upon the false hypothesis 
that society is level like the sea, can never solve our 
problems. Justice is within the bounds of attainment to 
a society which realizes that it has at the heart of its 
life a common aim— to produce the fruit of the tree— and 
where each individual aims at fulfilling the function to 
which it is best adapted toward that common end.' 

"This train of argument inevitably culminates in a 
plea for eugenics; but eugenics in its present stage holds 
out what Mrs. Martin can regard only as a somewhat 
desolating prospect. She declares in concluding: 

'"No more alluring prospect could be held up to the 
sorrowing and impatient lover of his kind than that propounded 
by the eugenicist. Think of breeding poets to 
order like Saint Andreasberg canaries, or Abraham Lincolns 
as required! Think of winning blue ribbons with 
lovely young girls and athletic boys bred and groomed 
for the show! Think of securing Rockefellers or Carnegies 
in one's family at will, and thus successfully replenish 
the family coffers! 

'"Alas for the vanity of these hopes! Eugenics in its 
present amorphous condition, while it presents no end 
which seems to be unattainable, presents no beginning 
which seems to be feasible. Many decades must be passed 
in the bare effort to accustom men to the idea. Long, 
long years the deliberate improvement of human breeds 
must be discussed and dreamed of before it can be done. 



For this, which is the most stupendous task man has ever 
attempted, will need his all of intelligence, will, endurance, 
and foresight.'"— Current Literature. 



R4917 : page 421 

A PRACTICAL SELF-EXAMINATION ON LOVE 

"Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the 
faith; prove your own selves."— 2 Cor. 13:5. 

IT SEEMS impossible to describe Love, this 

wonderful quality without which nothing 

is acceptable in the sight of God! The 

Apostle does not attempt to define Love, 

but contents himself with giving us some 

of its manifestations. Those who possess 

a love with such characteristics are able 

to appreciate it, but not able otherwise to 

explain it. The fact is that Love, like life 

and light, is difficult to define; and our 

best endeavors to comprehend it are along the lines of 

its effects. It is of God; it is god-likeness in the heart, 

in the tongue, in the hands, in the thoughts— supervising 

all the human attributes and seeking to control them. 

Where Love is lacking, the results are more or less evil; 

where Love is present, the results differ according to 

the degree of Love, and are proportionately good. 

In the Christian an outward manifestation of amiability, 
meekness, gentleness, patience, etc., is not sufficient, 
either in God's sight or in his own. These graces 
must be produced by the spirit of Love, filling and 
expanding within his own heart. Many of the graces of 
the Spirit are recognized by the unregenerate and are 
imitated as marks of good breeding, and in many cases 
are successfully worn as a cloak or mask, covering 
hearts and sentiments wholly antagonistic to the holy 
spirit of Love. 

The measure of our appreciation of Divine Love will 
be the measure of our zeal in conforming our characters 
to the Divine pattern. A naturally rough, uncouth, depraved 
disposition may require a long time, after the 
grace of Divine Love enters the heart, before that grace 
is manifest in all the thoughts and words and acts of 
the outward man. Others, on the contrary, of more 

R4917 : page 422 

gentle birth and cultured training, may, without the 

grace of God within, have many of the outward refinements. 

None but Him who reads the heart is competent, 

therefore, to judge as to who have and who have 

not received this grace, and of the degree of its development 

in their hearts; but each one may judge for himself, 



and each one begotten of this Holy Spirit, Love, 
should seek to let its light so shine out, through all the 
avenues of communication with his fellow-creatures, as 
to glorify his Father in Heaven and "show forth the 
praises of Him who hath called us out of darkness into 
His marvelous light."— I Pet. 2:9. 

Amongst the "gifts" of early Apostolic times, prophecy, 
or oratory, was one highly commended. Knowledge of 
the mysteries of God was also highly commended, and 
large faith was reckoned as being amongst the chief of 
Christian requirements; yet the Apostle declares that if 
he possessed all of these in their fullest measure, and 
Love were absent, he would be nothing— a mere cipher- 
not a member of the New Creation at all, since Love 
is the very spirit of the begetting to the new nature. 

What a wonderful test this is! The Apostle Paul 
counsels, "Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the 
faith; prove your own selves." Let us each apply the 
test to himself: Whether I am something or nothing 
in God's estimation is to be measured by my love for 
Him, for His brethren, for His cause, for the world in 
general, and even for my enemies, rather than by my 
knowledge, or fame, or oratory! 

Yet we are not to understand that one could have a 
knowledge of the deep mysteries of God without having 
been begotten by the Holy Spirit of Love; for the deep 
things of God knoweth no man, but by the Spirit of God; 
but one might lose the spirit before losing the knowledge 
it brought him. In the measure of character, therefore, 
we are to put Love first, and to consider it the chief test 
of our nearness to and acceptance with the Lord. 

LOVE IS THE SECRET OF TRUE POLITENESS 

Having given us such a conception of the importance 
of Love, the Apostle proceeds to describe what it is and 
what it is not— how it operates and how it does not 
operate, or conduct itself. Let us each make a practical 
application of this matter to himself and inquire within: 

Have I such a love, especially for the household of 
faith, as leads me to suffer considerable and for a long 

R4918 : page 422 

time, and yet to be kind? Am I patient with the weaknesses 
and imperfections of those who give any evidence 
of good intentions? Am I patient even with those who 
are out of the way, realizing that the great Adversary 
blinds the minds of the masses and remembering that 
this manifestation of Love was very prominent in our 
Lord Jesus, who was patient with His opponents? 

Am I kind in my methods, seeking to guard my manner 
and my tones, knowing that they have much to do 
with every affair of life? Have I this mark of Love 
pervading my actions and words and thoughts? Do I 
think of and am I considerate of others? Do I feel and 



manifest kindness toward them in word, in look, in act? 
A Christian, above all others, should be kind, courteous, 
gentle in the home, in his place of business, in the 
Church— everywhere. In proportion as perfect Love is 
attained the constant effort of the heart will be to have 
every word and act, like the thought which prompts 
them, full of patience and kindness. With the child of 
God these qualities are not to be mere outward adornments, 
they cannot be; on the contrary, they are fruits 
of the Spirit— growths from or results of having come 
into fellowship with God, having learned of Him, received 
of His Spirit of holiness, of Love. 

Have I the Love that "envieth not," the Love that is 
generous, so that I can see others prosper and rejoice in 
their prosperity, even if, for a time, my own affairs be 
not so prosperous? This is true generosity, the very 
reverse of jealousy and envy, which spring from a perverted 
nature. The root of envy is selfishness; envy 
will not grow upon the root of Love. Love rejoices with 
them that rejoice, in the prosperity of every good word 
and work, and in the advancement in Christian grace 
and in the Divine service of all who are actuated by the 
Divine Spirit. 

Have I the Love that is humble, that "vaunteth not 
itself, is not puffed up"? the love that tends to modesty, 
that is not boastful, not lifted up? Have I the Love 
that would prompt to good deeds, not to be seen of men, 
but that would do the same if no one saw or knew but 
God only? that boasts neither of its knowledge nor of 
its graces, but in humility acknowledges that every good 
and perfect gift comes from the Father? And do I 
make return to Him in Love and service for every 
mercy? Boasting over self-esteem has led many a man 
not only into folly, but sometimes into gross sins in his 
endeavor to make good his boasts. The Spirit of the 
Lord is the spirit of a sound mind, which not only seeks 
generously to esteem others, but also soberly to estimate 
one's self, and not to think too highly of his character 
and attainments. 

Have I the Love which is courteous, "doth not behave 
itself unseemly"? Pride is the root out of which grows 
much of the unseemly conduct, impoliteness, so common 
to those who think themselves somebody, either intellectually 
or financially. Politeness has been defined as Love 
in trifles; courtesy as Love in little things. The secret 
of politeness is either surface polishing or love in the 
heart. As Christians we are to have the heart-love 
which will prompt us to acts of kindness and courtesy, 
not only in the household of faith, but in our homes and 
in our dealings with the world. 

Have I the Love which is unselfish, which "seeketh 
not her own" interests exclusively, which might even be 
willing to let some of her own rights be sacrificed in 
the interests of others? or have I, on the contrary, the 
selfishness which not only demands my own rights on 
every occasion, but which demands those rights regardless 



of the conveniences, comfort and rights of others? 
To have Love in this particular means that we will be 
on guard against taking any unjust advantage of others, 
and will prefer rather to suffer a wrong than to do a 
wrong; to suffer an injustice than to do an injustice. 

LOVE BEGINS AT HOME 

Nothing in this signifies that one should neglect the 
caring for and providing in every way for those dependent 
upon him by the ties of nature, in order that he 
may do good to others. In every sense, "Love begins at 
home." The proper thought, as we gather it, is that 
men and women, possessed of the spirit of perfect Love, 
would not think exclusively of their own interests in any 
of the affairs of life. Put into exercise, this element of 
Love would have a great influence upon all the affairs 
of life, inside as well as outside the home and family. 

Have I the Love which is good tempered, "not easily 
provoked" to anger— Love that enables me to see both 
sides of a question, that gives me the spirit of a sound 
mind, which enables me to perceive that exasperation 
and violent anger are not only unbecoming but, worse 
than that, injurious to those toward whom they may be 
directed, and also injurious in their effect upon my own 
heart and body? 

There may be times when Love will need to be firm, 

R4918 : page 423 

almost to sternness and inflexibility, where principles 
are involved, where valuable lessons are to be inculcated; 
and this might come under the head of anger, using that 
word in a proper sense, in regard to a righteous indignation, 
exercised for a loving purpose, for doing good; but 
it should be exercised then only for a time. If justly 
angry we should see to it that we sin not either with our 
lips, or in our hearts, in which, at no time, may we entertain 
any but loving and generous sentiments toward 
those who are our enemies, or toward those of our 
friends whom we would assist or instruct or correct. 

To be easily provoked is to have a bad temper, fretfulness, 
bad humor, touchiness, quickness to take offense. 
This is wholly contrary to the spirit of Love; and whoever 
is on the Lord's side and seeking to be pleasing to 
Him and to attain to an overcomer's position should 
jealously guard himself against this general besetment 
of our day. To whatever extent this disposition is fostered, 
or willingly harbored, or not fought against, it 
becomes an evidence of a deficiency and imperfection 
of our development in the Holy Spirit of our Father, 
and of the deficiency of our likeness to our Lord Jesus, 
our Pattern. 

Very few of the evidences of a wrong spirit receive 
from one's self as much kindness and as many excuses 
for their continuance as this one. But however much 



natural depravity and heredity and nervous disorders 
may tend toward this spirit of fretfulness, taciturnity and 
touchiness, every heart filled with the Lord's Spirit must 
oppose this disposition to evil in his flesh, and must wage 
a good warfare against it. 

It will not do to say, "It is my way," for all the "ways" 
of the fallen nature are bad; and it is the business of the 
New Creature to overcome the old nature in this as 
well as other works of the flesh and the Devil. In few 
ways can we show to our friends and households more 
than in this the power of the grace of Love. This grace, 
as it grows, should make every child of God sweet-tempered. 
In no way can we better show forth the 
praises of Him who hath called us out of darkness into 
His marvelous light than by the exhibition of the spirit 
of Love in the daily affairs of life. 

LOVE THINKS NO EVIL 

Have I the spirit of Love which "thinketh no evil," 
which is guileless, not suspicious of evil or looking for 
faults in others, not attributing to them evil motives? 
Have I the Love which seeks always to interpret the 
conduct of others charitably, to make all possible allowance 
for errors in judgment rather than to impugn the 
motives of the heart? Perfect Love is good intentioned 
itself; it prefers and, so far as possible, endeavors to 
view the words and conduct of others from the same 
standpoint. It does not treasure up animosities and 
suspicions, nor manufacture a chain of circumstantial 
proofs of evil intentions out of trivial affairs. "Faults 
are thick where Love is thin" is a very wise proverb. 

But where Love passes over offenses and takes no 
account of them, holding no grudges, this does not mean 
that Love would treat evil-doers in precisely the same 
manner that it would treat its friends. It might be 
proper or even necessary to take some notice of the 
offenses to the extent of not manifesting the same cordiality 
as before, but no hatred, malice or strife should 
be manifested— nothing but kindness and gentleness, 
leaving the door of opportunity open for a full reconciliation 
as soon as possible, doing all that could be done 
to promote a reconciliation and evincing a willingness to 
forgive and forget the wrong. 

"LOVE REJOICETH NOT IN INIQUITY" 

Have I the Love that is sincere, that "rejoiceth not 
in iniquity [in-equity], but rejoiceth in the Truth"? Are 
the principles of right and wrong so firmly fixed in my 
mind, and am I so thoroughly in accord with right, and 
so out of harmony with the wrong, that I am grieved 
with evils wherever encountered and sympathize with 
all who fall into evil or who are beset with temptations? 
Am I so opposed to the wrong that I would not encourage 
it even if it brought advantage to me? Am I so in 



accord with right, with Truth, that I could not avoid 
rejoicing in the Truth and in its prosperity, even to the 
upsetting of some of my preconceived opinions, or to 
the disadvantage of some of my earthly interests? 

Every one who is seeking to develop in his heart the 
Holy Spirit, perfect Love, should guard carefully this 
point of sincerity of motive as well as uprightness of 
conduct. The least suggestion of rejoicing at the fall 
of any person or thing that in any degree represents 
righteousness or goodness is to be deplored and overcome. 
Perfect "Love rejoiceth not in iniquity" under 
any circumstances or conditions and would have no sympathy 
but only sorrow in the fall of another, even if it 
should mean his own advancement. 

The Love of God, which the Apostle here describes 
as the spirit of the Lord's people, is a love which is far 
above all selfishness and is based upon fixed principles 
which should, day by day, be more distinctly discerned 
and always firmly adhered to at any cost. However 
profitable error might be, Love could take no part in it 

R4919 : page 423 

and could not desire the reward of evil. But it does take 
pleasure in the Truth— truth upon every subject, and 
especially in the Truth of Divine revelation, however 
unpopular the Truth may be; however much persecution 
its advocacy may involve; however much it may cost 
the loss of the friendship of this world and of those who 
are blinded by the god of this world. The spirit of Love 
has such an affinity for the Truth that it rejoices to 
share loss, persecution, distress or whatever may come 
against the Truth or its servants. In the Lord's estimate 
it is all the same whether we are ashamed of Him 
or ashamed of His Word; and of all such He declares 
that He will be ashamed when He comes to be glorified 
in His saints. 

Have I the Love that "beareth all things"? that is 
impregnable against the assaults of evil? that resists 
evil, impurity, sin and everything that is contrary to 
Love? that is both able and willing to endure, for the 
cause of God, reproaches, reproofs, insults, losses, misrepresentations 
and even death? "This is the victory 
that overcometh the world, even your faith"— the very 
life and center of which faith is the Holy Spirit of Love 
for the Lord and for those that are His and, sympathetically, 
for the world. Perfect Love can bear up 
under all circumstances and, by God's grace, bring us 
off conquerors and "more than conquerors through Him 
that loved us."-I John 5:4; Rom. 8:37. 

LOVE IS NOT SUSPICIOUS 

Have I the Love that "believeth all things"? that is 
unwilling to impute evil to another unless forced so to 
do by indisputable evidences? that would rather believe 



good than evil about everybody? that would take no 
pleasure in hearing evil, but would be disposed to resent 
it? Perfect Love is not suspicious, but is, on the contrary, 
disposed to be trustful. It acts on the principle 
that it is better, if necessary, to be deceived a hundred 
times than to go through life soured by a suspicious 
mind— far better than to accuse or suspicion even one 

R4919 : page 424 

person unjustly. This is the merciful disposition, as 
applied to thoughts; and of it the Master said, "Blessed 
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." (Matt. 5:7.) 
The unmerciful, evil-thinking mind is father to 
unmerciful conduct toward others. 

Have I the Love that "hopeth all things," that perseveres 
under unfavorable conditions, and continues to hope 
for and to labor for those who need my assistance? 
Have I the Love that "endureth all things," that continues 
to hope for the best in regard to all and to strive for the 
best, and that with perseverance? Perfect Love is not 
easily discouraged. This is the secret of Love's perseverance: 
having learned of God, and having become a 
partaker of His holiness, it trusts in Him and hopes undismayed 
for the fulfilment of His gracious Covenant, 
however dark the immediate surroundings. 

This hopeful element of Love is one of the striking 
features in the perseverance of the saints, enabling them 
to endure hardness as good soldiers. Its hopeful quality 
hinders it from being easily offended, or easily stopped 
in the work of the Lord. Where others would be discouraged 
or put to flight, the spirit of Love gives endurance, 
that we may war a good warfare, and please the 
Captain of our salvation. Love's hopefulness knows no 
despair, for its anchorage enters into that which is beyond 
the veil, and is firmly fastened to the Rock of Ages. 

Let us, Beloved, with all our getting, get Love— not 
merely in word but in deed and in truth— the Love whose 
roots are in the new heart, begotten in us by our Heavenly 
Father's Love, and exemplified in the words and 
deeds of our dear Redeemer. All else sought and gained 
will be but loss and dross unless, with all, we secure LOVE! 



R4919 : page 424 

DO NOTHING WHEREBY THY BROTHER STUMBLETH 

"It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor anything 
whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made 
weak."— Rom. 14:21. 

VERY EVIDENTLY the Apostle was not in 
these words endeavoring to put any bounds 
upon the liberties of God's people. Elsewhere 



he declares that the liberty of Christ 

makes us free. But he points out that while 

we have liberty to do things not sinful and 

not injurious to ourselves, yet it is part of 

our privilege and of our contract with 

the Lord to abstain from anything which 

would be injurious to others; and that we 

should seek to regulate our lives so as to be a help to 

others and not use our liberty merely for the flesh, for 

self-gratification. We are representatives of righteousness 

and should so deal with others, "Doing good unto 

all men, especially unto those who are of the household 

offaith."-Gal. 6:10. 

In this text the Apostle is not referring to a matter 
where there might be merely a difference of opinion as 
between meat and vegetable diet. Such a question each 
should decide for himself. If one finds a flesh diet injurious 
to him, he should abstain. If, on the contrary, he 
finds that flesh diet is beneficial to him, he should use it. 
The Apostle's thought in connection with the eating of 
meat was in reference to religious convictions. In his 
time it was the custom for people to eat meat which had 
been offered to idols. No Jew would care to eat such 
meat. With a Christian it would be different. He would 
understand that it did not affect the meat to wave it 
before wooden idols, etc. Yet the Apostle goes on to 
show that to some it would seem a crime to eat meat 
that had been offered to an idol. 

The Apostle's thought is that our conscience is the 
most important thing we have to deal with and should 
always be obeyed. The brother who would violate some 
one's conscience by eating the meat would be stumbling 
and harming that person. Thus a stronger brother would 
injure a weaker brother. And this was what the Apostle 
meant. In the case of a brother who could not see as 
clearly as we, not only should we not seek to break down 
his conscience, but we should not permit even our influence 
to break it down. 

It would be very proper for us in the case of a weak 
brother to explain the matter from our standpoint. This 
would not be seeking to break down his conscience, but 
to educate it. Then, if he should eat such meat with impunity 
—without the disapprobation of his conscience— we 
have thus made him a strong brother rather than a weak 
one; and this should be to his advantage. The Apostle 
urges that we should be on the lookout for the interests 
of the brethren. 

SELF-DENIAL IN THE INTEREST OF OTHERS 

St. Paul here is evidently laying down a broad principle 
of self-denial in the interest of others— a principle 
which applies primarily to the Church, but also to the 
world. He applies this principle, not merely to religion 
and to eating meat offered to idols, but he extends the 
matter, saying, "It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to 



drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, 
or is offended, or is made weak." 

There might be some weak brother to whom wine 
might be a great temptation, a snare. The Apostle urges 
that, while there is nothing in the Scriptures to forbid 
the use of wine, and while he really recommended it to 
Timothy, whose stomach was weak, nevertheless, our 
liberties should be limited by the surroundings. We know 
that wine was used much more then than now, and is 
much more used in Europe than in this country; nevertheless, 
we know that the effect of alcohol is much more 
hurtful to the nerves of people now, because the race is 
so much weaker than in our Lord's day. 

When there was no particular danger along this line 
our Lord and the Apostles seem to have used these things 
with moderation. They also counseled moderation— 
"Whether, therefore, ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye 
do, do all to the glory of God" (I Cor. 10:31); and we 
should not use our liberty in any way that would stumble 
a brother in any sense of the word. God's people are to 
have love, to be willing to sacrifice self-gratification in 
the interest of others. 

So far as we are able to discern, intoxication is one 
of the most terrible evils scourging our race at the present 
time. Many are so weak through the fall, by heredity, 
that they are totally unable to resist the influence of 
intoxicants. Is it too much to ask of those who have 
consecrated their lives to the Lord, to righteousness and 
to the blessing of others, that they should deny themselves 
in this matter, and thus lay down some liberties 
and privileges in the interest of the brethren, and of the 
world in general? 

Similar arguments might be used respecting the use 
of tobacco, cards and the various implements which the 
Adversary uses in luring mankind into sin. The whole, 
be it noted, is the argument of Love. In proportion as 
we grow in the graces of our Lord, in His Spirit of 

R4919 : page 425 

Love, we shall be glad, not only to put away all filthiness 
of the flesh for our own sakes, thus to be more like the 
Lord, but also, at the instance of Love, we shall desire 
to put away from us everything that might have an evil 
influence upon others, whatever we might consider our 
personal liberties to be in respect to them. 

Another illustration of this principle would be in the 
observance of Sunday. The Jews thought it wrong even 
to build a fire on the Sabbath; and any one who was 
found picking up sticks on that day was stoned to death. 
We do not consider it wrong to do on Sunday whatever 
might be done on other days. But would it be wise to 

R4920 : page 425 

use this liberty? Our conduct might have an injurious 



effect upon others and so discount all that we could say 
to them along religious lines. They would say: "These 
people are not good. They do not keep God's holy day." 
They would not understand. 

It would be well for us to keep Sunday more particularly 
than any other people in the world. In fact, 
we very likely keep it better than others; and this is 
right. This error of Christendom has worked good for 
us. We can have a day full of spiritual enjoyment. If 
the world understood it as we do there would be no 
Sunday to keep. On our part we would be very glad 
if there could be three or four Sundays in a week. In 
fact, with us, every day should be Sunday. We are seeking 
to serve God, the main object of life being to preach 
the Gospel, and to enjoy the "good tidings"— the Message 
of God's Word. 

Our relationship to God is that of the New Creation, 
a heart relationship; and the blessing which the Lord 
gives us is as newly begotten children— not along lines 
of the flesh, but along the lines of the spiritual and of 
heart development, which shall ultimately be perfected in 
the resurrection. 

True, whom the Son makes free "shall be free indeed" 
(John 8:36), and we should all seek to "Stand fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free" (Gal. 5:1); 
but it is also true that we should be on guard lest we use 
our liberty in such a manner as to stumble others weaker 
than ourselves, not able to use the liberty of Christ discriminatingly, 
sometimes through lack of knowledge. 

The liberty wherewith Christ makes free may be 
viewed from two standpoints: if it gives us liberty to 
eat without restraint, in a manner that the Jews were 
not at liberty to eat, it gives us liberty also to abstain; 
and whoever has the Spirit of Christ and is seeking to 
follow in His steps has already covenanted with the Lord 
to use his liberty, not in the promotion of his fleshly 
desires, ambitions and appetites, but in self-sacrifice, following 
in the footsteps of the Master, seeking to lay 
down his life, even, on behalf of the brethren— for their 
assistance. How different are these two uses of liberty! 
Its selfish use— as well as the selfish use of knowledge- 
would mean self-gratification, regardless of the interests 
of others; the loving use would prompt to self-sacrifice in 
the interests of others. 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO OUR BROTHER 

Knowledge does not necessarily mean a great growth 
in spirituality. A mite of soap will make a very large 
air bubble; and so a comparatively little knowledge 
might puff one up greatly, without any solidity of 
character. There is, therefore, great advantage in measuring 
one's self by growth in love rather than by growth 
merely in knowledge— though, of course, to be great in 
both knowledge and love would be the ideal condition. 
The Apostle inculcates this same lesson, asserting, 



"Though I have all knowledge and have not love I am 
nothing." 

Knowledge without love would be an injury; and to 
consider it otherwise would imply that real knowledge 
has not yet been secured; but to the contrary of this the 
same Apostle says, "If any man love God, the same is 
known of Him." (I Cor. 13:2; 8:3.) We might have a 
great deal of knowledge and yet not know God and not 
be known or recognized by Him; but no one can have a 
large development of true love in his character without 
personally knowing the Lord and having obtained the 
spirit of love through fellowship with Him. Hence the 
getting of love is sure to build us up substantially (thus 
avoiding the inflation of pride) in all the various graces 
of the Spirit, including meekness, gentleness, patience, 
long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, knowledge, wisdom 
from above and the spirit of a sound mind. 

Love, after securing knowledge and liberty, will look 
about to see what effect the use of liberty might have 
upon others; and will perceive that by reason of differing 
mental conditions— perceptions, reasoning faculties, 
etc.— all could not have exactly the same standpoint of 
knowledge and appreciation of principles. Love, therefore, 
would forbid the use of knowledge and liberty if it 
perceived that their exercise might work injury to 
another. 

EVERY VIOLATION OF CONSCIENCE WRONG 

But why? What principle is involved that would 
make it incumbent upon one whose conscience is clear to 
consider the conscience of another? Why not let the 
person of a weak conscience take care of his own conscience, 
and eat or abstain from eating as he felt disposed? 
The Apostle explains that this would be right 
if it were possible; but that the person of weaker mind, 
feebler reasoning powers, is likely to be weaker in every 
respect and, hence, more susceptible to the leadings of 
others, into paths which his conscience could not approve, 
because of his weaker reasoning powers or inferior 
knowledge. 

One might, without violation of conscience, eat meat 
that had been offered to idols, or even sit at a feast in 
an idol temple, without injury to his conscience; but the 
other, feeling that such a course was wrong, might 
endeavor to follow the example of his stronger brother, 
and thus might violate his conscience, which would make 
the act a sin to him. 

Every violation of conscience, whether the thing itself 
be right or wrong, is a step in the direction of wilful sin. 
It is a downward course, leading further and further 
away from the communion and fellowship of the Lord, 
and into grosser transgressions of conscience and, hence, 
possibly leading to the Second Death. Thus the Apostle 
presents the matter: "And through thy knowledge shall 
the weak one perish— the brother for whom Christ died?" 



The question is not, Would it be a sin to eat the meat 
offered to idols? but, Would it be a sin against the spirit 
of love, the law of the New Creation, to do anything 
which could reasonably prove a cause of stumbling to 
our brother, not only to the brethren in Christ, the 
Church, but even to a fellow-creature according to the 
flesh?— for Christ died for the sins of the whole world. 

Let us take our stand with the Lord and determine 
that, in regard to using our liberties in any manner that 
might do injury to others, we will refuse so to use them; 
and will rather sacrifice them for the benefit of others, 
even as our Master, our Redeemer, gave all that He had. 
Let us adopt the words of the Apostle and determine 
once for all that anything that would injure a brother 
we will not do— any liberty of ours, however reasonable 
in itself, that would work our brother's injury, that liberty 

R4920 : page 426 

we will not exercise; we will surrender it in his 
interest; we will sacrifice it; we will to that extent lay 
down our life for him. 

"Thus sinning against the brethren, and wounding their 
conscience when it is weak, ye sin against Christ. Wherefore, 
if meat maketh my brother to stumble, I will eat no 
flesh forevermore, that I make not my brother to stumble." 
-I Cor. 8:13, R.V. 



R4920 : page 426 

LORD'S GOAT AND SCAPE-GOAT 

WE HAVE already shown in "Tabernacle 

Shadows of the Better Sacrifices" that 

Israel's "Day of Atonement" of old typified 

this Gospel Age and the blessings to follow 

—in the Millennium; that now is the 

sacrificing time— from Jesus' baptism until 

His second advent in glory, and that then 

will come the time for the general application 

of the merit of the antitypical "better 

sacrifices" to mankind under the New Covenant. 

And we have also seen that the faithful Sacrificer 

(Head and Body) will be the great antitypical Mediator 

between God and mankind in general. 

Our readers have fully in mind also that the call of 
this Age is for sacrificers only— to follow our Redeemer's 
footsteps of self-denial, even unto death. This was our 
Lord's proposal: "Whosoever shall lose his life for my 
sake, shall find it." (Matt. 10:39.) St. Paul reiterated 
and expounded this saying, "I beseech you, brethren, by 
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies living 
sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God," for "If we suffer 
with Him we shall also reign with Him."— Rom. 12:1; 



2 Tim. 2:12. 

APOSTLE SHOWS TYPE AND ANTITYPE MOST BEAUTIFULLY 

St. Paul directly associates the sufferings of the 
Church with the sufferings of the Redeemer, and both 
with the "better sacrifices" of the Day of Atonement. 
He says, pointing back to the type, "Let us go to Him 
outside the camp, bearing His reproach." (Heb. 13:11-15.) 
Here the Apostle refers to the fact that as our Lord 
Jesus fulfilled the antitype of the "bullock," we should 
fulfil the antitype of the "Lord's goat" of the Day of 
Atonement. As the "bullock" was slain, so our Lord fulfilled 
that feature by the consecration of His life to death 
at His baptism. As the "bullock's" body (except the fat 
and the blood) was then dragged outside the camp and 
burned, so our Lord suffered shame, ignominy, destruction 
of the flesh, to accomplish the antitype. 

Likewise we, who have accepted the call of this 
Age ("Gather together my saints unto Me, those who 
have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice"), should fulfil 
the antitype of the Lord's goat. As the body of that 
"Lord's goat" passed through the same experiences as 
those of the "bullock," so we should, like our Lord, first 
make a full covenant of sacrifice and then fulfil the burning 
of the flesh of the Lord's goat by suffering shame, 
ignominy and revilings, even unto death. Only those 
who thus suffer with the Redeemer for righteousness' 

R4921 : page 426 

sake will reign with Him as the Royal Priesthood of the 
Millennium. 

SCAPE-GOAT CLASS FAIL TO BEAR "HIS REPROACH" 

The "scape-goat" shows a class which, after making 
consecration and being accepted and spirit-begotten, refuse 
or neglect to "go to Him outside the camp bearing 
His reproach"— even unto death. This class does not repudiate 
the Redeemer, nor "the blood of the Covenant 
wherewith they were sanctified." As the "scape-goat" 
remained tied at the door of the Tabernacle, so these in 
antitype remain loyal, outwardly, to their consecration, 
but bound— as the Apostle declares, "who through fear 
of death were all their life time subject to bondage." 

The Lord will "deliver" these, however, but not to the 
glory, honor and immortality which He will bestow upon 
the class antityping the Lord's goat. Their deliverance 
will mean tribulations, which will test their loyalty by 
forcing them into the "wilderness" of sorrow, disappointment, 
separation. They may suffer just as much 
tribulation as the Lord's goat class as they go unto death. 
The difference is that one class endures willingly, voluntarily, 
joyfully, while the other endures under compulsion 
of circumstances; or, failing so to endure, is cut 



off in the Second Death, and is not represented in the 
experiences of either of those goats. 

Some erroneously think of the two goats as representing 
two different classes from start to finish. Not so; 
they represent the finished classes only— those who "sin 
wilfully" (Heb. 6:4-8 and 10:26,27) being entirely ignored, 
because they fail entirely and go into the Second 
Death. 

THE END OF THE RACE FULLY REVEALS OUR POSITION 

Until the finish it may not be known where any of 
those consecrated to sacrifice may terminate their race. 
"Ye are called in one hope of your calling"— the hope that 
we may be of the Lord's goat class. Some for a time 
may appear to be fulfilling the part of the Lord's goat, 
but later they may "become weary and faint in their 
minds" and seem to fulfil the experiences typified in the 
"Scape-Goat;" yet eventually they may allow pride or 
some other form of selfishness to quench the Holy Spirit 
whereby they were sealed and may be dropped entirely 
from the favor of God and treated as His enemies— 
and be destroyed in the Second Death. 

On the other hand, many are so slow of development, 
so slow to be quickened by the Lord's Spirit to sacrifice 
for the Truth or for righteousness' sake, that it may for 
years appear as though they would belong to the "scape-goat" 
class. Yet later some of these receive the 
light of Truth more clearly and by their noble self-sacrifices 
apparently show that they finish the race as members 
of the Lord's goat class. 

Nothing is determined or fixed in respect to any of 
us until our tests have all been passed. St. Paul, after 
having sacrificed much, after having experienced many 
sufferings of Christ as a tentative member of the Lord's 
goat class, and even after being honored of the Lord as 
a special mouthpiece, wrote: "I keep my body under (in 
subjection to the new will and its consecration to sacrifice), 
lest after having preached to others I myself might 
be a castaway."— I Corinthians 9:27. 

Brethren, the Lord's goat's experiences are the type of 
what the Lord would have fulfilled in us if we would attain 
the crown of glory, the honor and the immortality 
promised to the faithful— the Bride class. There will 
indeed be a secondary class of "virgins" who foolishly 
hold back from sacrificing their little all, and who consequently 
will fail to become members of the Bride of the 
Lamb. These, after demonstrating an inferior loyalty, 
will follow the Bride into scenes of glory as her honored 
servants. (Psalm 45:14.) These are represented in the 
scape-goat. 

If any reader realizes that he has not been zealously 
and voluntarily suffering with his Savior, laying down 

R4921 : page 427 



time and strength, reputation and life in His service 
he is realizing his danger of being counted in 
as one of the scape-goat class, or worse. Such 
should quickly arouse himself or herself and appeal 
in prayer to the Master for grace and faith to walk in His 
steps of voluntary sacrifice. He should also seek to "arm 
himself with the same mind" that the Lord had by studying 
afresh the "exceeding great and precious promises" 
of God's Word. He should at once "Lay aside every 
weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset (whichever 
weakness may be his special besetment) and run 
with patience the race set before him" in the gospel— 
the narrow way. He should indeed, Look unto Jesus, the 
Author of our faith, who is also to be the finisher of it. 
He should consider Him lest he be weak and faint in his 
mind and thus fail to be an overcomer.— Heb. 12:1-3. 



R4923 : page 427 

"WHAT DOES IT MEAN?" 

I PETER 4:12,19. 

"It does not matter what it means, poor heart, 

The dear Lord knows, to bear it is your part; 

Nor think some strange thing happens unto you 

Which He would not allow so if He knew. 

He does know. In His all-wise Fatherhood 

He knows it, and allows it for your good. 

He is not hard; you do not think He is 

When in the dark you find your Hand in His; 

When it was light you tried to walk alone, 

And thought the strength He gave you all your own. 

"You did not ask what that last blessing meant; 
Just smiled and took it, satisfied, content. 
You did not think it strange. You thought He knew 
And planned the sweet surprise which came to you. 
Tried one, then do you take life's sweet and good, 
Yet cannot trust that tender Fatherhood, 
But think it makes mistakes whene'er it sends 
Some hindrance which your eager haste offends? 

"Or when He lets the wicked plot you harm, 
And stir a whirlwind when you seek a calm, 
You think it strange, this trial swift and keen, 
And in your weakness ask, 'What does it mean?' 

"I think the language of God's heart would read: 

I love My child, I note his slightest need; 

I long to prosper him in all his ways, 

To give him quiet nights and peaceful days, 

But if I do, he'll lose himself from Me, 

My outstretched hand he will not wait to see; 



I'll place a hindering wall before his feet; 
There He will wait, and there we two will meet. 

"I do it not in wrath for broken laws, 

Or wilful disobedience, but because 

I want him nearer, and I cannot wait 

For him to come, for he might wander late. 

My child will wonder, will not understand, 

Still half in doubt he'll clasp My outstretched hand; 

But when at last upon My heart he leans 

He will have ceased to wonder what it means.'" 



R4921 : page 427 

NOBILITY CONQUERS MEANNESS 

--NEHEMIAH 6.--DECEMBER 10.- 

"The Lord is the strength of my life; of 
whom shall I be afraid?"— Psa. 27:1. 

AFTER many difficulties Nehemiah's work had 

almost reached success when a great wail 

of distress went out. The poor Jews had 

been giving all of their time to the repairing 

of the walls and had thus cut off their 

income from other sources. In their zeal 

they went into debt in mortgages on their 

property. When the tax collectors came 

and the interest became due they were unable 

to meet these and so, destitution staring 

them in the face, a great wail went up. Disasters 

spread rapidly and a food riot was barely averted. 

Nehemiah looked into the matter and found that the 
wealthy Jews had advanced money to their poor neighbors 
on mortgages at exorbitant interest rates, and they were 
thus profiting by the calamities of their brethren. He 
called them together and had a plain but kind talk with 
them respecting the brotherly obligations required by the 
Law— "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." He 
gave them a practical exemplification of his good exhortations. 
The wealthy Jews were abashed. They acknowledged 
the injustice of their course and rectified 
matters. Here we see the power of noble character and 
good example in its influence upon others. As custom 
and example foster unjust methods and usage makes 
right in the minds of many, so likewise examples of justice 
are powerful in opposition to wrong. Thus every 
Christian owes it to himself and to God and the principles 
of righteousness which he represents, not only to take 
the proper stand, but also to let this stand for righteousness 
be known to others as reproofs of unrighteousness. 

TREACHERY AND SLANDER IN OPPOSITION 



No sooner had the prevailing difficulties been successfully 
combated than a new foe arose. The outside enemies, 
perceiving that the wall was about finished, and that 
only the hanging of the gates remained to complete the 
defenses of Jerusalem, tried new tactics. They professed 
a desire to reconsider the whole matter— to meet with 
Nehemiah for discussions of their business and fresh examination 
of his papers of authority from the King. But 
he replied that his work was a great one, very important, 
and that he could not take time for discussion. He had 
time to discuss with his brethren; he had time to show 
them as the people of God the right and wrong of each 
important question, but he had no time to dispute about 
outside matters while his important mission was 
unfinished. 

There is a lesson in this for Christians. We should 
always have time to discuss God's Word and 
His love with the brethren. We should always 
have time to give to everyone that asks a reason 
for the hope that is in us. But surely while important 
interests of God's cause are needing our attention we 
have no time to give to discussing outside questions which 
St. Paul denominates "science falsely so called." We 
are to have the same mind on the subject as St. Paul 
expressed, saying, "I have determined to know nothing 
amongst you save Jesus Christ and Him crucified." Anything 
relating to Jesus as God's anointed Son, the Messiah, 
or anything relating to His crucifixion and the hopes 
built thereon, St. Paul was ready to discuss at any time. 
The defense of this cause and subject was his special 
business in life. Although he was well educated and well 
informed on topics of general interest, he acted as though 
he were ignorant of those things that he might give all 
his influence and time to the one paramount matter— to 
the cause for which he was an ambassador. 

Four times the outsiders sought to converse with Nehemiah; 

R4921 : page 428 

four times he declined, not only because of the 

importance of the work he was doing, but because additionally 

he perceived that they were merely urging this 

as a pretext for the conference which was to be held in 

a village twenty miles from Jerusalem on neutral ground, 

and during Nehemiah's absence they might overpower 

the garrison of Israel and destroy the work already accomplished, 

or they might do him violence at the conference, 

or both. 

EVIL SPEAKING AND SLANDER 

Finally, the enemies resorted to the usual weapons of 
slander. They did not charge directly that Nehemiah 
sought to make himself king of the Jews, with Jerusalem 
its capital, and that he was secretly employing men to 



speak favorably for him amongst the people, but in an 
open letter sent declared that these things were commonly 
reported amongst all the people— they were "common gossip;" 
and by way of giving personality and force the letter 
added, "And Gesham saith that thou and the Jews think to 

R4922 : page 428 

rebel, for which cause thou buildest the wall; and that thou 
desirest to be their king." 

This message was sent by Sanballat in a complimentary 
way as though he were a friend and hoped to save 
Nehemiah from trouble with the king, and he still urged 
him to come to the counsel which was to be held for his 
interest. Nehemiah's answer was quite to the point: 
"There are no such things done as thou sayest; thou feignest 
them out of thine own heart." The object evidently 
was to alarm the Jews and to thus discourage the completion 
of their work. 

How cruel are the multitudinous methods of slander! 
How contrary they are to everything that is right, not 
to mention the highest of all standards, Christian love! 
Nevertheless, how frequently God's people are ensnared 
by the spirit of slander. How grievous are the wrongs 
thus accomplished; how unbearable is the injustice inflicted; 
how dreadful are the responsibilities incurred! 
Assuredly those who lend their lips to slander are correspondingly 
opening their hearts to the Adversary. Not 
only is evil speaking condemned in the Scriptures but 
also by all noble men and women, even though heathen. 
Even when Nehemiah's life was threatened, his consciousness 
of loyalty to God and of Divine guidance kept 
him without fear. We close by quoting the poem, "Three 
Gates of Gold":— 

"If you are tempted to reveal 

A tale someone to you has told 
About another, let it pass, 

Before you speak, three gates of gold— 

"Three narrow gates— First, Is it true?' 

Then, Is it needful?' In your mind 
Give the truthful answer. And the next 

Is last and narrowest, Is it kind?' 

"And if, to reach your lips at last 

It passes through these gateways three, 
Then you may tell the tale, nor fear 

What the result of speech may be." 



R4922 : page 428 

EZRA'S BIBLE CLASS 



--NEHEMIAH 8. --DECEMBER 17TH.- 

"The law of the Lord is perfect, 
converting the soul."— Psa. 19:7. 

EZRA apparently returned to Babylon, there 

to prosecute his study of the Law and his 

collating thereof. We next hear of him 

thirteen years after, again a prominent figure 

at Jerusalem. Nehemiah's work on 

the city wall and its gates was completed 

a week before the Jewish new year. That 

week was used for rest and refreshment, 

and on that day (about October 1st) a 

general convocation or public gathering 

took place in an open square just behind the temple. 

There a platform or pulpit was erected for Ezra who was 

the scribe or learned man of the occasion, who read to 

the people from morning until noon out of the Book of 

the law. It was read in sections; The priests and Levites 

commingled themselves with the people and explained to 

them the meaning of the various sections. The people, 

out of respect while the law was being read, stood, and 

then sat on the ground while it was being discussed. 

It was an immense Bible class and aroused deep interest. 
As the people heard the words of the Divine Law, 
and realized that they had failed to keep that Law— even 
to the extent of their ability— they perceived the reason 
why the Lord had allowed various chastisements, captivities, 
etc., to come upon them. They perceived that such 
was His covenant with them; that obedience on their part 
was to be rewarded with blessings and prosperity, and 
disobedience with punishment, captivity, etc. The realization 
of sin brought sorrow and tears— the people wept 
sore. 

Then Nehemiah, Ezra and others explained to the 
people, directly and through the Levites, that this was 
not a time for tears, but, on the contrary, a time for rejoicing. 
They were not only to remember the severity of 
God in punishing the wrongdoings of their fathers, but 
they were to remember also His mercies now returning to 
them, and especially to appreciate the fact that He had 
again sent to them the Law, and thus indicated His willingness 
to receive them back again to His favor. They 
were reminded that the very Law which foretold the punishments 
declared also God's mercy, and that when they 

R4923 : page 428 

would repent He would forgive and restore them to His 
favor. Thus their tears were turned to smiles, their 
mourning to rejoicing. 

Nehemiah's message was: "Go your way; eat the fat 
and drink the sweet, and send portions unto those for 
whom nothing is prepared; for this day is holy unto our 
Lord; neither be ye grieved, for the Lord is your 



Strength." 

THEY READ THE LAW DISTINCTLY 

The declaration is that they "caused the people to understand 
the Law." There is evidently great need of just 
such instruction today. Nominal Spiritual Israel is in a 
dilapidated condition because of the lack in understanding 
God's Word. We seem to be in the time referred to by 
the Prophet, saying, "There shall be a famine in the land," 
saith the Lord, "not a famine for bread, neither a famine 
for water, but a famine for the hearing of the Word of 
the Lord."— Amos 8:11. 

Many imagine that they are familiar with the teachings 
of the Bible, when in reality they are familiar with 
one or another of the creeds of the darker past, all of 
which contain some truth with considerable error, we 
must all admit. Our great mistake has been in assuming 
that our confessions of faith and all of our creeds strongly 
and fully represent the Bible's teachings. This mistake 
has already been costly. Thousands of the most generous 
minds have been turned away from the Bible by the mistaken 
supposition that the creeds properly represent its 
teachings. Assured that they could no longer endorse 

R4923 : page 429 

any Christian creed as a whole, these bright minds have 
renounced them and the Bible as well. 

The necessary thing to be done is to resume Bible 
study, and that without our creedal spectacles. Our forefathers 
who made our creeds participated more or less in 
persecutions of each other which we today entirely condemn. 
They were as honest, doubtless, as are we, but 
they had less light— they lived in a darker Age. The belief 
that God is torturing thousands of millions of His 
creatures led some of our well-intentioned forefathers to 
torture one another in God's name, in a manner which we 
today cannot endorse as being either just or loving or 
Christlike. 

Why then should we assume that those creeds are 
correct in all particulars? Should we not the rather see 
that if so good a man as brother John Calvin committed 
so great a mistake as to sign the warrant which sent a 
brother Christian, Servetus, to the stake, this proves 
that there was something wrong with Calvin's theological 
ideas, which lie at the foundation of nearly all of our Protestant 
creeds? 

With the wonderful Bibles which we possess today, 
found in nearly every Christian home, we should know 
more of its teachings than any of our forefathers could 
possibly have known. Not only has education aided in 
this respect, but our Bibles are conveniently formed, and 
we have study-aids, in the form of concordances, marginal 
references, etc. Is it not time to strive as Levites 
and spiritual Israelites to turn afresh to the Bible and 



instruct the people respecting its teachings? 

We are not advocating merely the reading of so many 
chapters a day, or the committing of verses to memory, 
nor the ordinary Sunday School lessons. We advocate a 
reconstruction of our faith upon the basis of the Bible 
only. Surely if all of God's people could take from their 
minds their creed spectacles and study the Word afresh 
in its own light, a great blessing would speedily follow. 
The Bible students would soon become one with each other 
and with the Father, and with the Lord Jesus Christ— the 
one Church of the Living God mentioned in the Scriptures, 
with one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God 
and Father of all. 

THE POWER OF THE DIVINE LAW 

There is a power for good in the Word of God which 
can be found nowhere else. Higher Criticism has much 
responsibility in connection with the growing lawlessness 
of the world. "The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting 
the soul"— transforming the being. The Higher 
Critics in all of our colleges and seminaries are doing a 
terribly destructive work, in comparison to which the 
work of Voltaire, Thomas Paine and Robert Ingersoll 
were as nothing. It is safe to say that three-fourths of 
all the graduates of all colleges within the last thirty 
years have been unbelievers in the Bible, and that their 
influence has been used persistently to undermine the faith 
of others. The errors which led them to infidelity are 
liable to influence others. The Bible itself is a study, and 
only what it teaches should be believed whether favorable 
to or contrary to our former creeds. 



R4922 : page 429 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
LIFE RIGHTS WERE NEEDED 

Question.— Could Christ become the Everlasting 
Father to the world if He did not have earthly life-rights 
at His disposal? 

Answer.— If our Lord Jesus did not possess the right 
to earthly life as an asset, in order to give that right to 
Adam and his race during the Millennial reign, then He 
could not properly be spoken of as the Father of that race. 
He could not regenerate the race unless He had a life to 
give, an earthly life. 



WE ARE "IN CHRIST A SWEET SAVOR TO GOD" 

Question.— Should the sweet incense burned by the 



high priest, and which represented the perfections of the 
man Jesus, be understood as having been offered also by 
the members of the body of the high priest, the under 
priests? If so, how was this shown? 

Answer.— Since there is nothing in the account in 
Leviticus that says that the incense was offered a second 
time, it is rather improbable that it was offered twice. 
And yet the thought is there that the sacrifice of the 
Church, made acceptable by the Atonement effected 
through Jesus' death, must continue to be presented until 
death, that these members might eventually be received 
into glory. "As our Lord was, so are we, in the world." 
As He was rendering obedience day by day, so are we 
rendering obedience day by day. As the spirit of loving 
zeal was demonstrated in His case, so in our case; otherwise 
we should not be permitted to be members of that 
Body. 

So we might say that the incense which He offered up, 
in a certain sense and to a certain degree, represented 
the whole Church, which is His Body; for in harmony 
with the Divine intention, before the foundation of the 
world, He was to be the Forerunner, the Representative 
and the Advocate of those who would be accepted as His 
members. Hence, in offering up His own perfections, He 
was offering up that which would, by imputation, be our 
perfection, as His members. 

In view of the fact that nothing was said about offering 
the incense the second time, and since we do not go into the 
Holy as individuals, but as members of His Body, we are 
safe in saying that we are, "in Christ, a sweet savor to 
God," though a bad savor to the world. "Be ye, therefore, 
followers of God, as dear children; and walk in love, 
as Christ also hath loved us and hath given Himself for 
us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling 
savor." "For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ." 
(Eph. 5:1,2; 2 Cor. 2:15; Rev. 8:3,4.) "Therefore, let 
us offer the sacrifices of praise to God continually"; "for 
with such sacrifices God is well pleased."— Heb. 13:15,16. 



ALL IN THE COURT IN FAVOR WITH GOD 

Question.— Could any one be in the Court condition 
without being in God's favor? 

Answer.— The Court of the Tabernacle represented 
a condition of Divine favor. But the Tabernacle represented 
Divine favor in a still higher sense and degree. 

In the present time the Court represents the condition 
of all those who, exercising faith in God, are approaching 
nearer and nearer to Him and His service. Such are in 
favor with God because of their spirit of loyalty to Him, 
which leads them to go on step by step to know and to 
do His perfect will. God's perfect will respecting all 
those called in this Age is that they shall present their 
bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to Him 



through the imputed merit of their Advocate— their Redeemer. 

But if, after full opportunity to know and to 

do His will, these hold back and refuse to make a consecration, 

from that time onward theirs will be a backward 

course in which there will be less and less of Divine favor, 

until they will be back again in the world. But even then 

R4922 : page 430 

God's purposes for them are generous, for they may share 
with mankind in general the gracious provisions of the 
New Covenant for the thousand years of Messiah's reign. 
Those who make the covenant of sacrifice and thereby 
pass from the Court into the Holy enter into the highest 
favor with God, as children of God and joint-heirs with 
Jesus. But if, later, they fearfully hold back and neglect 
to complete their sacrifice, they may not remain in so 
close a fellowship, but will eventually be expelled into the 
Court. There they will, indeed, be in God's favor as the 
Great Company class, unless they entirely draw back, in 
which event their portion will be the Second Death. 



R4923 : page 430 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

I have just returned home, enjoying eight days at the 
convention. This convention was to me a great spiritual 
uplift, and I write to say that while I have never been in 
opposition to the Vow, yet had never seen the necessity of 
making it my own until September 4, when present at the 
morning prayer, praise and testimony meeting. I ask your 
prayers that I may be able by God's grace to keep it until I 
stand complete in Him. 

Yours in Christ, THEODORE ANDERSON. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Inclosed you will find something I have copied from Oliver 
Spencer Halstead's book. Thought you might like it for 
THE TOWER. F. BENNER. 

"The Rev. Dr. Theodore Clapp, in his autobiography, says 
he had preached, at New Orleans, a zealous sermon for endless 
punishment; that after the sermon Judge W., who, 
says he, was an eminent scholar and had studied for the 
ministry but relinquished his purpose because he could not 
find the doctrine of endless punishment and kindred dogmas, 
asked him to make out a list of texts in the Hebrew and 
Greek on which he relied for the doctrine. The Doctor 
then gives a detailed account of his studies in search of 
texts to give to the Judge. 

"He began his study with the Old Testament in the Hebrew, 



and prosecuted it during that and the succeeding year, 

and yet was unable to find therein so much as an 

allusion to any suffering after death; that in the dictionary 

of the Hebrew language he could not discern a word signifying 

a place of punishment in a future state; that he could 

not find a single text in any form of phraseology which 

holds out threats of retribution beyond the grave; that to 

his utter astonishment it turned out that Orthodox critics 

of the greatest celebrity were perfectly familiar with these 

facts. 

R4924 : page 430 

"He was compelled to confess to the Judge that he could 
not produce any Hebrew text. But still he was sanguine 
that the New Testament would furnish what he had sought 
for without success in Moses and the Prophets. He prosecuted 
his study of the Greek of the New Testament eight 
years. The result was that he could not name a portion of 
it, from the first verse in Matthew, to the last of Revelation, 
which, fairly interpreted, affirms that a part of mankind will 
be eternally miserable. 

"The Doctor concludes by saying: It is an important and 
most instructive fact that I was brought into my present 
state of mind (the repudiation of the dogma of eternal torment) 
by the Bible only— a state of mind running counter 
to all the prejudices of my early life, of parental precept, of 
school, college, theological seminary, and professional caste.' 

"How could the Doctor expect to find any such teaching 
in the New Testament, after he discovered that it was 
not found either in Moses or in any other of the Prophets? 
And if he could have found any passage in his Greek of 
the New Testament which might seem to teach what he 
could not find on so fundamental a matter in Moses and 
the Prophets, would he have accepted it as genuine? 
"OLIVER SPENCER HALSTED, 
"Ex-Chancellor State of New Jersey." 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Yours dated August 9 reached me today, and I praise 
the Lord for all His goodness. It seems that the Lord is 
answering the prayers of thousands here in India. May the 
Father bring you speedily so that you may proclaim the 
glad tidings here also. It would be a great disappointment 
to the friends here if you should omit them. You can hold 
meetings in three places in Travancore. There is a little 
improvement in the traveling, as a motor service was recently 
started between three important places. 

If I could know definitely about your coming here I 
could make arrangements for some meetings in English and 
also one or two meetings for the brethren in these parts. 

May the Lord bless you and bring you in His own time 
in our midst. With love and prayers from us all, 

Your brother and servant in the harvest field, 



S. P. DEVASAHAYAM. 



page 430 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I should like to tell you that I have made the Vow my 
own. I have already told you orally, but know you like to 
have it in writing. I have been rejoicing in the knowledge 
of the Truth for three years. 

I took the Vow shortly after consecrating, but it is especially 
of help just of late. The part I find so helpful is 
this— "All my thoughts." I find that as surely as we think 
a thing, so surely, in some unguarded moment, does it come 
out. So with the dear Lord's help I am striving daily to 
cleanse my thoughts. 

I would like to tell you that although I am having, and 
have had, repeated trials— in fact, my life from a temporal 
standpoint is all worry and trial— yet I would go through 
it all again rather than lose the corresponding blessing. The 
Lord has indeed given me good measure, pressed down and 
running over. I do wish to be faithful unto death. 

I am sure the Lord is providing good, wholesome food. 
I want to keep to the table He has spread, and to keep my 
heart in the right condition. I pray the Heavenly Father 
daily for yourself and all the dear Harvest workers. Rejoicing 
in the Lord for His goodness and mercy, believe me, 

Yours in the dear Lord, MRS. IVY FROST. -England. 



R4924 : page 430 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Being somewhat familiar with the subject of incubation, I 
submit the following as illustrative of the development of the 
New Creature: We are not able to determine at the time of 
filling the incubator whether the eggs are fertile or sterile. 
At the first testing the sterile eggs are sorted out and removed, 
as they would lower the temperature of the egg 
chamber, not developing the degree of heat perceptible in the 
fertile egg. 

At the next testing there are found to be eggs that were 
fertile and in which the development had progressed to a 
certain degree. Under inspection these are proved to be lifeless, 
the germ of the new being having died, and, further 
progress toward development being impossible, these are removed 
from the incubator, as they would not only lower the 
temperature of the egg chamber, but they would befoul the 
atmosphere. The effect of these "bad eggs" is to weaken the 
vitality of the live embryos. 

Just before hatching time we usually again make sure that 
there are no "bad eggs" in the incubator, as these become 
offensive in proportion to their stage of development. 

Does not the Lord accept to the knowledge of the Truth 



both naturally-minded and spiritually-minded persons? Only 
those actually begotten of the spirit are represented in the 
"fertile" eggs. But are there not many who come under the 
influence of the Truth who, after testing, fail to reveal the 
warmth and life— the zeal represented in the heat of the 
"fertile" egg? 

When a Spirit-begotten New Creature, after having received 
the germ of the new being, the new mind, the mind of Christ, 
and after having progressed to some extent in the new life, 
discloses the fact that the new life has died, does he not 
give evidence of this fact by a course somewhat similar to the 
egg in the incubator? Does not the Lord find it necessary to 
remove such from the fellowship of those who still have the 
life and the vitality of the Spirit lest their coldness and general 
off ensiveness jeopardize the interests of the other live 
embryos of spiritual being? 

Is it not also true that the dead embryos reveal offensiveness 
in proportion to the advance in their stage of development? 
Is it not observable that the persons who were never 
begotten of the Spirit, even if they have been defiled by sin, 
never seem to reach the depths of heart-defilement revealed in 
those who once "tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made 

R4924 : page 43 1 

partakers of the Holy Spirit and have tasted the powers of 
the world to come?" This would seem to be illustrated in 
the difference in the measure of corruption of the fertile and 
the sterile egg. 

Praying the Master's rich blessing upon your service and 
labor of love, I remain your brother in the fellowship of 
Christ, 

W. A. WHEELER.-N.Y. 



page 43 1 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study VI., Order and 
Discipline in the New Creation. 

DECEMBER 3 

"SUPPORT THE WEAK." 

(59) How should the weak ones of the flock of God be 
recognized and cared for? P. 305, par. 2. 

"PATIENT TOWARD ALL." 

(60) How should this grandest of all graces, Patience, be 
exercised toward the groaning creation, as well as toward our 
fellow members of the New Creation? P. 306. 

(61) Should we not have still more patience with our 



brethren in Christ? furthermore, in dealing with our own 
selves? P. 307, par. 1. 

"SEE THAT NONE RENDER EVIL FOR EVIL." 

(62) Is this exhortation, "See that none render evil for 
evil," of general or special application in the Church? P. 307, 
par. 2. 

"PROVOKING UNTO LOVE AND GOOD WORKS." 

(63) How should we put into practice the Apostle's exhortation 
in Heb. 10:24? P. 308. 

DECEMBER 10 

"THE ASSEMBLING OF OURSELVES." 

(64) What is the object of the assembling together of the 
New Creation? P. 309, par. 1. 

(65) What illustration in nature suggests the necessity for 
assembling? P. 309, par. 2. 

(66) Why are some of the Lord's people unappreciative of 
this precious privilege of assembling together? P. 310. 

(67) What is the special significance of assembling ourselves 
together? P. 311, par. 1,2. 

(68) Does this imply that outsiders are to be forbidden 
entrance to the meetings of the Church, if they manifest interest 
and a desire to come in? P. 311, par. 3. 

DECEMBER 17 

CHARACTER OF THE MEETINGS. 

(69) In the matter of meetings, are there any cast-iron 
rules or regulations laid down in Scripture? P. 312, par. 1. 

(70) What was the character of the meetings in the early 
Church? P. 312, par. 2. 

(71) What is the principal lesson taught in I Cor. 14 regarding 
the nature of meetings in the early Church? P. 313, 

par. 2. 

(72) Was there then no preaching in the early Church? 
P. 313, par. 2. 

(73) What four kinds of meetings do the spiritual interests 
of the Church seem to require? P. 314. 

DECEMBER 24 

DOCTRINE STILL NECESSARY. 

(74) Why is doctrinal instruction especially important to a 
proper faith and character development? P. 315, par. 1. 

(75) In our study, how shall we distinguish between the 
doctrines of Christ and the doctrines of men? P. 315, par. 2. 

(76) Why is there necessity for meetings where all may 
express themselves, however imperfectly, and opportunity 



given to ask questions? Pp. 316, 317. 

(77) Should there be special meetings for the hearing of 
different views from those generally accepted by the Ecclesia? 
If so, why? P. 317, par. 1;P. 318, par. 1. 

(78) Why are devotional and testimony meetings especially 
needful to the rounding out and full development of the New 
Creature? P. 319, par. 1,2. 

DECEMBER 31 

(79) What is there particularly helpful in mid-week testimony 
meetings, and what suggestion is made as to a topic for 

the week? P. 320, par. 1. 

(80) Give a detailed illustration of such a meeting. P. 321, 
par. 1. 

(81) Why is order a necessity in these meetings, as well 
as in all others? P. 321, par. 2. 

(82) Under what circumstances would preaching services 
seem advantageous? P. 322, par. 1. 

(83) Describe in detail what is doubtless the most helpful 
meeting, next to a devotional one. P. 323, par. 1, to P. 325, par. 1. 

(84) Explain the nature and object of meetings known as 
"Dawn Circles for Bible Study." P. 325, par. 2. 



page 433 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

Bro. Russell's Round-the-World Itinerary 434 

Editor's British Autumn Tour 435 

Prayer of the Consecrated 436 

"The Feet of Him" 437 

Our Responsibility to One Another 439 

"We Are Not to Please Ourselves" 439 

The Grace of Humility 440 

"To Show Thyself Approved" 442 

"Fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord" 442 

Waiting for Messiah 443 

"He Is Faithful and Just" 444 

Interesting Questions 445 

"Now Are We the Sons of God" 445 

Land Was Forced to Keep Its Sabbaths 446 

Some Interesting Letters 446 

Extension Work in Africa 446 

"Rolling Old Chariot Along" in Africa 446 

"Die Stimme" Stirring Up Jews in 

Russia 447 

Berean Questions in "Scripture Studies" 447 

page 434 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 



not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 

AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 

FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



NEWARK, N.J., DECEMBER 3 

Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m. in Proctor's Theatre, Broad St. 

Other services of the day will be conducted at Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
17 Hicks St. Praise and Testimony at 10.30 a.m., and a meeting for 
the interested at 7.30 p.m., preceded by half-hour's praise service. 

DALLAS, TEXAS, DECEMBER 6 

At 10.30 a.m. meeting for Praise, Prayer and Testimony and at 3 
o'clock in the afternoon discourse for the interested. Both services will 
be held in Woodman's Hall, 414 Harwood St. 

SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS, DECEMBER 7 

"The New Woodman's Hall" at 1 17 North Flores St., will be used 
at 10 o'clock for Praise, Prayer and Testimony meeting and again at 
3 o'clock for a discourse to the interested. 

LOS ANGELES, CAL., DECEMBER 10 

Morning Rally and Discourse for the interested. 10 o'clock, Mammoth 
Hall, 517 S. Broadway. Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m., 
Shrine Auditorium, 655 West Jefferson St. 

FRESNO, CAL., DECEMBER 11 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 o'clock and 
discourse for the interested at 3 o'clock, will both be held in the 
A.O.U.W. Hall, Fresno St., between I and J. The public address 
at 8 p.m. will be given in Armory Hall, J and Fresno Sts. 

OAKLAND, CAL., DECEMBER 12 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30. Discourse 



for the interested at 3 o'clock, Hamilton Auditorium, Jefferson 
and 13th Sts. 

R4932 : page 434 

BRO. RUSSELL'S ROUND-THE-WORLD ITINERARY 



Wed 
Thu. 
Sun. 
Mon 



After serving the public at Newark, N.J., and also the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle congregation on the first Sunday in December, Brother 
Russell will start at once on the trip that will encircle the world: ~ 
Tue. Dec. 5 Arrive at St. Louis, Mo., Penn. R.R 8:30 a.m. 

Leave ' M.K.&T. Ry 10:05 a.m. 

6 Arrive Dallas, Texas, " ..9:10 a.m. 

Leave " " " ..8:00 p.m. 

7 Arrive San Antonio, Texas, " ..7:30 a.m. 

Leave So. Pac. Ry 8:30 p.m. 

10 Arrive Los Angeles, Cal. " ..6:30 a.m. 

Leave ' " ..7:30 p.m. 

11 Arrive Fresno, Cal. " ..7:00 a.m. 

Leave " " " .12:30 night 

Tue. " 12 Arrive San Francisco, Cal. " ..7:50 a.m. 

Wed. " 13 Leave ..Steamship "Shinyo Maru" 

Tue. " 19 Arrive Honolulu, Hawaii " 

Sat. " 30 Arrive Yokohama, Japan " 

Sun. " 31 At Tokio " Imperial Japanese Ry. 

1912. 

Mon. Jan. 1 Leave Tokio, Japan Imperial Japanese Ry. 

Tue. " 2 Leave Kobe, Japan Steamship "Shinyo Maru" 

Thu. " 4 Leave Nagasaki, Japan " 

Sat. " 6 Leave Shanghai, China " 

Tue. " 9 Arrive Hong Kong, " " 

Wed. " 10 Leave " " " for Manila by steamship 

Sun. " 14 At Manila, Philippine Islands. 

Tue. " 16 Leave " " " by steamship 

Sat. " 20 Leave Hong Kong, China P.&O.S.S. Co. 

Thu. " 25 Leave Singapore, Straits Settlements 

Sat. " 27 Leave Penang, Prince of Wales Island 

Thu. Feb. 1 Arrive Colombo, Ceylon 

" 3 to 9 Visit Travancore District 

Sun. " 1 1 At Madras, India. 

Mon. " 12 Leave " " ..for Calcutta (via Juggernaut) 

Sun. " 18 Arrive Calcutta, " 

Mon. " 19 Leave " " for Bombay via Lucknow and Agra. 

Sat. " 24 Leave Bombay, " P.&O.S.S. Co. 

Thu. " 29 Leave Aden, Arabia " " " 

Sun. Mar. 3 (Disembark at Suez, rail to Cairo) 

Tue. " 5 Leave Cairo, Egypt by rail 9:30 a.m. 

" " 5 Arrive Alexandria, Egypt " "12:45 p.m. 

Wed. " 6 Leave " " .Khedivial S.S., 4:00 p.m. 

Fri. " 8 Arrive Piraeus, Greece... " " 10:00 a.m. 
Sat. " 9 At Athens, 
Sun. " 10 At Corinth, " 

Mon. " 11 Leave " " by rail 10:25 a.m. 

" " 11 Arrive Patras, " " " 3:45 p.m. 



" " 11 Leave " "by steamship, sailing 7:00 p.m. 

Wed. " 13 Arrive Brindisi, Italy 3:00 p.m. 

" " 13 Leave " " by rail 4:55 p.m. 

Thu. " 14 Arrive Rome, " " " 9:35 a.m. 

14 Leave " " " " 11:50 p.m. 

Sat. " 16 Arrive Paris, France " " 6:45 a.m. 

" " 16 Leave " " about 1:00 p.m. 

" " 16 Arrive London, England " 10:00 p.m. 

Sun. " 17 At " " One week 

Sat. " 23 Leave " " for America 

Thu. " 28 Arrive New York City Steamship Mauretania 

Sun. " 31 At New York Hippodrome. ...Public Service, 3:00 p.m. 

" " " At Brooklyn Memorial Supper, 7:00 p.m. 



R4924 : page 435 

EDITOR'S BRITISH AUTUMN TOUR 

GOD HAS greatly blessed us on our present 
tour. The meetings have been grandly inspiring. 
Not only have the attendances 
been large, but the interest has been keen 
and evidently deep. The friends as well as 
myself have been encouraged. In every 
place thus far visited the very best halls 
available have been secured. The volunteering 
has been thoroughly done, and the 
posters have been well placed. 

All of our Sundays were apportioned to London Tabernacle 
except one given to Glasgow on the occasion of 
its Convention. Good audiences were the rule. The Tabernacle 
was packed in the evenings, sometimes with standing 
room only. This is encouraging to us and to all the 
friends who shall read this report and who properly feel 
that the work is theirs, because it is the Lord's and the 
Society's. 

THE GLASGOW CONVENTION 

This Convention was every way a success. The attendance 
ranged from 700 to 800 at the ordinary sessions, 
and the meeting advertised for the public ran up to 5,000, 
of whom about 500 stood, while about 200 failed to gain 
admission. 

And such attention from so vast an audience! You 
could have heard a pin drop. For nearly two hours they 
studied with us "Which Is the True Gospel?" Together 
we considered what has been presented as the Gospel by 
various denominations, and then came to the one preached 
in advance to Abraham, and finally announced "in due 
time" by Jesus, who brought life and immortality to light 
through the Gospel. The audience saw a vast difference 
between the creeds of the Dark Ages and the Gospel of 
Divine grace, of which St. Paul was not ashamed and in 



which we, too, may well rejoice. 

We had three delightful days of spiritual refreshment 
at this Convention. Friends attended from England, Ireland, 
Wales and Scotland. Our goodby greetings were 
at the railway platform, where about 300 tried to shake 
hands with us; they all waved and sang us away, using 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love" 
and "God be with you till we meet again." 

BRIGHTON--SOUTHAMPTON--PORTSMOUTH, ETC. 

In the South of England, where we had few or no 
friends, we now have some loyal defenders of the Divine 
Plan of the Ages; and more, we trust, are ripening. At 
Brighton we had a grand auditorium, The Dome, whose 
capacity, 3,000, was none too much. We spoke on the 
"Hereafter" and had close attention to the message of 
God's Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power. Besides this 
witness 35,000 PEOPLES PULPITS had been previously used 
in announcing the meeting. The Lord only knows how 
many or how few had really "hearing ears." 

At Southampton we had the Coliseum, seating 2,000, 
and a splendid audience; we used same topic; 20,000 copies 
of PEOPLES PULPIT had been distributed. Some told of 
blessing received; others are thinking. 

Portsmouth: Another rousing meeting, in Town Hall, 
seating 2,000, crowded, middle class, reverential, thoughtful, 
many gray and bald heads; mostly men; same subject, 
"Hereafter"; 20,000 PEOPLES PULPIT. How many ripe 
grains of wheat and what will the Harvest be only the 
Lord knows. 

Bournemouth: 10,000 PEOPLES PULPIT; we had an extremely 
intelligent and attentive audience— 700— in St. 
Peter's Church Hall. The volunteering in some of these 
places was done considerably by brethren, who journeyed 
100 miles or more at their own expense to thus serve the 
Lord, the Truth and brethren as yet unknown to them. 
How precious is such loving service in the sight of our 
Lord and his brethren! 

PERTH-DUNDEE-PAISLEY-GREENOCK 

Our visit amongst the Scotch Bible students was extremely 
interesting and encouraging, in the smaller places 
as well as in Glasgow. Everywhere we had the best halls 
obtainable, and correspondingly large and intelligent audiences. 
Our weekly sermons in some of the newspapers 

R4925 : page 435 

affected our audiences favorably, and we trust that the 
oral presentations will make the printed discourses more 
popular and more profitable. 

It was our first visit to Perth, but the friends had advertised 
our coming thoroughly. The City Hall, of 2,000 
capacity, was crowded in the evening with the public, 



while we gave an afternoon talk to the interested students 
of God's Word. A witness to the "Gospel of the Kingdom" 
was given which, we trust, will tell something for 
good when the Lord of the harvest shall reckon with His 
own servants, to whom He gave talents and pounds for 
service. Ten thousand copies of PEOPLES PULPIT were 
distributed to announce the service. 

Dundee we visited some years ago, and amongst those 
who helped arrange for this visit were some interested 
then. Our afternoon session was for the interested in 
Masonic Hall. Nearly one hundred were present, their 
faces beaming out the joy within— the joy the world can 
neither give nor take away. Gilfillan Hall, 1,600 capacity, 
was well filled by the public at night to hear respecting 

R4925 : page 436 

"The Great Hereafter." We believe the Lord's blessing 
was upon the meeting and that good was accomplished; 
how much we may not judge. Our united services, dear 
friends, are rendered to the Lord. We are sure He accepts 
them irrespective of results seen. 

Paisley we visited for the first time. We had a splendid 
hearing of intelligent middle-class people. Although 
the night was stormy, Good Templar Hall (capacity 
1 ,000) was nearly full, although there were several public 
functions to divert. The message of God's Word respecting 
the "Hereafter" was presented in contrast with the 
horrible fantasies of the Dark Ages. Some got a start in 
Bible study and sober thinking such as they never before 
comprehended. Surely, as the Bible declares, the woman, 
with the golden cup in her hand full of explanations of 
her abominations, made all nations drunk with her false 
doctrines.— Rev. 17:1-5. 

Greenock we visited for the first time. We had a 
splendid reception. The Town Hall, holding 3,000, was 
crowded. Here as elsewhere on this tour the intelligence of 
our hearers impressed us. Surely people with such heads 
and faces could not hear of God's Hereafter in contrast 
with human theories without being thereby impressed in 
regard to the Truth. 

FOUR APPOINTMENTS IN IRELAND 

The North of Ireland people like to remind us that their 
country was the original Scotland according to history; 
that some of their brothers conquered Caledonia and gave 
it the name Scotland, and that they have furnished the 
United States more than half her Presidents and statesmen. 
Thus impoverished for the blessing of others they 
fear the proposed "Home Rule." They declare that the 
Catholics of the south and west of the island, outnumbering 
them, will trample them. 

We encouraged them to believe that Catholics as well 
as Protestants are more civilized than of yore, and that 
anyway it will not be long until Messiah's Kingdom shall 



set all matters right. We encouraged them to do all in 
their power to be well represented in that glorious Kingdom, 
in comparison to which victories in Scotland and 
America will be as nothing. 

Belfast was our first stop. We were accompanied by 
three brethren of Irish birth or lineage from the Glasgow 
Church, and they rendered valuable aid in various ways 
in connection with the meetings. We had blessed fellowship. 
The meetings were quite successful, even though 
the attendances were smaller than in England and Scotland. 
Every night was stormy, and the night at Belfast 
was Hallowe'en. We certainly had very intelligent audiences, 
and many evidences that a good impression was 
produced. There were follow-up meetings held by Brother 
Hemery which manifested considerable depth of interest. 

At Belfast we met about forty Bible students in private 
session. We discussed with them the great blessing of God 
upon the Elect Church, which, it is declared, is "His 
workmanship." Although God rested from His work 
with mankind to permit the Savior to redeem and restore 
it, God did not rest from His still higher work of developing 
the "New Creation." He is now "working in us to 
will and to do His good pleasure"— drawing, calling, sanctifying 
us by His Word and Providences. 

In the evening we had about 1,000 present in the Large 
Ulster Hall. It was a remarkable gathering in many respects. 
(1) The personnel: The people were intelligent, 
fine looking and most attentive. (2) About three-fourths 
of the audience were men. (3) There were other large 
meetings and it was Hallowe'en Night. Our address was 
on, "Which Is the True Gospel?" We made it quite clear 
that we are in fullest sympathy with all Christians, but 
opposed to the creeds of the past, which have divided 
God's people into 600 sects and dishonored God and violated 
human reason. 

We defended the Bible against the modern infidelity, 
which styles itself "Higher Criticism," and is undermining 
Christian faith and leading on toward Atheism and anarchy. 
We reminded our hearers that all Christians believe 
that there is but "ONE Church of the First-borns 
whose names are written in heaven: but ONE Lord, ONE 
faith, ONE baptism; that our forefathers organized our 
different "Churches," each as the only one, and consigned 
members of other churches to eternal torture, and sometimes 
even tortured them to death. All that is past, thank 
God; but the faulty creeds we still hold, and they still 
separate us. God's time has come for us to return to the 
Bible and to ignore and destroy all human creeds and 
isms if we can find, surely, what is the true Gospel, of 
which St. Paul was not ashamed. That Gospel we presented 
to the best of our ability. 

Ballymena we visited for the first time and had a good 
hearing. The attendance was about 250; at Portadown about 
500; at Dublin about 800. We had excellent order everywhere, 
except, we might say, at Dublin. At the latter 
place the same Y.M.C.A. secretary who formerly 



tried to catch us in our words was present, accompanied 
by about 100 young men of his association, who gave no 
great evidence of a work of grace. Evidently the "hell-fire" 
faith which they profess has not had sanctifying 
power in their lives. On occasions they yelled and hooted 
like "hoodlums," and quite disgraced the fair name of 
Dublin and of the Y.M.C.A. 

The questions were of the usual order and were answered 
fully and promptly and to the apparent satisfaction 
of all the audience except the "Y.M.C.A." rowdies. 
One of the questions was inspired by an attack made on 
me there recently by the Rev. Dr. Torry. It was, "Is it 
true that you are divorced from your wife?" 

I replied that my topic was, "Which Is the True Gospel?" 
and that my home affairs and my relationship to my 
God were my personal affairs. Nevertheless I would 
answer the question. "I am not divorced from my wife. 
The decree of the court was not divorce, but separation, 
granted by a sympathetic jury, which declared that we 
would both be happier separated. My wife's charge was 
cruelty, but the only cruelty put in evidence was my 
refusal on one occasion to give her a kiss when she had 
requested it." I assured my audience that I disputed the 
charge of cruelty and believed that no woman was ever 
better treated by a husband. The applause showed that 
the audience believed my statements. 



R4933 : page 436 

PRAYER OF THE CONSECRATED 

"We seek not, Lord, for tongues of flame, 

Or healing virtue's mystic aid; 
But power thy Gospel to proclaim— 

The balm for wounds that sin has made. 

"Breathe on us, Lord; thy radiance pour 
On all the wonders of the page 

Where hidden lies the heavenly lore 

That blessed our youth and guides our age. 

"Grant skill each sacred theme to trace, 
With loving voice and glowing tongue, 

As when upon thy words of grace 

The wondering crowds enraptured hung. 

"Grant faith, that treads the stormy deep 
If but thy voice shall bid it come; 

And zeal, that climbs the mountain steep, 
To seek and bring the wanderer home." 



R4925 : page 437 



"THE FEET OF HIM" 

IT IS NECESSARY for the discipline, trial 

and final proving of the Church of God 

that they should be subjected to adverse influence; 

for "to him that overcometh" is 

the promise of the great reward. If we 

would reign with Christ, we must prove our 

worthiness to reign, by the same tests of 

loyalty to God, of faith in His Word, of 

zeal for the Truth, of patient endurance, 

of reproach and persecution, even unto 

death, and in the unwavering trust in the power and purpose 

of God to deliver and exalt His Church in due time. 

To such faithful ones are the blessed consolations of 

Psalm 91, which we believe is a picture of the Church in 

the end of this Gospel Age— a picture of The Christ. 

Hearken: 

"He who dwelleth in the secret place of the Most 
High [typified by the Holy of the Tabernacle] shall 
abide under the shadow of the Almighty." We thus place 
ourselves under the Divine protection when, having come 
to a knowledge of God's willingness to accept us as His 
children, we gratefully accept the invitation and approach 
in His appointed way, through Christ our Redeemer, and 
consecrate ourselves fully to His service. Such may 
sweetly rest in the precious promises of God, all of which 
are yea and amen in Christ Jesus. (2 Cor. 1:20.) The 
world does not see the overshadowing wings of Divine 
protection, but the faithful have a blessed secret realization 
of it. Praise the Lord! 

"I [Christ Jesus, whom David here, as elsewhere, personifies, 
and who thus addresses His Body, His Church] 
will say of Jehovah, He is My refuge and My fortress, 
My God; in Him will I trust, that He will surely deliver 
thee from the snare of the Fowler and from the noisome 
pestilence"— from the deceptions of Satan, into which all 
those not protected shall stumble; for our Lord said that 
so subtle and deceptive will they be that, if it were possible, 
they would deceive "the very elect." But this is not possible; 
for those who are making their calling and election 
sure abide under the protection of the Almighty. Such 

R4926 : page 437 

shall be delivered, not from the destructive pestilence of 
physical disease, but from the moral and spiritual pestilences 
of destruction— from the sinful propensities of the 
old nature, which in unguarded moments are liable to 
assert their mastery and overwhelm the souls of those 
who are not abiding under the secret protection of the 
Most High; and from the spiritual pestilences of false 
doctrine which, with subtle sophistry, destroy the faith 
of the unwatchful. 
Such pestilences are already abroad in the world 



in the shape of so-called Christian Science, Spiritism 
and the various no-ransom theories which take the name 
of "The Larger Hope," and which bid fair, both from 
present prospects and from the prophetic outlook, ere long 
to become epidemic. From all these pestilences the Lord's 
elect shall be protected, resting safely and sweetly under 
the shadow of the Almighty. 

"He shall cover thee with His feathers, and under His 
wings shalt thou trust; His Truth shall be thy shield and 
buckler." So close to His heart does Jehovah gather His 
loyal and faithful children that they feel the warmth of 
His love; and the responsive language of their hearts is, 
"I will abide in Thy tabernacle forever; I will trust in 
the covert of Thy wings; for Thou hast been a shelter 
for me and a strong Tower from the enemy; for Thou 
hast heard my vows; Thou hast given me the heritage of 
those that fear Thy name." (Psa. 61:4,3,5.) Yes, His 
Truth— that grand system of Truth comprised in the 
Divine Plan of the Ages— is an ample shield and buckler 
to all who in simplicity of heart receive it and prove faithful 
to it. It is the armor of God, which the Apostle urges 
all the faithful to put on— to appropriate, to meditate upon 
and to store up Truth in mind and heart— that they may 
be able by its use to withstand error and evil in every 
form presented to them in this evil day. 

JEHOVAH SHALL KEEP THE FEET OF HIS SAINTS 

"Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor 
for the arrow that flieth by day; nor for the pestilence that 
walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth 
at noonday." This is the "night," the dark night of which 
the Prophet Isaiah spoke and to which our Lord also referred, 
"The morning cometh, and also the night"; "The 
night cometh when no man can work." (Isa. 21:12; John 9:4.) 
The Millennial morning comes, and just as surely 
the great time of trouble will immediately precede it— the 
night wherein no man can labor for the dissemination of 
Divine Truth; so great will be the "terror," the tumult 
and trouble and persecution of that night; the arrows— 
"even bitter words" of the opponents of the Truth— will 
fly by day— at the present time, which in comparison with 
the dark night that is coming, is called day. The various 
besetments and difficulties from infidelity, Higher Criticism 
and other false doctrines are pictorially represented 
as the shooting out of arrows, as pestilences, as stumbling 
stones. None of these are to injure the "elect," of which 
Christ is the Head and the Church His Members, as specially 
indicated in this Psalm. The Church shall be 
immune, and nothing shall in any way hurt them. As the 
Lord said, the difficulties of this day would, if possible, 
deceive the very elect; but this will not be possible, for 
"the feet" class shall be kept. No; the Church need have 
no fear of the moral and spiritual pestilences that walk 
in darkness, spreading and making their victims amongst 
those who are ignorant of the Truth, or who are unfaithful 



to it and are, hence, unworthy of it, and who, therefore, 
lack the Divine protection and are subject to the 
"strong delusions" of error that subvert the faith and 
hope of many, just when the light of Divine Truth is 
shining clearest upon the faithful, as it is shining upon 
us today. 

"A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at 
thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee." Great 
will be the falling away from the Truth, even amongst 
those who, like ourselves, received it once with joy and 
who did for a time run well; but the Church, because of 
their loyalty and uncompromising faithfulness and because 
of the ample armor of Truth and righteousness, shall 
stand and not fall. 

We are not to think of those who will be injured 
and who will fall ("A thousand at thy side and ten 
thousand at thy right hand") as of the world, but rather 
as being friends of the Church; closely associated with 
the Church. The world could not fall from Divine favor, 
for it has not been in Divine favor. The whole "world 
lieth in the Wicked One," and, therefore, could not be 
overthrown. This verse seems to apply to those who were 
actually begotten of the Holy Spirit or who have assumed 
a position such as those begotten of the Holy Spirit; 
as, for instance, the tares which affect to be wheat. They 
never were wheat, and will not be garnered with the 
wheat class. Time will show that they are not of this 
class. So in this picture we see the fall of these in 
general and of the consecrated in particular. There is a 
distinction between the thousand falling at the side and 
the ten thousand at the right hand. We might infer that 
the one thousand may fall into total unbelief, and the 
ten thousand, the "great company," into the great 
time of trouble to wash their robes white and to purify 
themselves. They will be partakers with Babylon in her 
sins and have part in her great fall.— Rev. 14:18; 18:10. 

R4926 : page 438 

None too extravagant is the prophetic declaration, "A 
thousand shall fall at thy side." Only the sanctified in 
Christ Jesus, copies of God's dear Son, will be able to 
stand complete in Him. These will be the very elect, and 
it will not be possible for them to be deceived and ensnared; 
for God will give His messengers a charge [message] 
for them ["present Truth"] and thus these "feet" 
of the Body of Christ shall be upheld that they stumble 
not. 

"Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the 
reward of the wicked," who reject the Truth or prove 
unfaithful to it. We know that we are already passing 
through the beginning of these troubles (the troubles upon 
the nominal church incident to its testing), and that we 
are escaping, while many on every hand are falling into 
error and infidelity. We escape, not by being taken 
away from the scene of trouble, but by being supported, 



strengthened and kept in the very midst of it all by the 
Word of the Lord, our shield and buckler. 

"NO EVIL SHALL BEFALL THEE" 

"Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, 
even the Most High, thy habitation; there shall no evil 
befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling" 
—no evil of the kind referred to; and any other 
seeming evils shall, under Divine providence, work together 
for your good.— Rom. 8:28. 

God has so arranged that only the truly consecrated 
will be kept from stumbling into error in this evil day. 
Every day we learn to appreciate more and more the 
Divine favor which has anointed the eyes of our understanding, 
and permitted us to see the internal strength 
and beauty of the Divine Word and Plan. If, then, we 
are thus, by Divine favor, made strong in the Lord, and 
enabled to "stand fast" while thousands are falling from 
their faith and steadfastness, let us "rejoice with fear" 
(reverence). Let him who feels strong and well supported 
"be not high-minded," but "take heed lest he fall." 
Humility and zeal for the Lord are the terms upon which 
we received the great blessing, and are also the terms 
upon which we may retain it to the end— until our 
"change" comes and establishes in glory what grace began 
in our weakness. 

"For He shall give His angels charge concerning thee, 
to keep thee in all thy ways." That is, God will raise up 
some faithful pastors and teachers who will "watch for 
your souls as they that must give account." True, there 
shall arise false teachers, perverting the Word of the Lord, 
and seeking by cunning sophistries to subvert your souls; 
but if in simplicity of heart the Lord's children require a 
"Thus saith the Lord" for every element of their faith, 
and carefully prove all things by the Word, they will be 
able readily to distinguish the true from the false. And 
having done so, the Apostle Paul (Heb. 10:35) counsels 
us to have confidence. The Lord, our Shepherd, will care 
for the true sheep. 

The Apostle Paul assures us that the angels of God 
are ministering spirits sent forth to minister unto and 
serve those who shall be heirs of salvation, the saved ones 
of this Gospel Age— not only the overcomers of the "little 
flock," but also the overcomers of the "great multitude." 
Our Lord Jesus sets forth practically the same thought in 
His declaration, "Their angels do always behold [have 
access to] the face of My Father." (Matt. 18:10.) The 
Master's words seem to imply, at least, that one or more 
angels have charge over the consecrated ones, the "very 
elect." Nothing can by any means, therefore, harm these, 
except as the Heavenly Father sees that the earthly injury 
or disadvantage would prove profitable either to the individual 
New Creature or to the Lord's general cause. 
This is in full accord with His general assurance that all 
things shall work together for good to those that love Him. 



-Rom. 8:28. 

Such a use of the heavenly messengers by no means 
invalidates the thought that the Lord's earthly children are 
frequently used of Him as ministers, servants, the one to 
the other. Indeed, we may be assured that the invisible 
messengers or servants, generally, if not always, are 
required to act through human instrumentalities— preferably 
through "the very elect." Of this kind of service 
done by the brethren, one for the other, we have illustrations 
in the Harvest work, for instance— supervised by our 
present Lord and His heavenly hosts, yet in the main 

R4927 : page 438 

carried on by the members of His Body still in the flesh. 

THE HARVEST MESSAGE GOD'S KEEPING POWER 

"They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash 
thy foot against a stone"— "thee"— all the members of the 
Body of Christ, individually and collectively, using all their 
strength to protect against any stumbling-stone of false 
doctrine, and especially that great fundamental Rock-Doctrine 
of the redemption through the precious blood of 
Christ; that "Rock of offense and stone of stumbling" to 
both the houses of nominal Israel. (Isa. 8:14.) "The 
feet" of the Body are its last members; the saints now 
living are members of "the feet of Him" (Christ), the 
ones who are now in danger of being stumbled, as the 
feet of the Jewish house of servants were in danger in 
the end, or harvest, of the Jewish Age. 

How do such messengers bear up the feet of Christ? 
By helping them to a clear understanding of the Truth, 
and teaching and encouraging them by word and example 
how to be faithful to the Truth, and how to run so as to 
obtain the prize of our high-calling. 

While doubtless the heavenly messengers are connected 
with this work, yet it is surely done through the 
Church in the flesh, as already intimated. The Lord in 
this present Harvest time has given His messengers, the 
leaders of His consecrated people, a "charge," a message, 
a word of warning, counsel, advice— an opening of the 
Word of Truth, an enlightening of their understanding— 
that they should bear up all the members of "the feet" 
class, all of "the very elect" in this time of serious trial, 
testing and stumbling, lest at any time any of this class 
should stumble through the peculiar trials of the present 
time. How manifestly this is fulfilled! The Harvest message 
in its various features, bearing on every phase of 
Truth now due, and every phase of error now brought 
forward, is God's keeping power by which, according to 
His guarantee, we know that nothing shall by any means 
hurt "the feet" members of the Body of Christ. 

It is for us to rejoice in these blessings and favors of 
the Lord and to increase our faith; and we remember that 
even before the "House of Sons" was organized the Lord 



had power and exercised it in the "House of Servants" in 
a way that illustrates to us the abundance of that power. 

Satan would like to have us walk by sight, not by faith; 
he would like to have us continually tempting God, and 
demanding some ocular demonstration of His favor and 
protection, instead of accepting the testimony of His 
Word, and relying thereupon implicitly, in faith. In the 
light of the unfolding of the Scriptures we see that Satan, 
probably unwittingly, quoted this passage of Scripture 
wholly out of its proper meaning and interpretation, a 
passage which referred, not to the literal feet of Jesus and 
to literal stones and to literal angels, but to the symbolic 
feet-members of the Body of Christ today, and to the 
stones of stumbling, doctrinal and otherwise, which are 
now permitted in the path of the faithful, and to the 
angels, or ministers, of Divine Truth, who in the present 

R4927 : page 439 

Harvest time would be commissioned to bear up "the feet" 
members with such counsels, admonitions and expositions 
of Scripture as would be necessary for them. 

"Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder; the young 
lion and the dragon thou shalt trample under feet." Thus 
borne up in the hands of the Lord's faithful messengers 
and guarded by their vigilant watchfulness, and under the 
constant protection of the Most High, God's trusting, 
faithful children shall triumph over every device of Satan 
either to overpower or to beguile them— whether he goes 
about like a roaring lion, or whether, serpent-like, he 
stealthily lurks about to insert his venomous poison. 

"Because he hath set his love upon Me, therefore will 
I deliver him; I will set him on high, because he hath known 
[appreciated] My name." On account of the love and 
loyalty of each individual composing "the feet" class, the 
heavenly Father will deliver him from the pestilences, etc., 
and will exalt him to joint-heirship with Christ, make 
him a member of the "Royal Priesthood" and a partaker 
of the divine nature. 

"He shall call upon Me and I will answer him; I will 
be with him in trouble; I will deliver him and honor him. 
With long life will I satisfy him, and show him My salvation" 
—He will make him understand His Plan. As individuals 
they are known unto the Lord, who judges not merely 
by the sight of the eye and the hearing of the ear, but 
who discerns and judges the thoughts and intents of the 
heart. And, however widely they may be scattered, 
whether standing alone as "wheat" in the midst of tares, 
or in company with others, God's eye is always upon them. 
Dwelling in the secret place of the Most High (sanctified, 
wholly set apart unto God), they shall abide under the 
shadow of the Almighty, while the judgments of the Lord 
are experienced by the great religious systems that bear 
His name in unfaithfulness. They have no share in the 
judgment of Great Babylon, but are previously enlightened 
and called out of her. 



Praise the Lord for such assurances of His loving 
care! "Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within 
me, praise His holy name!" 



R4927 : page 439 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO ONE ANOTHER 

"We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of 
the weak, and not to please ourselves."— Romans 15:1. 

THE GREAT PRINCIPLE set forth in our 

text is the principle of Love, the essence of 

the Divine Spirit. God is love; and the 

Spirit of love is the Spirit of God. This 

spirit, operating amongst God's people, necessarily 

makes them considerate of one another. 

It is the opposite of a selfish spirit. 

It seeks the welfare of others as well as of 

itself, especially the welfare of the household 

of faith. 

In every case it should be our disposition, as far as 
possible, to help the weak and those who need assistance. 
The general disposition of the world, on the contrary, is 
to speak slightingly of those who are weak and to say, 
"They have my sympathy." But really, the weak do not 
get much sympathy. The world applauds those who are 
the most successful, the mighty, the rich. But as God has 
sympathy for the weak and lowly, so we should show 
sympathy more for those who are in need of sympathy 
than for those who are not. In the Church there are 
some who are intellectually strong, some who are intellectually 
weak, some who are physically strong, others who 
are physically weak; some who are spiritually strong and 
others who are spiritually weak. 

In proportion as we are strong, we should not only 
help others to overcome their weaknesses, but should be 
assistful to all, encouraging them and pointing out to 
them how they can best overcome their shortcomings. 
We should not make these points too strong, however; 
for most people do not appreciate their own weaknesses; 
and the stronger should bear with them in their difficulty 
as well as bear some of their blunders. If anyone sees 
his own weakness, it becomes a wonderful incentive to 
endeavor. Therefore, the mission of the stronger would 
be so to call the attention of others to their weaknesses 
as not to offend or stumble them. If their attention 
be called to these weaknesses in a wrong way they are 
liable to be stumbled; but if called in a wise way, they will 
be helped. This might be applied in all the ramifications 
of life. We should ever be on the alert to see and to overcome 
our own weaknesses, and to be glad to spend and be 
spent in the interest of the brethren, considering matters 
from their standpoint and lending them our assistance. 



The Elders in the Church should be really elder brethren. 
In the family the elder brother is supposed to be next 
to the father, helping and assisting, and spending himself 
for the interests of the other members. And so in the 
Church. Those who are older in the Truth, who are more 
developed in the Truth, should encourage, assist, lift up 
and defend the younger. This we observe in the affairs 
of earthly life in every family. The elders are helpful in 
the family to give assistance to the younger, and at the 
loss of their own convenience, their own preferences; their 
own pleasures are to be yielded up in the interests of the 
younger of the family. The thought of the Apostle is that 
both strong and weak should be growing in grace, in 
knowledge and in love by exercising themselves in spiritual 
things. 

"WE ARE NOT TO PLEASE OURSELVES" 

The latter part of the text, "And not to please ourselves," 
carries with it the thought that, although we have 
made a consecration to the Lord, although we have turned 
our backs upon sin, nevertheless we have a tendency, a 
disposition to sin. The disposition of the New Creature, 
however, is not to sin, but to do that which is right and 
to build himself up in the "most holy faith." Yet in seeking 
to build himself up in that "most holy faith" he might 
allow something of self-interest to stand first in his mind. 
But while he should have self-interest prominent in his 
mind— his own upbuilding— he should remember that, having 
responsibility in being a member of Christ, he should 
not wish merely to please himself, but should be willing 
to forego some of the right and proper things that he 
might serve others, and thus get a lesson in the Lord's 
providence. For instance, the more spiritually developed 

R4928 : page 439 

might choose to be off by themselves discussing the interests 
of the work. But the spirit of the Apostle's exhortation 
seems to be that they should look beyond their own 
preferences, seeking to arrange their own affairs so as 
to be most helpful to the brethren. 

Amongst the different classes of the Lord's people, 
the classes of Bible students, there is a disposition among 
those who are more advanced to segregate themselves, to 
hold themselves aloof from the others. We have endeavored 
to throw our influence against this disposition. If 
there are some who have less knowledge let them have 
the opportunity to learn. If they should bring in good, 
hard questions, so much the better. We are not merely 
to please ourselves in respect to time and places of meetings. 
We might see that some would be desirous of having 

R4928 : page 440 

the meetings in places more difficult of access, but we 



are not to be selfish or self-seeking, but seek to please 
the majority of those whose interests are concerned. If 
this spirit were observed in classes, more progress would 
be made; and the Lord's people in general are learning 
this lesson. 

The same thought applies to the servants of the Church. 
There is a disposition for the Elders to say, "We will 
meet together and discuss amongst ourselves different 
things." Now, this is not with bad intention. It might 
be wise to do so occasionally. But as a general thing, the 
Elders should meet with the Deacons and treat them with 
confidence, so that they also might be counted in the 
Lord's service: it is better for all to meet together, and 
in the majority of things to have the congregation informed 
about everything, rather than to keep secrets from 
the Church. Of course, there would be, at times, something 
not to be made public in a general way; but, as a 
rule, the Elders and the Deacons should seek to arrange 
their meetings so as to assist all the congregation who 
have time and ability, etc., that all will feel that there 
is no class separation. 

Centuries ago the theory was started by the Catholic 
friends that the clergy are a separate class constituting 
the Church, and that the others are the children or infants 
of the Church. This theory was adopted afterwards by 
the Protestants. And so we see that the clergy set themselves 
off by themselves as a separate class. The fact 
that the Lord has set some in the Church as Elders does 
not make them separate. We are all one class. Thus, 
the Apostle says that the eye cannot say to the foot, "I 
have no need of thee." Every member is to be considered; 
and no one is to assume a position over others. If one 
has a higher office he is to use it for the others; if one 
has a lower office he is to use it for the general good. 
And so, the Church is to make herself ready until all 
come to the fulness of the Body of the Anointed, of which 
we are all members. 

Principles may never be abandoned for any consideration; 
but liberties and personal rights may be ignored in 
the interest of others frequently and to Divine pleasing. 
The Apostle Paul was ready to go to any length in defense 
of principle (Gal. 2:5-1 1), but in the sacrifice of 
earthly rights and privileges and liberties for the sake of 
Christ and the Church, the Apostle evidently came next 
to our Lord Jesus, and is a noble example to all the 
Church. 

"How wise are God's commands; 
How sure His precepts are!" 



R4928 : page 440 

THE GRACE OF HUMILITY 

"In lowliness of mind let each esteem 



other better than themselves."— Phil. 2:3. 

THOSE WHO naturally have a humble mind 

have no particular difficulty in esteeming 

others better than themselves. But there 

are some who naturally have another attitude 

of mind. This is not necessarily their 

fault, for they may have been born with 

larger self-conceit than were others. But 

even if we were born with humbleness of 

mind, we should need to take care that self-conceit 

and pride do not come in. Sometimes 

in their own heart some people feel boastful of the 

knowledge they possess. They like to shine, even though 

they know they have no more brilliancy than others; they 

would like to obscure the shining of others that they might 

be the more noticed in the darkness. 

It would, therefore, be a safe matter for each of us to 
follow the Apostle's suggestion to cultivate this humility 
of mind and never allow it to be lost. "Humble yourselves, 
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that He 
may exalt you in due time"; "Whosoever exalteth himself 
shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted." (I Pet. 5:6; Luke 14:11.) God would do this 
abasing, not of a vengeful spirit, but because the one who 
would vaunt himself must be brought low. 

There might, however, be circumstances when some 
who appear to be vaunting themselves really are not doing 
so, but circumstances and conditions make it seem so. 
Therefore, to best fulfil the Apostle's injunction, we 
should, as he suggests in this text, cultivate the spirit of 
humility— not considering our own good qualities so much 
as those of others. If we have good qualities, we are 
glad; let us make use of them. 

In comparing ourselves with others, let us look at our 
own blemishes. There are very few in whom we cannot 
see some good qualities, good traits. If, therefore, we 
look at our own imperfections and the good qualities of 
others, we shall find ourselves more and more appreciative 
of others; and this will be of assistance to us in running 
the race. 

As an illustration of seeing something to admire, even 
in our enemies, we have the suggestion of the old lady to 
her nieces. One niece said to the other, "Auntie can say 
something good about everybody. I believe she could say 
something good even about the Devil." "That is so," 
answered the other. "Let us ask her." Then she called, 
"Auntie, is there any good about the Devil?" "My dear," 
replied Auntie, "I wish we all had as much perseverance 
as he has." 

So if we could find something in the Adversary that we 
could admire and commend, we can certainly find something 
in all others to admire and commend and to give 
them credit for. Thus we will cultivate the spirit that will 
be most helpful to ourselves for our future work. 

The consideration of our own imperfections would, as 



we have suggested, make us very humble of mind and keep 
us in a very humble attitude of mind. This might discourage 
us unless we had the proper relationship with the Lord 
and His Word. We know that "all things work together 
for good to those who love God." (Rom. 8:28.) Through 
His Word our Lord has provided for such the "Balm of 
Gilead" for their encouragement, and the anointing oil and 
the comfort of the Scriptures. 

The Lord does not cast us off if we are not wilfully 
wrongdoers and if we take in the right spirit the humiliating 
things. That disposition is what He wants. Those 
things which would humiliate us in the sight of others and 
in the sight of the Lord Himself, will, if we are rightly 
exercised by them, work together for good to us. Such 
He will bless and lift up and give an appreciation of 
His Love. This He purposes to do. We have every evidence 
that the Lord will give the necessary encouragement, 
and we have the assurance of the Scriptures that 
those who obey His Word to the best of their ability shall 
not be overcome. 

For each one to look merely upon his own things, interests, 
welfare or talents and to ignore those of others 
would manifest a general selfishness and, consequently, a 
dearth of the Spirit of Christ, which is a spirit of love and 
generosity. In proportion as we are filled more and more 
with the Holy Spirit, Love, we shall find ourselves interested 
in the welfare of others. This was the mind, disposition, 
or spirit which was in our dear Redeemer, which 

R4928 : page 441 

He so wonderfully manifested, which we must copy and 
develop in our characters if we would ultimately be of the 
"little flock," who shall be joint-heirs with Christ in His 
glory, concerning whom God has predestinated that to be 
accepted with Him to this position they must be "copies 
of His Son."-Rom. 8:29. 

OUR GREAT EXEMPLAR 

That we may partially discern how our Lord Jesus exemplified 
this spirit of humility, the Apostle briefly sums 
up the story of His humiliation and shows how it led to 
His present exaltation. He points out to us that when our 
Lord Jesus was a spirit being, before He stooped to take 
our nature and to bear the penalty of our sin, He was in 
"a form of God"— a spirit form, a high and glorious condition. 
But instead of being moved selfishly and ambitiously 
to grasp for higher things than God had conferred 
upon Him— instead of seeking to set up a rival Empire, 
as Satan did— He did not meditate a robbery of God to 
make Himself the Father's equal (Satan's course), and 
say, "I will ascend above the stars [the bright ones, the 
angelic hosts], I will be as the Most High" [His peer, His 
equal]. Quite to the contrary of this, our Lord Jesus, 
"the beginning of the creation of God," was willing, in 



harmony with the Father's plan, to humble Himself, to 
take a lower nature and to do a work which would involve, 
not only a great deal of humiliation, but also a great 
deal of pain and suffering. 

The Apostle points out how the "Only Begotten" 
proved His willingness and humility by complying with 
this arrangement; and that after He became a man He 
continued of this same humble spirit, willing to carry out 

R4929 : page 411 

the Divine Plan to the very letter by dying as man's 

ransom-price; and not only so, but when it pleased the 

Father to require that the death should be a most ignominious 

one in every respect, perhaps beyond the requirements 

of the ransom merely, He did not draw back, but 

said, "Thy will, not Mine, be done," and stooped even to 

the ignominious "death of the cross!" 

Here we have the most wonderful demonstration of 
humility, meekness and obedience to God that ever was 
manifested or that could be conceived of. And this is the 
pattern the Apostle points out that we should seek to copy. 
"Let this same [humble] mind be in you which was also 
in Christ Jesus. "--Phil. 2:5-10. 

This humility enabled our Lord to render perfect obedience, 
on account of which the Heavenly Father has so 
highly honored Him as to raise Him from the dead to the 
divine nature, to a station far above angels, principalities 
and powers, and every name that is named. That this is 
the Apostle's argument is shown (verse 9) by the word 
"wherefore"; i.e., on this account, on account of this 
humility just described, God has highly exalted Him. 

Not only did our Lord's beautiful and perfect humility 
and obedience demonstrate that He was to the core loyal 
to the Heavenly Father, but it also demonstrated that in 
Him the Father's spirit, Love, dwelt richly, for He shared 
the Father's love for the race He redeems. On this account 
also He is found worthy to be the Divine Agent in 
the blessing of all the families of the earth, according to 
the terms of the Divine Covenant made with Father 
Abraham. 

Thus He has become the "Seed of Abraham" which is 
to bless the race redeemed; and hence it will be to Him 
that "every knee shall bow and every tongue confess" 
when Jehovah's "due time" shall come for the pouring out 
of Divine blessings upon the redeemed world— that all 
may come to a knowledge of the truth and, if they will, 
into full harmony with God, and to eternal life. 

Not only does the Apostle hold up the Lord Jesus as 
the great Example of a proper humility, self-abnegation 
and obedience to God in the interest of others, but he 
would also hold up before us the reward, the high exaltation 
of our Lord by the Father, the result or reward of 
His obedience, that we also might be encouraged and realize 
that, if faithful in following the footsteps of our Redeemer 
and sacrificing the advantages of the present to 



serve the Lord and His cause, then in due time we also 
may expect to be glorified with Him and to share His 
name and throne and work, as members of His anointed 
Body, His Church, His joint-heir. 

Beloved, let us apply to ourselves the loving exhortation 
of the Apostle to the Church at Philippi, contained in 
the succeeding verses (Phil. 2:12-16), and continue in the 
way upon which we have entered, making more and more 
progress in the race-course, working out in ourselves 
through humility and obedience the character, the disposition 
of Christ, with fear and trembling, and thus working 
out each our own share in the great salvation to glory, 
honor and immortality which God hath promised. 

WORKING OUT OUR SALVATION 

We cannot work out our own justification, but being 
justified by the blood of Christ, and being called with the 
heavenly calling, we can make our calling and election 
sure. We can work out our own share in the great salvation 
to which we have been called in Christ by giving heed 
to the instructions of the Lord, by following the pattern 
which He has set for us; not that we shall attain perfection 
in the flesh, but merely perfection of will, of intention, 
of heart, and if we keep the body under to the 
extent of our ability, its weaknesses and imperfections will 
be reckoned as covered by the merit of our Lord, the Holy 
One. 

It is encouraging also for us to know that this warfare 
against weakness and sin is not merely one of our 
own, but that God is for us, has called us, and is helping 
us. He already works in us, by His word of promise, and 
has led us thus far in the willing and the doing of His 
will, His good pleasure; and He will continue thus to lead 
and to help us and to work in us by His Word of Truth, 
if we will continue to give heed to His counsel. "Sanctify 
them through Thy Truth— Thy Word is Truth." The 
Gospel is "the power of God unto salvation" to every one 
that so accepts it; and no greater stimulus to true godliness 
can be found than the "exceeding great and precious 
promises given unto us; that by these ye might be partakers 
of the divine nature."— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

Moreover, in following in the footsteps of our Lord 
Jesus, running the race for the great prize set before us 
in the Gospel, we are not to murmur by the way, finding 
fault with its difficulties and narrowness; nor are we to 
dispute respecting it, nor seek to have any other way than 
that which Divine providence marks out for us, realizing 
that the Lord knows exactly what experiences are necessary 
to our development in the school of Christ; and realizing 
also that, if obedience were possible, while our 
mouths are full of complaints and dissatisfaction with the 
Lord and our lot which He has permitted, it would indicate 
that we are at least out of sympathy with the spirit 
of His arrangement; and such an obedience, if it were 
possible (but it would not be possible), would not meet the 



Divine approval, nor gain us the "prize." Hence, as the 
Apostle exhorts, we should "Do all things without murmurings 
and disputings, that ye may be blameless and 
harmless, the sons of God without rebuke,... holding 
forth the Word of life in the midst of a crooked and 
perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the 
world."— Verses 14-16. 



R4930 : page 442 

"TO SHOW THYSELF APPROVED" 

"Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth 
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth."— 
2 Tim. 2:15. 

GOD SEEMS to have greatly blessed and used 

in the "harvest" work the six volumes of 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Probably 

none who are today rejoicing in the Truth 

would dissent from this statement in the 

slightest degree. Some we know would 

express the matter more strongly than this. 

Nevertheless every now and then we are 

brought to a realization that many of those 

who rejoice considerably in the Truth have 

but an imperfect knowledge of it— they are not rooted, 

grounded, established and built up in the Truth; they are 

not able to "rightly divide the Word of Truth"; they are 

not workmen who need never be ashamed in discussing 

the Truth with others. 

Some of these, deficient in their knowledge of the 
Truth, are mere babes, beginners, who have not yet had 
a full opportunity for study. Some of them have read 
Vol. I and have skimmed over the other volumes. They 
perhaps learned of the classes for Bible study, and, attending 
them and discussing with the brethren and hearing 
some discourses, seemed to assume that they knew 
the teachings of the entire six volumes as though they 
had read them, studied them. 

This is a great mistake; more, it is a serious mistake, 
because we are in the time when each and all must expect 
to be specially tried and tested. And those who have 
only a partial understanding of the Divine Plan— those 
who have only a part of the provided armor, will find it 
difficult, if not impossible, to stand in this evil day the 
assaults of the world, the flesh and the Adversary. If 
they have proper zeal for the Lord and a proper love for 
the Plan, they should manifest that zeal by thorough and 
persevering study of the volumes. They cannot afford 
to do less. 

We find also that some of the dear friends who read 
the SCRIPTURE STUDIES years ago, and not recently, imagine 
that they remember their contents, when in reality 



they are quite ignorant of many of their teachings. We 

all have leaky, earthen vessels and the precious treasure 

of Divine Truth soon exhausts unless we keep replenishing. 

One way of replenishing is to go to the Bible direct. 

But many have found what the Scriptures seem to imply, 

namely, that human teachers are necessary, and that they 

can get much more knowledge of the Scriptures through 

the assistance of a teacher than they could obtain by their 

own energy. Such of our readers as have not read the 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES this year can scarcely appreciate 

how much they probably have lost of what they 

originally learned therein. 



R4929 : page 442 

FERVENT IN SPIRIT-SERVING THE LORD 

THE HEAVENLY FATHER, through His 

various agencies operating during the 

more than eighteen centuries of this Gospel 

Age, has been seeking for His Son a companion, 

a Bride of many members, although 

in comparison to the world a "little flock." 

Various good qualities are desired and all 

of these will make the Bride class in the 

character-likeness of their Redeemer, their 

betrothed Bridegroom. They are deficient 

in all of these qualities according to the flesh, but fortunately 

the flesh will not be the basis of the decision as to 

their worthiness or unworthiness of the glorious prize. 

All will depend upon the mind, the will, the heart. It 

must be not only good, but absolutely perfect. "Blessed 

are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." They 

shall be the children of God. They shall be the joint-heirs 

of the Redeemer. 

This purity of heart which the Lord approves and 
desires might be summed up in the expression, loyalty of 
heart— loyalty to principles of Truth and righteousness, 
the principles of the Divine Government— loyalty to God 
the Father and to our Lord Jesus Christ and to all the 
members of His Body. This perfect heart-loyalty includes, 
therefore, love for God and for the Redeemer 
and for the brethren, as well as sympathetic love for the 
world of mankind, in harmony with the Divine purpose 
and Revelation. The Apostle says, "If these things be 
in you and abound, they make you that ye shall be neither 
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord," and 
"so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ."-2 Pet. 1:8,11. 

There is a particular force attaching to this word 
"abound." All of God's people, all begotten of the Holy 
Spirit, are inspired by the Spirit of the Father, 
the Spirit of love, the Spirit of justice and loyalty. 



But how about the degree, the abounding, the having 

of this love permeate all of life's affairs? If this 

Spirit of the Lord abound in us it will influence our business, 

our pleasure, our homes, our workshops, our kitchens, 

our dining rooms, our bed chambers, our very 

thoughts. 

May it be possible to have a measure of the Lord's 
Spirit with very little abounding, and hence have merely 
an enjoyment of some spiritual things, on special occasions, 
at church, etc.? It is the abounding love, the all -pervading 
influence of our Lord in the lives and in all of 
life's affairs of those who would have the abundant entrance 
into the Kingdom of Messiah as members of the 
Bride class, that is required. If they have this abounding 
loyalty and love they will be copies of God's dear Son, 
the Redeemer; otherwise, they will not. And God has 
predestinated that only such as are copies of His Son shall 
have a share in the Kingdom of Messiah. Others may 
reach, indeed, a secondary place, in the "great company" 
class, but will never reach the throne and never be members 
of the Bride class. 

How important, then, that we discern clearly the 
necessity for this abounding love, this zeal for God and 
for righteousness which will amount to a hatred of iniquity, 
even while loving, succoring and helping the evil-doers 
into right paths. 

THE HARVEST A SPECIAL TIME OF TRIAL 

So surely as we recognize that we are in the "harvest" 
time, we must also assume that the Lord is now specially 
ripening the "wheat" and separating it from the "tares" 
and, shall we say, dividing the wheat into two classes? 
It is this special testing of this harvest time which the 
Scriptures draw particularly to our attention, frequently 
warning us of the necessity of having on the whole armor 
of God and being not slothful in business, but fervent in 
spirit, serving the Lord. 

From our vantage-point in THE WATCH TOWER we 
perceive that just such testings as we should expect are 
in progress throughout the Lord's ripe wheat field. Divine 
providence is permitting tests of love and loyalty, faith 
and obedience, brotherly kindness and patience. Sometimes 
the trials come to the classes through the Elders, 

R4930 : page 443 

who should be the very ones to help, protect, admonish 
and assist the flock. Sometimes the Elders assume a 
lordly disposition quite contrary to the Divine Word and 
example and trying to the patience and love of the 
brethren. 

Sometimes the trial is from the other side. Some 
members of the class may be very exacting, very ready 
to strain at a gnat and swallow a camel, very ready to find 
fault with everything that the Elder may do, however 



faithful he may be. Such experiences, whether coming 
from the one side or the other, are tests, and it behooves 
each of the Lord's people to see just how he receives 
these tests and just what effect they have upon his own 
heart and character. If the experiences embitter him, 
anger him, or wound deeply his pride, it proves that he 
needed just such disciplinary experiences to show him 
his own lack and to point him to the Throne of heavenly 
grace for mercy and help. 

Again, some of the dear classes are assailed by the 
Adversary through false doctrines and have their own 
difficulties in endeavoring to defend the Truth, the Divine 
Plan of the Ages, and to maintain their stand in harmony 
therewith. Or, on the other hand, the difficulty may arise 
from some of the dear friends being hypercritical and 
trying to find differences where there are none— fomenting 
the spirit of strife rather than the spirit of harmony 
—discord rather than love. 

We exhort, dear brothers and sisters, what we all 
can agree to, namely, that we are in the testing time 
and these various matters are our test. Only by the exercise 
of much fervency of spirit, much zeal for the Lord, 
for the Truth and for the brethren, can we hope to stand 
faithfully and to be of assistance to others to a faithful 
stand. Let us not be faint-hearted. If we faint not, we 
shall soon reap our reward and hear the Master's voice: 
"Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joy of thy Lord." 

We are in the time of general unrest, grumbling, etc. 
Let us not think for a moment that such grumblings and 
murmurings are contentions for the "faith once delivered 
to the saints." Let us rather cultivate more and more 
the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. Let us specially 
exercise these in connection with our brethren of the 
"household of faith," of course not neglecting to "do 
good to all men as we have opportunity" and to be patient 
and forbearing to one another. But the special blessing 
of the Lord comes to those who specially seek to promote 
peace, happiness, welfare, prosperity and growth in grace 
in the Body of Christ, which is the "Church of the 
Living God." 



R4930 : page 443 

WAITING FOR MESSIAH 

-MAL. 3:1; 4:3.-DECEMBER 24TH.- 

"Behold He shall come, saith the Lord, even the Messenger of 
the Covenant, whom ye delight in. But who may abide the 
day of His coming? for He is like a refiner's 
fire and like fullers' soap."— Malachi 3:1,2. 

MALACHI'S PROPHECY, the most striking 



features of which constitute the lesson of 

today, concludes the Old Testament canon. 

It contains not only a Divine rebuke for 

sin, but also a Divine promise of rescue. 

It fits well to the time generally assigned to 

it— Nehemiah's period. It remained for 

Israel to show thorough repentance and to 

institute thorough reforms. The needed 

reformation fits equally well to our day. 

In their professed devotions they were robbing God and 

impoverishing themselves. It rested upon them to note 

what great blessings would be theirs if they rendered a 

whole-heart service to the King of kings. 

The Jews, comparing themselves with other nations, 
perceived that as a result of being God's people they had 
been held to a more strict account than other nations, so 
that although their nationality was superior, it was 
through repeated and severe chastisements. They were 
even questioning the profitableness of being "God's chosen 
people." The arrogant, proud nations around them flourished 
in temporalities more than they. They could not 
stand this; they forgot that they were a people for a purpose, 
and that to fit them for Divine service in the future 
trying experiences were permitted, and were really evidences 
of Divine favor. "What son is he whom the 
father chasteneth not? If ye be without chastisement, 
then are ye not sons." 

This lesson of a future reward is brought forward by 
the words, "They that feared the Lord spake often one to 
another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book 
of remembrance was written before Him for them that 
feared the Lord and thought upon His Name. They 
shall be Mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that Day when 
I make up My jewels."— Malachi 3:16,17. 

ISRAEL-TYPICAL AND ANTITYPICAL 

The foregoing has revealed very much of all prophecies 
respecting Israel's favors to be fulfilled— a portion in 
Spiritual Israel's experiences and another portion in 
Natural Israel's. The faithful of the Jewish Age, Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets, will surely 
have a great reward. When Messiah's Kingdom shall be 
inaugurated on the spirit plane, invisible to men, those 
Ancient Worthies, who were once called the fathers, will 
have a very high rank of service in connection with the 
Kingdom, in that they will be its earthly representatives 
and exponents. "Instead of Thy fathers shall be Thy 
children" [of Messiah], whom Thou [Messiah] mayest 
make Princes [rulers] in all the earth."— Psa. 45:16. 

R4931 : page 443 

Spiritual Israel, as history shows us, is the great Messiah 
for whom the Jews have so long waited. This Messiah 
has many members— Jesus is its Head, the Church 



are His members. This Messiah, Jesus and His members 

or Bride, constitute the Spiritual Seed of Abraham— 

"as the stars of heaven." These must first be completed, 

and will be glorified in Kingdom power before 

the Ancient Worthies can receive their blessing on the 

earthly plane, and before Natural Israel can be gathered 

to them as the nucleus of the Kingdom of God on 

earth, to which ultimately all nations, peoples, kindred and 

tongues shall flow for a share in Israel's New Covenant 

blessings. Of these St. Paul says, "If ye be Christ's then 

are ye Abraham's Seed [typified by Isaac], and heirs according 

to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) These are to be 

God's jewels on the spirit plane, as the faithful Jews of 

the past are to be the jewels on the earthly plane, marked 

or enrolled for distinguished honor in connection with 

Messiah's Kingdom. 

"MESSENGER OF THE COVENANT" 

The Israelites, discouraged with their failure to keep 
the Law and to get the blessings promised therefrom, were 
encouraged by the Lord with the promise that some day 
a great Messiah would appear— greater than Moses, with 
whom God would make a New Covenant on their behalf. 
The New Covenant would be superior to the old one in 
that it would have a better Mediator, for Israel already 

R4931 : page 444 

had God's perfect law. The New Mediator would not 
relax the Law, either. The advantage to accrue through 
Him would be that somehow His Covenant and Sin-Offering 
would be more efficacious than that which Moses instituted, 
because it would put away sin forever and give willing 
Israelites a new heart, a heart of flesh, after which 
they would be given everlasting life on condition of their 
maintaining their relationship with the Almighty. 

Jeremiah particularized this, saying: "It shall come to 
pass after those days, saith the Lord, that I will make a 
New Covenant with the House of Israel and with the 
House of Judah, not according to the Covenant which I 
made with their fathers when I led them out of Egypt, 
...but their sins and their iniquities will I remember 
no more."— Jer. 31:31. 

Israel's hope thenceforth was in the Messiah, whose 
coming would bring to them the New Covenant blessings. 
They have waited for Him since. Who can help admiring 
the persistency of the Jewish faith— their loyalty to 
God! Who can help noticing how sharply it is in contrast 
with their previous unbelief and idolatry! Who can 
doubt that God still loves His people whom He foreknew 
and whom He has promised shall be regathered— back to 
their own land and back to His favor under the New Covenant! 
-Rom. 11:25. 

But the Prophet Malachi clearly intimates that there 
might be disappointment in connection with the much 



longed for Messenger or Mediator of the New Covenant, 
in whom the Jews so delighted and hoped. The declaration 
is that His day will be a strenuous one: "Who shall 
stand when He appeareth?" "Who will abide the day of 
His coming?" (Malachi 3:2.) The intimation is that not 
many will abide, not many will stand— the majority will fall. 

The reason is given. He will require such purity, such 
holiness, that few will come up to His requirements. 
The tests He will impose will be like fullers' soap, which 
is the foe of every spot upon a garment white. His requirements 
will be like those of a refiner of silver— all the 
dross must be eliminated, in a furnace hot enough to insure 
its separation. The test will last a considerable time, 
for He will sit as a refiner sits, giving close inspection, 
that the heat be neither too great nor too little, the time 
neither too long nor too short. 

This great Messiah, the Messenger of the New Covenant, 
began His refining and purifying work more than 
eighteen centuries ago. He followed the Divine rule, "To 
the Jew first." He began to refine and purify a priestly 
class for association with Himself in the glorious Messianic 
work. To the Jew first came the privilege of being 
the antitypical Levites. Thousands of them responded 
at Pentecost, and subsequently, but not enough to complete 
the foreordained number of Spiritual Israelites, 
members of the Body of Messiah. 

Since then the selecting work has been in progress for 
eighteen centuries. God has been calling and drawing 
from all nations, and as many as respond the great Refiner 
has been purifying; and if these suffer afflictions for 
righteousness they are sharing in the sufferings of Messiah 
that they may be accounted worthy also of a share in His 
glories to follow. Soon the "elect" number will be completed; 
the blood of the New Covenant will be made efficacious 
for Israel and for all the families of the earth, and 
on that basis the Messianic Kingdom or reign of righteousness 
will begin. 



R493 1 : page 444 

"HE IS FAITHFUL AND JUST" 

-DECEMBER 3 1ST. - 

"If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us 
our sins and cleanse us from all unrighteousness."— 1 John 1:9. 

WE KNOW of no heathen religion which 
teaches a god of mercy and love and kindness. 
Heathen deities are represented as 
powerful, ferocious, terrible. The people 
fear them as demons, but know nothing 
about the God of Love. Alas! that we 
must say it, but there are many Christians 



who, misled by the creeds of the Darker 
Ages, do not recognize, do not worship the 
God of the Bible— the God of all Grace, 
concerning whom we have the declaration, "God is 
Love." 

The Psalmist's words give us a proper conception— 
"But there is forgiveness with Thee, that Thou mayest 
be feared"— reverenced. (Psa. 130:4.) We can see 
readily enough that the Almighty must be the very embodiment 
of Justice— not, however, a justice of the kind 
we were taught, which was really a great injustice. God 
was just in sentencing Father Adam to death because of 
his disobedience to the Divine Law. He was just in making 
that sentence applicable to all of Adam's posterity. 
Had He let the sentence rest and allowed man to die like 
the brute beast, without any hope of a future life, we 
would have had no ground for complaint. It would have 
been simple Justice. 

But God commended His love to us, and it is His love 
which constrains us to seek Him and to desire to serve 
Him and to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. God's will 
meant the requirement of Justice and He opened up the 
way by which He could be just and yet be the Justifier 
of those who believe in Jesus, who become His disciples, 
to take up their cross and follow Him; and having thus 
arranged for the satisfaction of these, God purposes to 
give a blessing to Adam and his race in a way which 
would do them the most good. And this showing of the 
Divine character is not merely to bring laudation to the 
Almighty, but specially for the purpose of making His 
creatures acquainted with His character, that they may 
have great confidence in Him throughout eternity, and 
that, seeing the beauties of His character, they may copy 
the same and thus be more abundantly blessed. 

SALVATION'S FIRST STEP 

The first step of God's Plan is the selection of a special 
class, a saintly few from amongst mankind. They are 
chosen for a purpose. In them God would show forth the 
exceeding riches of His Grace and His loving kindness 
in Christ Jesus (Eph. 2:6,7), in lifting sinners from the 
miry clay to so glorious a station as He has promised 
them— the divine nature, far above angels, principalities 
and powers. Additionally He proposes to use them and 
their experiences with sin, and their victories over sin, by 
making them joint-heirs with Christ in the ruling and 
blessing and judging of the world by and by. 

Following the completion of the Church of the First-borns 
will come the later borns. It is the Divine intention, 
not only that the Church shall attain to the liberty of 
the sons of God on the spirit plane, like unto the angels, 
but it is His purpose also that humanity in general shall 
be granted an opportunity to become sons of God during 
Messiah's reign: "For the creation itself also shall be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption [death and sin] 



into the glorious liberty of the sons of God" [human sons, 

R4931 : page 445 

such as Adam was in his perfection, free from sin and 
death, possessed of the full liberty which God provided 
for all in full fellowship with Him].— Romans 8:21. 

IF WE CONFESS 

Our text undoubtedly refers to those now called of God 
to be members of the Bride of Christ, and sharers of the 
liberty and glory of sonship on the spirit plane. Nevertheless 
it states a principle which will be applicable also 
during the thousand years of Messiah's reign. None then 
need expect to make progress on the Highway of Holiness 
except first they confess their sins and turn from 
them and accept the proffered blessing of Messiah, who 
then will be reigning for the very purpose of destroying 
sin and uplifting sinners. 

Applying the text to the present time, we see that it 
does not refer to sinners in general, but to the Church 
of Christ, as again we read, "If we sin we have an Advocate 
with the Father, Jesus Christ." So this confession 
of sins does not relate to the world, who have not 
yet become children of God through faith and consecration. 
This statement corresponds to the one in our Lord's 
prayer which says, "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive 

R4932 : page 445 

those who trespass against us." 

"JUST TO FORGIVE US" 

Those who have become new creatures in Christ by 
faith and obedience— those who have taken up their cross 
to follow Him and have been begotten of the Holy Spirit 
—God has agreed to forgive all their unwilling trespasses 
upon request. Hence the Apostle John here says 
that it will be merely just on God's part to fulfil to His 
holy ones this promise which He has made to them. 
Reasoning upon the same subject St. Paul urges, "Let us 
come with courage to the throne of heavenly grace that 
we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of 
need."-Heb. 4:16. 

It was evidently because the Lord foresaw that His 
people might become so abashed by their repeated failures 
through inherited weaknesses of their flesh that He 
provided this special exhortation for their encouragement. 
This is a point well to be remembered. At this, 
the close of another year and the opening of a new one, 
we urge that all Christians keep daily record with the 
Lord and never retire to rest without obtaining this grace 
of forgiveness and help. But if any have delayed the 
matter and a cloud has come between them and the Lord, 



let them surely avail themselves of these promises in the 
close of this year that they may start the New Year with 
a clean slate— with the smile of their Father's face upon 
them, and with the fellowship of their Redeemer and 
with fresh resolves for earnestness and carefulness in 
walking in His steps. 

WEARY AND HEAVY LADEN 

There are other Scriptures which apply to those of 
the world who have not yet become the Lord's people, and 
who are not therefore included in our text. This class 
we refer to are included in the Lord's words, "Come unto 
Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give 
you rest. Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me, and 
ye shall find rest to your souls." (Matt. 1 1:28,29.) 
There is no rest of heart in the restless striving of selfishness 
and sin, yet these sometimes work out experiences 
which lead the weary to the great Sin-Bearer, the Friend 
above all others. 

What more opportune time than the beginning of the 
year to make the one great contract with the Lord which 
will make us disciples indeed— the covenant of self-sacrifice, 
self-denial, self-renunciation, taking up the cross 
to follow the Lord's leading whithersoever He goeth, 
knowing that the end of the journey will be glorious and 
blessed; yea, and that the trials on the way toward the 
Heavenly Kingdom will be blessed and overruled for good, 
because Jesus will be a sharer also in them. 



R4932 : page 445 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

"NOW ARE WE THE SONS OF GOD" 

QUESTION.— Are consecrated believers actually 
or only reckonedly sons of God? 

Answer.— Consecrated believers are actually 
sons of God. The Scriptures so state 
the matter. "Now are we the sons of God, 
and it doth not yet appear what we shall 
be; but we know that when He shall appear, 
we shall be like Him, for we shall 
see Him as He is." (I John 3:2.) Old 
things have passed away and all things have become 
new. (2 Cor. 5:17.) Either you are a son of God or you 
are not a son of God. If you have made the proper consecration 
and God has begotten you of the Holy Spirit, 
you are a son of God. It is just as well, dear friends, 
that we have this matter clearly before our minds. 

In England a business man said to us after one of the 
great Albert Hall Meetings, "I was out to hear you at 
Albert Hall, and you discouraged me very much." At 



first we did not know what he meant. As he proceeded 
we found out. He said, "I had been thinking that I was a 
good Episcopalian, and that if God had anything good to 
give away I should be sure to get it if any one would. 
From the way you talk I see you think there is only a 
'little flock' which gets these good things which the Father 
has. You have quite upset my faith." 

When we came to understand what the gentleman 
meant we told him that we were very glad, for we wanted 
to wake him up before he should die with such a misunderstanding 
of God's terms. God is not calling people who 
say, "I would rather serve You than go to hell, but that 
is all the interest I have in you." God is calling those 
people who love righteousness and hate iniquity. Of 
that kind He is getting the number He wants for His 
special place— to be joint-heirs with His Son. He is not 
calling the remainder of mankind. After this Gospel Age 
will be the time for those on the earthly plane to receive 
their blessing, to reach human perfection. 

But the only ones who will ever get the spiritual or 
high calling are those who are saints. How can we suppose 
that God will exalt to association with Jesus, as 
members of His Body, any who are not saints at heart, 
pure in their intentions, especially pure— loyal to God to 
the very core? Would you expect Him to take any 
others? You would not even respect the Government of 
God if you knew He would have all sorts of people in 
highly exalted places and give them the divine nature. 
If you believed such to be the case you must lose all respect 
for the Almighty's Government. But when He 
tells you that all those who will be highly exalted to association 
with Jesus will be copies of His Son, you will say, 
"That sounds right." It is right. The Lord's ways 
are just and righteous altogether. If we should never 
make our calling and election sure we would say, "True 
and righteous are Thy ways, Lord God Almighty." 

But we could never count it right if anyone should 
be roasted through all eternity or in Purgatory for a time. 
We could never agree to the righteousness of that. Such 

R4932 : page 446 

ways would be most unjust. There is no one who for his 
shortcomings could ever warrant the sentence of eternal 
torment, or even one hundred years of torment, or even 
one year of torment. It could not be right for poor, imperfect 
human beings to be held responsible for perfection 
and to be tormented because of coming short of it. But 
you know, and everybody knows, that to whatever extent 
you co-operate with evil, to that extent you will bring 
upon yourself degradation, mental, moral and physical; 
and every step you go downward must be retraced, if you 
attain to anything good in this life or in the life to come. 

R4933 : page 446 



There is a righteous recompense of reward, as the Scriptures 
say, to the righteous as well as to the evildoers. 



THE LAND WAS FORCED TO KEEP ITS SABBATHS 

Question. --In a chapter in Vol. II of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES it is shown how the Israelites while in captivity 
were forced to observe the Sabbaths which they 
did not observe before. Why are these Sabbaths called 
Jubilees in Vol. II? 

Answer.— What the Second Volume of STUDIES says 
is, not that the Jews were forced to keep their Sabbaths 
while in Babylon, but that the land was forced to keep 
these Sabbaths, while the Jews were in Babylon. God 
says so. (2 Chron. 36:20,21.) The Jews were commanded 
that in the Jubilee year the land should rest. 
Like the rest of humanity, somewhat selfish, they were 
afraid that if they should let the land rest a whole year 
they would get behind in their taxes, etc. So they did 
not properly keep those Jubilees. Israel had kept nineteen 
Jubilees up to the time when they went into captivity; 
and the Lord was greatly dissatisfied with them. 
He said: While you have had the land, the land did not 
observe the Sabbaths. You did not keep the Sabbaths 
properly. We are not herein blaming the Jews, for we 
believe that if the Lord should put such a commandment 
upon the United States or any other country, very few 
would keep it. 

According to the Law, the Sabbath year occurred 
every seventh year. The people were instructed to count 
seven times seven years, and then came the fiftieth, the 
Jubilee. Thus two Sabbaths came together, one of which, 
the fiftieth, was the great Jubilee year. The Jews kept 
these Sabbaths in a half-hearted way; so the Lord put 
them out of their land into the enemy's land, until their 
land should accomplish her Sabbaths. Evidently God 
did not wish the Jew to understand the full import 
of these time features; for the Jew does not understand 
even to this day. If God had meant for the Jew to understand, 
the Jew would have understood. But we believe 
that these time features were meant chiefly for the 
Spiritual Israelite, and that the number 70 was put there 
to show us when the time should come for the Lord to 
bless Israel and the whole world. When the time comes, 
then the Jews will understand about their Sabbaths, the 
captivity and the fulfilment of all things. But we get 
this information from the spiritual source, a higher source 
than the Jews and the remainder of the world. 



R4933 : page 446 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



EXTENSION WORK IN AFRICA 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have just returned from a Pilgrim visit to Johannesburg 
and am writing to supplement my reports of the work in that 
district by what I have learned from personal observation. 

In fulfilment of a long-standing promise and regarding it 
opportune for the advancement of the Lord's work, I arranged 
a ten-days' visit to Johannesburg and the Orange Free State 
to meet brethren in both places. Most of that time I spent 
in the "Golden City." 

As there were no regular meetings held there I did not 
have an opportunity to lecture, but spent a busy time visiting 
those who were more or less interested, seeking to strengthen 
and confirm their faith. 

I had also some interesting conversations with friends who 
do not quite see eye to eye with us, among whom was the 
President of the Natal and Transvaal Conference of Seventh 
Day Adventists. I had a more profitable time with some other 
friends I visited, and the outcome is that with the beginning 
of September there will be a little class meeting in Johannesburg 
for the study of God's great Plan. This is a small beginning, 
but it is a beginning, and I am hopeful of further 
development. 

Johannesburg is a peculiar city. Being the center of the 
gold industry of the world it attracts to itself from all parts 
people of an acquisitive type, whom we would not expect to 
show much interest in spiritual things. The vigorous existence 
of several modern religious idiosyncrasies, such as the Apostolic 
Faith Movement (gift of tongues), Spiritism, Christian 
Science, etc., etc., indicate, however, that, despite our expectations, 
there exists even in this modern Babylon a spiritual 
hunger, which the old errors and superstitions cannot satisfy 
and reveals the presence of many who, though meantime blinded 
by the Adversary, are nevertheless groping for the light. 

While in that district I took the opportunity to run down 
seventy miles into the Orange Free State to make the acquaintance 
of some Dutch brethren with whom I had been corresponding. 
I suggested a Chart Lecture in the little town of 
Parys, where they live, and they jumped at the idea. Through 
the courtesy of the municipality we had the free use of the 
Town Hall for the lecture, which was quite an event. The 
Mayor of Parys occupied the chair and introduced the lecturer 
with a few well-chosen words. The Vice-Mayor, a brother 
in the Truth, translated our remarks into Dutch for the benefit 
of the non-English-speaking portion of the audience after we 
had been accompanied to the platform by a prominent merchant 
in town, also a brother in the Lord. There were about 250 
people in the audience and they listened attentively to an 
exposition of the Chart. 

I had also interesting talks with several of the Boers and 
found them quite ready to reason about God's Plan and very 
tired of the spiritual fare served out to them by the Predikants 
of the Dutch Reformed Church. 

The South African Dutch are a Bible-loving people. They 



are as yet free from the demoralizing influence of Higher 
Criticism and Evolutionary Theories and are growing restive 
under the continued preaching of a theory of eternal torment 
that is an insult to the intelligence of humanity and a libel on 
the character of God. Having met some of these people I 
feel more than ever convinced that God has a work to do 
among them and would earnestly recommend the proposals 
which I submit under other covers for their assistance. 

The Lord of the Harvest is at work. The time is short. 
Not a single grain of wheat will fail of being gathered. May 
we then be diligent in (His) business that we may gather 
fruit unto life eternal! 

With much Christian love, dear brother, and earnestly 
soliciting your prayers for the Harvest work in Africa, I am, 

Your brother and co-laborer, W. W. JOHNSTON. --Africa. 



"ROLLING THE OLD CHARIOT ALONG IN AFRICA" 

DEAR BROTHER IN THE LORD:- 

We, a few in South Africa, gratefully own possession of 
your "keys" [STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES] and ofttimes praise 
our dear Lord for the privilege of the free access they afford 
us to the great storehouse of the riches of His Truth. 

With uplifted hearts we bless and praise the God of our 
forefathers that He hath magnified the Law and made it honorable; 
that His mercy endureth forever. 

Further, in addition to the "keys," which we may also term 
a magnifying glass, we are greatly blessed with a carpenter 
in the flesh and "he stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out 
with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out 
with a compass." Oh, "What shall we render unto the Lord 
for all His benefits!" 

Thus, our little band realizes that the Lord is ever mindful 
of us; yea, specially favoring us and we rejoice in the love 
and fellowship of His saints. 

But, dear brother, we know full well that there are not 
many in South Africa who put "the keys" to their practical 

R4934 : page 447 

use and that few have the penetration of spiritual character 
that would lead them to the use of the magnifying glass and 
many there are who cannot be reached by present temporal 
facilities. 

We are, therefore, praying the Lord of the Harvest to 
call a feast in order that special opportunities may be afforded 
the lame, the halt, the blind and the indifferent ones, to "see 
themselves as they are" and afterward contemplate the King 
in all His love and beauty. 

We feel that this is the Lord's due time in this corner of 
the earth for a special awakening of estranged brethren and 
the shaking of the structures of the formalist, the scientist, the 
spiritist and the atheist. 

The "weekly flashlights" from across the waters are specially 



welcome to us, but our hearts are fervently zealous in 
supplication to our Heavenly Father that He will ship to us 
the Instrument of His handiwork and favor us with His command 
—"Let there be Light." 

We have come to realize "the liberty of the sons of God," 
hence our full freedom from restraint in holding converse 
with a brother we know and love, but have not yet seen with 
the natural eye, but hope to see in darkest Africa. And 
until you arrive on our shores we will do our best to serve 
the Lord and "roll the old chariot along" in His dear name, 
gratefully ascribing to Him all the honor and the glory. 

May the special blessing of the Master rest upon you, dear 
brother, is our earnest prayer and thus will we continue to 
pray. Yours in the Lord, WILHELMINA J. PITT. -Africa. 



"DIE STIMME" STIRRING UP JEWS IN RUSSIA 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Your favor of August 1 gladly received. My visit to this 
place is at an end. The Lord knows best what result shall 
come from it. The Truth is spread considerably over the 
country in many different ways. There is also a good deal 
of interest in Present Truth, but the Roman Catholics in 
general and Poles especially are very slow to join any 
Protestant congregation. Many are coming to the meeting 
and are circulating our literature, but they do not join the 
class. 

The class at Warsaw is about twenty-five, at Pabianice 
twenty, at Ricin about eight, besides a few scattered here and 
there. On August 15 seven of the brethren were immersed. 
Some interest is manifested in Lodz. One of our brethren 
here in Warsaw doing Colporteur work will go there to assist. 
He is a young man, full of zeal, and consecrated; I believe 
it may be the Lord's will for him to go and do the work. 
Lodz is a large city of about 500,000 and is very close to 
Pabianice, where we have a class. At the railroad station in 
Lodz, at a newspaper stand, we placed Die Stimme; many Jews 
coming and going to Russia are buying and carrying the paper 
with them. 

Many Jews in Warsaw and small towns already know your 
name. All Jewish papers were writing articles pro and con, 
but most of them have the idea that Die Stimme is a missionary 
paper. However, there is a good deal of interest all over 
the country amongst the Jews. 

It is very hard to do Colporteur work here. One or two 
books is all that a Colporteur can sell in a day's work; besides, 
there are many difficulties at every step. 

In regard to the permission for meetings, which Brother 
Bente tried to get, it is a complete failure. The first petition 
to the Secretary of Religious Affairs was refused on account 
of some miswording, though it cost fifteen rubles. The second 
petition was placed in the hands of a lawyer and cost seventy-five 
rubles and, after all, is good for nothing. I think I have 
found a man, however, who will do the work for us and bring 



desirable results. In whatever way the Lord's answer may 
come this time we will take it as from the Lord. 

With this letter I enclose a copy of the Russian PEOPLES 
PULPIT, "Where are the Dead?" For ten thousand copies they 
charged seventy-three rubles, about $36. I ordered also stereo-types 
which will cost about $4 for four pages. Some difficulties 
were experienced before the paper could appear as it is now. 
While it is true that there are many difficulties, nevertheless 
there are many souls longing after God. 

As soon as I have everything ready I shall leave for 
Galicia, and by the end of the month, or October 1 , 1 expect to 
land in America. 

May our dear Lord continue to bless you and all your co-workers 
until the Harvest work is over. 

Your brother in the Lord Jesus, 

R. H. OLESZYNSKI.-Russia. 



page 447 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study VI.— Order and 
Discipline in the New Creation. 

JANUARY 8 

"LET EVERY MAN BE FULLY PERSUADED IN HIS OWN MIND. 

(85) While it is desirable that each should reach a decision 
"in his own mind," is it reasonable to expect or demand 
that all should see exactly alike? P. 326, par. 1. 

(86) How harmonize this view with the Apostle's exhortation 
that we "mind the same things"? P. 326, par. 1; P. 327, par. 1. 

(87) To preserve order in meetings for study, to whom 

only should questions and remarks be addressed? P. 327, par. 2. 

(88) While unity of knowledge is desirable, what is still 
more important? P. 327, par. 3. 

FUNERAL SERVICES 

(89) What general advice respecting funeral arrangements 
is suggested? P. 328. 

(90) Who are best qualified to conduct a funeral service, 
and if none such be found, may any brother, or even a sister, 
with propriety set forth the Truth about death, and our hopes 
for the future? P. 329, par. 1. 

JANUARY 15 

SUGGESTIVE OUTLINE OF FUNERAL DISCOURSE 

(91) What suggestions as to the order of such a service? 
P. 329, par. 1-3. 

(92) Briefly state the general character and scope of a 



funeral discourse. P. 330 to 337, par. 1. 

(93) What course should be followed with respect to the 
prayer immediately after the discourse, and in the closing of 
the service, and at the grave? P. 338, par. 1-3. 

(94) What changes should be made to suit the varying 
circumstances of the deceased? P. 338, par. 4,5. 

TITHES, COLLECTIONS, ETC. 

(95) Why should public collections and the money question 
in general be avoided in assemblies of the Lord's people? 

P. 339, par. 1,2. 

(96) Should this avoidance of collections and financial 
questions in the assembly be interpreted to discourage a spirit 

of generosity or cheerful giving? P. 340, par. 1; P. 341, par. 1, first 
six lines. 

JANUARY 22 

(97) Are our time, talents and influence more appreciated 
by the Lord than our money, and if so, what should be our 
course of action accordingly? P. 341, par. 1,2. 

(98) What thoughts respecting God, the great Giver, are 
suggested by the Scripture, "It is more blessed to give than to 
receive"? P. 341, par. 3; P. 342, par. 1. 

(99) In proportion as we have fellowship with the Lord 
and partake of His Holy Spirit, what are our experiences as 
New Creatures? P. 342, par. 2. 

(100) How does this spirit of love, this desire to give, influence 
our every thought and action? P. 343, par. 1. 

(101) What lesson may we learn from the poor widow and 
her "two mites"? P. 344, par. 1. 

JANUARY 29 

(102) Why is our consecration measured by our benevolences 
and self-sacrifices? P. 344, par. 2. 

(103) How shall we determine the Divine Will with respect 
to carrying out our consecration of our time, our money, 

our all? P. 345, par. 1. 

(104) Why did the Lord give the tithing system to the 

Jews and leave the New Creation without any such law? P. 345, 
par. 2. 

(105) As all the gold and silver are the Lord's why 

does He permit His work to be in such condition as to need 
financial help from His consecrated people? P. 346. 

(106) What is our conclusion with respect to the money 
question? and should money be solicited or accepted from outsiders? 
P. 347. 



page 449 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXXII DECEMBER 15 No. 24 



A.D. 1911-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

1911-AnnualReport-1911 451 

Facts and Figures Helpful 451 

1912— Views from The Watch Tower 454 

The Outlook is Promising 455 

What Recent Events Foreshadow 455 

The Editor's British Tour 456 

Preparing for the Kingdom 457 

The Very Greatest Prophet 458 

A Savior-A Life-Giver 459 

The Hallelujah Chorus 460 

Consecration in the Temple 460 

"Set for the Fall and Rising Again of 

Many in Israel 461 

What We are to Expect 461 

In Everything Give Thanks (Poem) 462 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 462 

Lecture Announcements 463 

Index to 1911 Watch Tower 464 

page 450 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. 
Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please 
address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4939 : page 450 

A SPECIAL JANUARY NUMBER 

The Pastor Russell Lecture Bureau is the style of a newspaper 
syndicate which handles Brother Russell's weekly sermons. 
This syndicate felt a deep interest in the world tour 
and published a pamphlet descriptive of said tour and containing 
sketches of Brother Russell's younger days, gleaned 
from an article in the National Encyclopedia of American 
Biography, Vol. XII. Several WATCH TOWER readers saw 
the pamphlet, which is about the size of THE WATCH TOWER, 
and they urged that it be made a part of the January 1st 
issue. We have adopted the suggestion, believing that the 
pamphlet would be interesting to all of our readers. The 
value will be enhanced by the printing of the outside cover 
of that issue in colors, thus making that page suitable for 
framing, if desired. 

Additionally, on another of the cover pages, we purpose 
a reproduction of a new and very popular picture of our 
Lord and His Apostles passing through a wheat-field, Jesus 
and Peter in conversation, John following, then James, 
Matthew the Levite and others. We are sure that this picture 
will be greatly prized by every WATCH TOWER reader. To 
avoid the marks of folding, we purpose that they shall be 
rolled and suggest to you great care in cutting the wrapper, 
lest the picture be injured. It is quite a work of art and 
probably could not be purchased in any art store for less than 
fifty cents. 

We trust that our subscribers will be as interested in the 
receiving of the January number as we feel interested in preparing 
it for them. 



YOUR CHURCH CONNECTION REPORTS 

In our issue of October 1 we suggested an appropriate 
answer for such as might inquire respecting our Church 
connections. It is important that we state ourselves truthfully 
and explicitly that we be not misunderstood— that our 
good be not evil-spoken of. Many were greatly pleased with 
our suggestions, yet they prefer not to cut the item from 
their WATCH TOWER and inquire if we cannot provide this 
same matter neatly gotten up in card form. 

The suggestion seems a good one and we have followed 
it, only that we have put the entire matter on one side of 



the card and on the back of the card the synopsis of faith 
found at the top of this page— as to what the Scriptures 
teach. We believe that these cards will be very desirable to 
the friends. We are able to provide them at a very small 
price, postpaid, namely 20c. per 100. 



page 450 

EXTRA TOWERS FOR BEREAN CLASSES 

Some are inquiring, "Could a lower price be made on 
THE WATCH TOWER if sent to Berean Classes in addition to 
those which the same persons subscribe for and get individually? 
The thought is to have THE WATCH TOWER at 
our Class Meeting for use in connection with the Berean 
Studies." 

We are pleased with this suggestion, but would not wish 
it to interfere in any way with the subscription standing in your 
own names. We specially like to have upon our lists the 
names of all who are interested in Present Truth— the 
Harvest Message. For such Berean Classes we will supply 
THE WATCH TOWER at half-price. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family 
listens to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," 
then joins in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA 
text is considered. Hymns for January follow: (1) 34; 
(2) 320; (3) 300; (4) 130; (5) 12; (6) 103; (7) 32; 
(8) 112; (9) 333; (10) 279; (11) 73; (12) 259; (13) 
Vow; (14) 177; (15) 229; (16) 16; (17) 301; (18) 70; 
(19) 135; (20) 325; (21) 191; (22) 87; (23) 109; (24) 
127; (25) 96; (26) 291; (27) 307; (28) 313; (29) 213; 
(30) 91; (31) 260. 



R4934: page 451 

1911 -ANNUAL REPORT- 1911 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 

DEC. 1ST, 1910-DEC. 1ST, 1911. 

SWIFTLY SPEED the years-another has 
gone! But none too swiftly do they fly 
when we reflect that they bring us nearer 
and nearer to our goal— "the hope set before 
us in the Gospel"— "the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son," in which with all the faithful 



of this Age we hope to share, as members of 

"the Bride, the Lamb's Wife," associated 

with Him in His Throne. Yet, while rejoicing 

in the nearness of the Kingdom, another 

thought presents itself— are we ready for it— have 

we the graces of the Holy Spirit shed abroad in our 

hearts? Have we the fruits of the spirit well ripened in 

our characters? The greater our faith the more earnest 

should be our zeal in the race for the prize set before us. 

If by God's grace we discern with clear vision the goal of 

glory, honor and immortality, in association with our Redeemer 

in the glorious work of His Messianic Kingdom 

of a thousand years, what manner of persons ought we to 

be in "all holy living and godliness" while awaiting that 

consummation! 

We are glad to be able to report from our vantage 
point on THE WATCH TOWER that a deep work of grace is 
in progress amongst the readers of this journal. We 
know this from the thousands of letters which come to us, 
as well as through the reports of the Pilgrim brethren and 
from our own personal contact with you at conventions, 
etc. Apparently there has been quite a clearing of the 
spiritual atmosphere within the past two years; some 
whom we loved walk no more with us, yet, strange to say, 
their places have been more than filled; and many who 
have come recently into the light of "present truth" give 
evidence that for a considerable time they have been in 
the school of Christ and learned of Him. In the light of 
"present truth" some of these have made such remarkable 
progress as to startle and abash others who have enjoyed 
the light of the Divine Plan much longer. 

The general effect is stimulating; many are realizing 
the force of what we have long pointed out, namely, that 
while the Divine requirement is not knowledge but grace, 
nevertheless, in Divine providence, the two go hand in 
hand today, the one sealing the heart and the other the intellect. 
The daily Manna text and comments are proving 
helpful in many homes. Many are joining with the Bethel 
Family daily in the use of the same hymn of praise and in 
the reading of the Vow. The numbers who have informed 
us that they have taken the Vow is now close upon 10,000. 
What a wonderful prayer circle— these each remembering 
the others throughout the world. The Berean Studies with 
the printed questions are stimulating thought and are helping 
Bible students to consider deep subjects far more than 
would printed answers. The little classes everywhere are 
finding that they thus make much better progress than ever 
before in the mastication of spiritual food. Increasing 
numbers are following the suggestions offered by one of 
our correspondents— that the reading of eight pages per 
day permits the reading of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES series 
of six volumes in a year. Great blessing is reported; 
truths are kept freshly in mind which otherwise would be 
forgotten or lost. The daily touch with the Scriptures and 
their gracious promises is strengthening and assists in 
repelling the spirit of the world and in entertaining the 



holy spirit of the truth. 

But while this personal work is indispensable, class 
work is progressing also. More and more it is being realized 
that while the Church is indeed commissioned to let 
her light shine before men as a witness— to reprove sin 
and to attract those who are feeling after God— yet this 
is not her only work nor the most important. The Bride 
is to make herself ready, the various members are to build 
one another up under the Headship of Jesus. And more 
and more is it seen that the Divine Plan interweaves for 
our highest welfare. 

Thus while we let our light shine before men, and additionally 
seek to build one another up in the most holy faith 
we are by both of these good works developing ourselves 
personally in the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. 
Thus personal character-building leads us to "forget not the 
assembling of ourselves together as the manner of some is, 
but so much the more as we see the day drawing on." 

R4935 : page 45 1 

Similarly, it leads to volunteering or free-tract distribution, 

to class extension work and to a personal work 

amongst our neighbors and friends, in the sale or the loaning 

of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. So many and so diversified 

are the opportunities of service that every consecrated 

child of God may have a share in the blessed Harvest 

work, however few his talents or opportunities. And 

the zeal for this work to a considerable extent marks our 

love for the Lord and our appreciation of our invitation to 

be associated with Him in the conquest of the great Enemies, 

Sin, Satan, Error. Faint-hearted fighting against 

these implies a lack of love for the Lord, the Truth and 

the brethren— a lack which must be made up if we would 

be counted in amongst the "more than conquerors" who 

will share the Messianic Throne. 

FACTS AND FIGURES HELPFUL 

While we are confident that you will rejoice as you 
read our estimate of the spiritual growth of Bible Students 

R4935 : page 452 

with whom you are so closely in touch, we are sure 
that you will appreciate the corroborative testimony of the 
facts and figures of our annual report. And while you 
read with pleasure of the considerable work accomplished 
by our Society through its Office, through its Pilgrims, 
Colporteurs, and by tons of free literature, etc., do not forget 
your own share in this great harvest work. Do not forget 
the thousands of patient, earnest, self-denying laborers 
whose zeal has been shown to the Lord, to us and to their 
neighbors by their faithful circulation of the free literature, 
and also by the providing of the money wherewith 
the entire campaign under God's providence has been carried 



on. 

Sometimes our carefulness and economy in connection 
with all the details of the work have been reflected upon 
as parsimonious, as a greater degree of economy than the 
Lord would approve. But we reply that Divine economy 
is everywhere shown— nothing goes to waste. Every leaf, 
every flower and every blade of grass, as well as every 
animal, dying, produces a fertilizer or nourishment for 
others. And when our Redeemer multiplied the loaves 
and fishes into an abundance for thousands, He was economical 
enough to direct that the broken fragments should 
be collected, that nothing be lost. Frugality is a new lesson 
to some of the Lord's people, but love will teach it. 
A desire to do good to others will prompt not only economy, 
but self-denial. Many of our readers have surmised 
that the growing donations to the Tract Fund for the 
spread of the Truth implies that there are many rich 
amongst the donors. This is a mistake. It is with us as 
the Lord declared it would be amongst His faithful, "not 
many rich." 

We are glad of the opportunities afforded by these 
earnest reapers to show all the dear friends who have 
contributed to the funds how carefully these have been 
handled— how much work has been accomplished— so much 
more than usual in religious or other enterprises. The 
secret is the love, the zeal of all the workers. Without 
this no such results would be possible. We believe that the 
Lord guided from the very beginning— that no financial 
inducements should be extended to anybody connected with 
the work— that none should have more than comfortable 
necessities— "things decent." The love of money lies 
close to every evil, and money lovers find nothing to attract 
them in our Society's arrangements for any part of 
the world. 

LETTERS RECEIVED AND DISPATCHED 

The importance of the Correspondence Department 
may be judged to some extent by the report below of mail 
received and mail dispatched. We take this opportunity 
to assure our readers that their letters are always very 
welcome— including those which seem to require no special 
answers except THE WATCH TOWER articles twice a month. 
Ordinary letters please direct invariably to the Society to 
insure prompt attention. Occasional changes in the Office 
force might otherwise delay replies. Of course, with the 
considerable development of the work in recent years, the 
Editor has been obliged to give less and less time to the 
correspondence. Nevertheless, if you so desire, important 
doctrinal or business questions may still be addressed to 
the Editor. Such letters will be handled by brethren specially 
deputed to act as his private secretaries. With these 
as with the Editor, communications will be confidential. 
If the questions require, the secretary would communicate 
with the Editor before sending a reply. But remember, 
please, to address all general and business communications 



to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society— to the 
Brooklyn, London or Melbourne address, as may be most 
convenient to you. Where the business relates specially 
to Colporteuring, you may add, "Colporteur Department;" 
where it relates specially to Pilgrim service, you may add 
"Pilgrim Department," and where it relates specially to 
Class Extension work, you may add "Class Extension." 

Total letters received 1911— Brooklyn 128,712 

Total letters dispatched 191 1 -Brooklyn 221,789 

"WATCH TOWER" SUBSCRIPTIONS 

We watch THE WATCH TOWER subscription list with 
keen interest, considering it our very best index to the general 
growth of the work, because all who become truly, 
deeply interested in "present truth" we assume will want 
to be on THE WATCH TOWER list-that they may keep in 
touch with the work as well as with the Truth. Especially 
have we reason to expect this because we continually 
keep before our readers the fact that we are glad to have 
their names there whether they are able to pay their subscription 
or not. All who ask for THE WATCH TOWER 
may have it on credit and will not be held responsible if 
they never pay, or they may have it sent to them free if 
they will request it as the "Lord's poor"— for whom we 
have a specially contributed fund. 

We have felt considerable disappointment that our list 
has grown so slowly— that even now it is not much above 
the thirty thousand mark. True, sometimes the one paper 
supplies several of the interested, but we would rather 
that each one have a copy himself, even though the additional 
copy be on the free list. Specially would we like 
to have the names of all fully consecrated Bible students on 
THE WATCH TOWER list. For various reasons we incline 
to think that our list should be at least double what it is. 

However, we must not forget that long ago, before the 
government made more stringent rules respecting newspaper 
subscriptions, we had names upon our list from 
whom we had heard nothing for years. New postal regulations 
required that addresses be dropped unless subscriptions 
be renewed, either for money or on credit. We encouraged 
the Students everywhere to do what they could 
to help forward this branch of the service because we believe 
that a stimulating and helpful influence is exercised 
by the twice a month visits of our journal. 

THE COLPORTEUR DEPARTMENT 

We have a grand little army of Colporteurs, numbering 
about six hundred faithful bearers of the cross, enduring 
hardness as good soldiers. Although more than half a 
million volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES went into 
the hands of the public during last year, and although this 
is a phenomenal sale for such books, we nevertheless are 
not quite satisfied. We hope that 1912 will show a considerable 



increase. To facilitate this the books are now 
appearing in a new style of binding— still more attractive 
than formerly. And now the sets are put up in paper 
boxes, making them very attractive. Besides, the prices 
have been made uniform for all volumes, and the Colporteurs, 
sharpshooters and classes ordering twenty volumes at 
a time will be supplied any volume, in any language, at sixteen 
cents net. Some who cannot give all of their time to 
colporteuring can give two or three half days of each 
week. Application to the Office will bring to you helpful 
suggestions along the lines of this work which God has so 
greatly blessed in connection with the harvesting of the 
"wheat." 

The total volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES circulated 
in 1911 was 538,783. 

I.B.S.A. BIBLE STUDY CLASS EXTENSION 

During this year our Society recommended a class extension 
work on the part of classes possessed of more talent 
for public work than they required. Any brethren 

R4935 : page 453 

who are thought by the class to be worthy, on Scriptural 

lines of selection, as Elders, whose talents could be spared, 

they were encouraged to send forth to start new classes in 

surrounding villages or wards, as opportunity might offer. 

Full particulars were sent to the classes telling upon what 

terms the Society would be glad to co-operate in this work 

by furnishing free literature for the public announcements 

of these meetings, and occasionally by rendering some assistance, 

financially. The subjoined report shows that little 

financial assistance was called for— the dear friends 

gladly and enthusiastically took hold of the service. We 

hope that the results may be a blessing to some truth hungry. 

Although this work has been under way but a few 

months, the following reports received are very encouraging. 

Number of meetings reported 3,049 

Attendance at meetings 97,898 

Number of copies "Everybody's Paper" 

circulated 1,111,238 

Reported cost of the above $6,927.21 

Amount supplied by the Society 1,1 16.34 

"Everybody's Paper" supplied by the Society Free 

R4936 : page 453 

We encourage the dear brethren possessed of ability 
for public speaking to engage in this Class Extension 
Work rather than to visit and attempt to preach to other 
classes. This latter work we believe can better be done 
by the regular "Pilgrims" sent by the Society in every direction 
in response to requests. It may be urged that the 
Pilgrim visits are not very frequent, and we reply that we 



believe this is all the better for the classes. It gives them 
an opportunity to serve themselves through the Berean 
Studies published in THE TOWER. This stimulates thought 
more than does preaching. Besides it tends to throw responsibility 
upon each little class and thus to draw out or 
develop whatever talent for leadership it may possess. 
Class Extension work is evangelistic and the plan which it 
outlines and which is being followed is bringing good results 
and apparently has the Divine blessing. 

We have noticed with regret that some of the dear Colporteurs 
have left their special work to engage in the 
Class Extension Work. We are sure they meant well, 
but not so sure that they are doing wisely. The Class 
Extension is excellent for those classes which have more 
talent for public speaking than they need— brethren who 
cannot engage in the Colporteuring. For those who have 
time for Colporteuring we still recommend that branch of 
the service as the very best and most useful. All of our 
meetings anyway will be without results, except as we get 
the STUDIES into the hands of the interested, and get them 
to read. One brother and sister, besides Colporteuring, 
usually leave a Class of Bible Students in every town or 
city they serve. They note evidences of interest and call 
back and "water" the seed sown. 

HARVEST WORK IN NEWSPAPERDOM 

Many of our readers appreciate, as we do, the publication 
of our weekly sermons by the secular press. This is 
effected by a newspaper syndicate. The prosperity and 
success of the syndicate depends upon getting sermons 
into numerous papers and keeping them there. We supply 
the sermons to the syndicate free, but, additionally, the 
one thousand papers which it supplies should have every 
encouragement our readers can give them. The number 
of American papers and their circulation is practically the 
same as a year ago, but the number of British papers publishing 
the sermons has greatly increased— to about three 
hundred. The syndicate estimates that thus our sermons 
go weekly to over ten million readers. This is little short 
of a miracle. Never before have sermons reached one-fourth 
this circulation. We are not to deceive ourselves 
into supposing that this number read the sermons, nor 
that all readers are converted to the Truth. We have, 
however, good evidence showing that gradually superstition, 
ignorance and the errors of the Dark Ages expressed 
in our creeds are giving way before the light now shining 
from God's Word. It is our privilege to let our light shine 
before men, witnessing to the Truth whether they hear or 
whether they forbear to hear. 

A GREAT VOLUNTEER WORK 

This year's figures on the Volunteer Work are astounding. 
To those who understand what tract distribution is 
these figures speak of an immense amount of work— carrying 



the Gospel into millions of homes of all denominations 
of Christendom, in all parts of the world, to which 
all other efforts put together are as nothing in comparison 
with our figures, yet they include great institutions with 
powerful financial backing. There is a difference, for 
which there is a reason. And we know what the reason 
is! Ours is the true Gospel of God's Love and Mercy, 
not only for the elect Church but also in due time for the 
non-elect world. Ours is the Gospel of which we are not 
ashamed, and this cannot be said of the other messages of 
bad tidings of great misery which are mis-named the Gospel, 
for the word Gospel signifies good tidings. We hope 
that every reader scanning these figures may have the 
consolation of thinking— I was a volunteer! I shared in 
this work! My labors are represented in the grand totals! 
Well has someone said that to love means to serve— to 
serve the Lord, the Truth, the brethren. 

TRACT DISTRIBUTION FOR 191 1 IN U.S. AND CANADA 

(includes EVERYBODY'S PAPER and PEOPLES PULPIT) 
DEC. 1, 1910-NOV. 1, 1911. 

In the English language (copies) 22,308,582 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 356,101,756 

In the Swedish language (copies) 92,500 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 1,480,000 

In the German language (copies) 25,700 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 422,400 

In the Polish language (copies) 189,500 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 3,032,000 

In the Greek language (copies) 109,200 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 1,747,200 

In the Italian language (copies) 53,500 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 856,000 

In the Hollandish language (copies) 1 1,750 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 124,000 

In the Hungarian language (copies) 7,000 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 224,000 

In the Spanish language (copies) 19,750 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 316,000 

In the Finnish language (copies) 16,500 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 264,000 

In the Norwegian language (copies) 1,000 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 16,000 

In the French language (copies) 2,000 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 20,800 

In the Syrian language (copies) 1,300 

(equaling in usual tract pages) 20,800 

Grand total of tracts 22,838,282 

Grand total in tract pages 364,624,956 

THE YEAR'S FINANCIAL SUMMARY 



The cost of foregoing work, including all the 
expenses of the Office and of the Bethel 

Home maintenance, was $140,729.51 

Last year's deficit 11,901.94 

ADDITIONAL EXPENDITURES IN OTHER LANDS: 

British Branch $23,401.87 

Germany and Holland 4,098.81 

Australasia 2,046.40 

India 1,366.25 

South Africa 904.71 

Sweden 3,462.65 

Jamaica 3,004.42 

Greece 240.00 

R4936 : page 454 

Crete 50.50 

Syria 69.34 

Egypt 115.84 

Cuba 5.00 

Hungary 115.25 

France, Italy and Switzerland 137.67 

Total $39,018.71 

Grand total $191,650.16 

Receipts from "Good Hopes" and other 
sources 169,234.23 

Deficiency or shortage $ 22,415.93 



We doubt not this indebtedness will soon be cancelled; 
nevertheless the fact that it is nearly double the shortage 
of last year cautions us that we must to some extent put 
on the "brakes"; for it is our judgment of the Lord's will 
that we spend money only as it is supplied under His 
Providence. 

PUBLIC PREACHING OF THE TRUTH 

During the year a very successful work has been accomplished 
by the brethren of the Peoples Pulpit Association. 
Every one of them participated and some other 
laborers were from time to time pressed into service as 
the work seemed to require and as the funds seemed to 
permit. Altogether fifty-eight participated in these public 
ministries, setting forth the teachings of the Divine Word. 
Some of these brethren labor during the week in the Correspondence 
Department and otherwise in the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle, and attend to public preaching on Sunday 
only, or chiefly. 

About an equal number have traveled through the 
length and breadth of the United States and Canada, 



holding meetings, both public and semi-public— the latter 

in connection with Classes of the International Bible 

Students Association. These are routed from the Office 

here and all of their expenses are provided. They average 

meetings twice a day every day in the week. Without 

flattery we can say for them that they are able to 

"rightly divide the Word of Truth" and that they are thoroughly 

furnished for their work of helping God's people 

to an understanding of His Message. They make weekly 

reports covering every meeting held and are entirely free 

from family and business cares, and thus are able to say, 

with St. Paul, "This one thing I do"— the preaching of 

"the good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 

people." 

We encourage our readers everywhere to co-operate 
with these dear brethren, whose entire lives are given to 
the Lord and His service. All classes who are prepared to 
supply places for meeting and to provide for the entertainment 
of the speaker are requested to write to us if 
they desire such services for the New Year, giving particulars 

R4937 : page 454 

re the numbers usually attending the Class Meetings 
and whether any public meetings would be undertaken. 
Those unable to provide for the speaker at any of 
their homes should also mention that fact. 

While our Society urges upon the brethren strict 
economy it nevertheless desires them to be suitably dressed 
for their profession as ministers and representatives of 
the Lord and His Message. As for their entertainment it 
is expected or desired merely that it be clean and wholesome 
—nothing elaborate or costly. 

The totals below testify to the zeal of these dear 
brethren and the efficiency and economy of the arrangements 
under which the Society regulates this branch of 
the Harvest Work. We are sure that all of our readers, 
as members of the Society, will greatly rejoice in the 
work in this direction which they have been able to 
achieve during the last twelve months: 

Total number of ministers engaged 58 

" " " cities and towns visited 4,735 

" " " public meetings 3,780 

" attendance 508,900 

Semi-public meetings held 8,333 

Total number in attendance 168,904 

" miles traveled 470,702 



R4937 : page 454 

1912-VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER- 19 12 
WHO CAN TELL what experiences lie just before 



us within the portals of the New Year! 

Ah! 'tis better so; 'tis better that the future 

is open to our Lord alone, and that 

we by faith should trust Him for life's blessings 

and for a measure of the peace which 

passeth all understanding and which the 

world can neither give nor take away. It 

is better, too, that the trials, the difficulties, 

the sharp stones and thorns of the narrow 

way we tread are seen alone by our gracious Care-taker 

who has promised His faithful that all things shall be so 

overruled as to outwork for their highest welfare. 

"My times are in Thy hand; my God, I wish them there." 

But while rejoicing that God knows, not we, what lies 
before us of joy or pain, we may profitably retrospect the 
past year and begin the new one with good resolutions. Indeed, 
the custom of merchants to take an account of stock 
and to map out their business energies at the beginning of 
each new year is evidently a wise one which may be adapted 
to our still more important spiritual interests and activities. 

Looking back upon the activities of 191 1, we are surprised 
at their magnitude, and amazed that the apparently 
wise expenditure of so much money has not produced 
greater results as respects the number of those who have 
publicly acknowledged the opening of the eyes of their 
understanding. One would think that our wonderful message 
of the grace of God shining out as an electric searchlight 
would have aroused much more interest than we see 
manifested. One would suppose that so reasonable and 
gracious and Bible-harmonious a message, so widely delivered 
in this our wonderful day of intelligence and increasing 
liberty from superstition, would have aroused the 
world to a far greater degree than is manifest. 

One lesson taught us by this retrospect is a fresh reminder 
that only he that hath an ear to hear can hear; and 
that the number with hearing ears at the present time must 
be comparatively small. Another lesson is that our work 
must be more particularly in the interest of those who believe 
—the workers. The wonderful opportunities presented 
to these for serving the Truth at the cost of self-sacrifice 
serves to prove their zeal, their loyalty and love for 
God, the brethren and the Truth. A third lesson is that 
the present very widespread circulation of the Truth into 
every nook and corner of civilization implies a general 
"rounding up," to the intent that not one saint in all the 
world shall fail to come into contact with "present 
truth," which, if he be an Israelite indeed, without guile, 
must surely prove attractive to him and thus draw him to 
the feast of fat things which some of us have been enjoying 
for years. Remember the words of the Master, 
"Wheresoever the carcass is there will the eagles be gathered 
together. "-Matt. 24:28. 

Year after year the swing and impetus of the work has 



R4937 : page 455 

increased until, as the report for 191 1 shows, our Society 

is spending nearly $500 per day for the heralding of the 

Good Tidings of Great Joy. True, that sum is little compared 

with the estimation of the value of the Truth to our 

own hearts, and therefore its value to others with whom 

we would desire to share our great blessings of the knowledge 

of Divine Grace. True, our shortage of a year ago, 

as we predicted, was made up by the third of January; but, 

as the report shows, since then our expenditures have exceeded 

the income, leaving a much heavier deficit than 

ever before. We have no doubt whatever that the deficit 

will be wiped out; but the increase in the amount warns us 

that we must curtail expenses— that we are moving too 

rapidly. This was our Society's decision long ago: that 

it would work on a cash basis and avoid any danger of 

insolvency. 

Some months ago we realized that we were going behind, 
and we began to put on the brakes. But the momentum 
was so great and the opportunities for the service 
of the Truth so many, that it has been difficult to know 
just when, where and how much to curtail most wisely in 
the interest of the cause we serve. The Colporteur work 
is self-sustaining, except for foreign editions and "bad 
debts," when some of the dear Colporteurs, through no 
fault of their own, fail to make ends meet. Neither can we 
think of curtailing the Pilgrim service— so valuable has it 
appeared to be. Our curtailment evidently must be along 
the lines of the supply of free literature, and we must withdraw 
our offer to assist in "Class Extension," except in 
the providing of free literature— until we get evened up 
and see that the expenditures do not exceed the income. 
Meantime let our watchword be "faithfulness," not only 
in energy but in frugality. If any have literature laid by, 
unused, let it be brought forward; and let all orders for 
free literature be for no more than can and will be used 
faithfully and judiciously. Perhaps this is a lesson which 
the Lord would have us learn. 

THE OUTLOOK IS PROMISING 

Never has the outlook been more promising than at the 
opening of 1912 A.D. More than twelve hundred newspapers, 
whose combined circulation is probably twelve 
million copies, are carrying the Truth to reading, thinking 
people, especially in country districts. City papers are 
too crowded for sermons; and if they were published, the 
readers would not appreciate them. But the Colporteurs 
are reaching the people in the cities. The increased attractiveness 
of the books, the increased wisdom of the Colporteurs 
in presenting them, the increased intelligence of 
the people and the growing evidence that we are in the 
midst of a change of Dispensation— these are all very 
favorable to the Colporteur work; and some of the dear 
brethren and sisters engaged in this work are not only 



greatly blessed themselves, but are making their work 
more efficient by calling back on the interested and watering 
the seed sown, and starting classes of Berean students. 
Many are having excellent success in selling the entire six 
volumes with one year's subscription to THE WATCH 
TOWER, all for $2.65, the ordinary price for one volume on 
theology. 

There are good evidences both in Great Britain and 
America that 1912 may be our very best year yet, so far 
as the Colporteur work is concerned; and for the volunteering, 
order all the free literature you can wisely use. 
If we find it necessary we will cut down the quantity sent 
you, but not otherwise! Let us hope that 1912 will not 
fall short of 191 1 in the circulation of free literature. 

WHAT RECENT EVENTS FORESHADOW 

The confession of the McNamara brothers has made 
a profound impression on the social world. For several 
years they have been under the pay of $1,000 per month 
to dynamite bridges and buildings with a view to the 
intimidation of capitalists and the assistance of trades-unionism. 
It is claimed that no less than twenty serious 
dynamite explosions have been accomplished through 
them— some say sixty. The most serious of the lot was 
the damage done to the Los Angeles Times building, in 
connection with which twenty-one persons lost their lives. 
It was hard to believe that members of our race could 
be so depraved and still harder to believe what trades-unionists 
claimed, namely, that the explosions have been 
caused by capitalists in order to incite the public mind 
against trades-unionism. Now we have the truth in the 
confession of the McNamaras and the implication of 
various prominent labor leaders. 

The shock to moral sense is tremendous and is sure 
to cause a reactionary sentiment against all trades-unionism 
and socialism. 

The results we anticipate are the drawing closer together 
than ever of capitalism and of all law-and-order 
people. This will mean a practical union of Church and 
State. Everybody not in sympathy with lawlessness will 

R4938 : page 455 

be expected and ultimately required to identify himself 

with the politico-religious arrangement thus inaugurated. 

Those who for any reason attempt to stand free and to 

oppose Churchianity will doubtless be seriously misunderstood 

and make themselves liable to hatred and persecution. 

Thus the readers of this publication, although 

the most staunch defenders of Law and Order and the 

most pronounced opposers of everything like anarchy, may 

yet find themselves branded as opponents to law and order 

—just as Jesus was crucified between two thieves. 

WHAT OUR POSITION SHOULD BE 



The exhortation of the moment is loyalty to God and 
to the Truth, but great moderation and love and wisdom 
in every expression respecting the same. Nevertheless, 
even at the risk of being misunderstood, the true message 
of the Kingdom must be proclaimed by those who 
would be esteemed of the Lord good soldiers of the Cross 
and Ambassadors for God. But let us not forget the 
Master's words, "Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as 
doves." 

The results of the combination will be powerful restraints 
upon everything supposed to effect the present 
social order and the ultimate results will be that this 
weighting down of the safety-valve will bring the great 
explosion of anarchy a little later on, very much as described 
in the volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
explanatory of the Divine prophecies that our Age will 
end with "a Time of Trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation," and that this will usher in the glorious 
Kingdom of Messiah. 

The experience of our British friends in connection 
with the dock-workers' strike and the railway men's strike 
of last September was good. They had read of strikes 
elsewhere, but seemed not to dream of their possibility in 
Britain. The general stagnation of business for a few 
days opened their eyes to the fact that, prolonged a little 
while, it would mean starvation to thousands— so dependent 
are we today upon modern methods of food and fuel 
distribution. The British people seem to realize that a 
mighty struggle between capital and labor is not far distant. 
The working people are boasting that they realize 
their strength as never before, and that the next strike will 
be much more severe than was this one. Capitalists are 
saying, "It must be settled once and for all who is master; 
and next time we will resort to severer measures." This 
determination on both sides is what will make the crisis 
the more severe when it comes. Both sides will be shouting, 

R4938 : page 456 

No quarter! No surrender! The next demonstration 
may be in Germany or in America. 

The proper course for us is to keep close to the Lord, 
maintaining an attitude of humility and justice toward all 
—always counseling peace, never strife. Half a loaf is 
better than no bread. The worst government is better 
than anarchy. To those who expect strikes, etc., we suggest 
the advisability, where financially practical, of keeping 
a full supply of coal and of such staples as oatmeal, 
dried beans, etc. 

However, our special concern should be to abide under 
the shadow of the Almighty, by abiding in His love and 
hence under the assurance that all shall work for our good. 
Then with hearts full of faith and rejoicing that the day 
of redemption draweth nigh, let us use our every opportunity 
for promoting peace and consolation amongst those 



of the world with whom we are in contact. "Blessed are 
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of 
God." As the time of trouble closes in, the "foolish virgin" 
class are to get the oil, the light; and we should be on the 
alert to assist them. Many of the worldly also will then 
be amenable to the Truth who are now deaf to it. Perhaps 
1912 A.D. may be one of our most successful years 
for witnessing. In the meantime let us never forget that 
our main responsibility is in connection with our own 
covenant with the Lord— a covenant of sacrifice— whereby 
we are to make our calling and election sure. "They 
shall be Mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I 
make up My jewels; and I will spare them as a man 
spareth his own son that serveth him."— Malachi 3:17. 



R4938 : page 456 

THE EDITOR'S BRITISH TOUR-PART 2 

THE ATTENDANCE at the meeting held in 

the Royal Albert Hall was estimated at 

three thousand— excellent, indeed, for a 

mid-week religious service in an Auditorium 

not very conveniently located for the 

general public. We had an excellent hearing 

on the topic, "Two Heavens and Two 

Hells." Amongst those who spoke to us 

after the meeting was a Methodist brother, 

who thanked God for what he had heard, 

saying that he accepted the message fully, and that previously 

he had been in danger of drifting into infidelity. 

Another remarked that he came in an unbeliever and departed 

with faith both in God and His Book. We thanked 

God and took courage. 

The London Tabernacle was the center of our activities 
in the world's metropolis. We delivered thirteen 
public addresses there; the attendance and interest were 
excellent. On one or two occasions the Tabernacle was 
overcrowded; even with extra chairs some stood. We 
hope that the dear friends of London and vicinity were 
as much encouraged and spiritually strengthened as we 
were. 

In our previous report of our visit to Scotland, we 
overlooked mention of the meeting at Motherwell Town 
Hall, which was attended by a thousand. Our Scotch 
brethren are very enthusiastic in their love of the Truth 
and in its service. We were most hospitably entertained, 
and brought back greetings to the Bible Students of 
America and everywhere. 

THE GOOD TIDINGS IN WALES 

We visited two of the principal Welsh cities and gave 
two addresses in each. At Cardiff the public address was 



in Park Hall. About fifteen hundred gave most earnest 
attention to what we had to say respecting "The Great 
Hereafter." About the same number were present at the 
public meeting in Swansea at Albert Hall. 

The Welsh friends are a little diffident, but evidently 
warm-hearted and very keen in their love of the Truth 
and in their service of it. They worked hard for both of 
these meetings. The Truth is making good progress in 
Wales, and the brethren are much encouraged. 

HOW THE ENGLISH HEARD 

We visited eleven English cities— outside of London. 
In almost all of these at least two meetings were held— 
one specially advertised to the public. These gatherings 
of the Bible Students were well attended, and in many 
cases were really little conventions of five, ten, fifteen, 
twenty, thirty and forty, who attended from surrounding 
cities and towns. How we enjoyed their fellowship, their 
earnestness, and how we noted their zeal for the Truth 
and the earnest endeavors put forth to make the meetings 
a success! And they were very successful. 

In our previous report we mentioned four English cities 
visited; now we record others:— 

At Reading at the Town Hall about a thousand were 
present— intelligent, attentive, sympathetic hearers. At 
Oxford the Corn Exchange was crowded to its capacity, 
seven hundred, and closest attention was accorded our 
message. At Newport we addressed the public in Phillips' 
Memorial Hall. The audience was estimated at above a 
thousand. They gave the same close attention and showed 
the same keen interest in the argument that was noted in 
preceding meetings. So also it was with the audience at 
Kittering, where Victoria Hall was filled— about seven 
hundred. Next came Nottingham. We spoke in Mechanics' 
Hall to an audience estimated at twelve hundred. We 
had various manifestations of deep interest and sympathy 
here also. In Sheffield the public service was at Albert 
Hall. It was well filled; the audience, approximately 
eighteen hundred, gave us undivided attention and evidenced 
much interest. At Leicester we addressed the 
public in Corn Exchange. Nearly a thousand were present, 
and from the sympathetic looks and occasional applause 
we feel sure that many of our hearers caught 
views of the Hereafter which will help them in future 
days in their battle against infidelity, doubt, fear, the 
world, the flesh and the Devil. 

On Friday, Nov. 17, at the London Tabernacle, our 
visit concluded. We bade the friends goodby, exhorting 
them to be of good courage and be faithful unto death. 
We spoke from the Apostle's words, which indicate that 
although our lives and message are an odor of death unto 
death to those who are in darkness, they are an odor of 
life unto life to the children of light, and to God a sweet 
odor in the Anointed One. Although the meeting was 
not advertised about eight hundred were present. The 



next day about thirty met us again at the railway platform, 
where we took the boat train. 

Surely we were greatly privileged of the Lord in connection 
with this British visit. The Lord alone knows to 
what extent it has stimulated and encouraged the faithful, 
or enlightened some of His faithful who previously 
sat in darkness. We leave the results with Him, thankful 
for the privilege of knowing the Truth and for the joy 
of being permitted to serve Him in this or in any manner. 
We felt, and endeavored everywhere to impress upon the 
dear friends the thought that the Truth is not ours; that 
it is God's, and therefore belongs to all who are His, and 
that it is a great privilege to be His ambassadors and 

R4939 : page 457 

mouthpieces in making it known to all who have hearing 
ears. Hence we properly ascribe all the glory to Him, 
from whom cometh every good and perfect gift, our 
Father in Heaven, and to Him through whom these gifts 
come to us, namely, our Lord and Redeemer, Jesus. 

A summary of our tour shows twenty-four cities visited, 
fifty-five public meetings held, forty-four thousand 
hearers and over a million papers and pamphlets distributed 
free. The dear friends in every place displayed 
great energy and devotion in connection with the meetings, 
arrangements and announcements. 

Our homeward journey was uneventful. The ocean 
voyage furnishes excellent opportunity for our literary 
work. 



R4939 : page 457 

PREPARING FOR THE KINGDOM 

-LUKE 1:5-23. -JANUARY 1 .- 

"Without faith it is impossible 
to please God."— Hebrews 11:6. 

OUR BEREAN STUDY course for the year 
has been mapped out by the International 
Committee. It constitutes a very thorough 
investigation of our Lord's earthly life, 
from His birth to His ascension. Today's 
study very appropriately calls for investigation 
of God's dealings and promises up to 
the birth of John the Baptist, the Redeemer's 
forerunner and herald. 

Four thousand years before the birth of 
Jesus, God declared that the Seed of the woman would 
bruise the Serpent's head. This dark saying we now see 
signifies that sin with all its work of havoc in the world 
is to be offset and destroyed in due time and that the 



power of God to this end will operate through a wonderful 
Son of the disobedient Eve. Centuries passed with no 
sign of a fulfilment of this promise. Our race became 
more degraded and lapsed more and more into unbelief. 
Then Enoch was born, of the line of Seth. "He walked 
with God" and was used as a Divine mouthpiece to give 
a further prophecy, saying, "Behold, the Lord cometh with 
myriads of His holy ones, to execute judgment (justice) 
in the earth."— Jude 14,15. 

Another thousand years elapsed before God made any 
further suggestion of His benevolent intention of giving 
the world a fresh trial or judgment. Then to Abraham, 
the friend of God, He made known more fully still the 
hope of the world— the Gospel. God declared to Abraham 
His intention to bless all the families of the earth, 
and secondly, that this blessing upon mankind would come 
to them through Abraham's posterity: "In thee and in 
thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed."— 
Gen. 12:3. 

This statement to Abraham, St. Paul pronounces the 
first Gospel message, because the other statements were 
so vague as not to make certain human recovery. Sin and 
the Serpent might have been destroyed without the seed 
of the woman being specially blessed, and the judging of 
mankind mentioned by Saint Enoch implied, but did not 
positively say, that human blessing would result. The 
message to Abraham, however, was explicit— "All the 
families of the earth shall be blessed." See Gal. 3:8. 

St. Paul reminds us that God not only declared His 
coming blessing, but that He made oath to the same. God's 
oath was not necessary to Abraham. He confidently believed; 
but, as St. Paul said, the oath was for our sake. 
The fulfilment of the promise would be so long deferred 
that we, who are so specially interested in it, might have 
feared some change in the Divine Program. St. Paul assures 
us that the oath was in order that, "by two immutable 
things (God's Word and God's oath), we might have 
strong consolation (we, the Church), who have fled for 
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us (in 'the 
good tidings', the promise), which hope we have as an 
anchor to our souls, sure and steadfast, within the veil, 
whither our Forerunner has for us entered." (Hebrews 6:18-20.) 
We see, then, by the Apostle's words, that the 
Abrahamic promise or Covenant has not yet been fulfilled 
—it is still an anchor for our faith. 

SEEKING ABRAHAM'S SEED 

Ishmael was not the heir of the promise, but Isaac 
was; Esau was not, but Jacob was. Finally, all of Jacob's 
family were accepted as Abraham's seed, and in due time 
they were all baptized into Moses in the sea and the cloud 
and became heirs of the promise, on condition that they 
would keep the Law given at Mt. Sinai. Obedience to the 
requirements of that Law would give them eternal life, 
and forthwith the approved ones would be God's agents 



in fulfilling the promise— in "blessing all the families of 
the earth." 

But, imperfect like all the remainder of our race under 
the death sentence, the Israelites were unable to keep the 
perfect Law of God; hence they all died, like the remainder 
of the race— because they were sinners. As Jesus 
said, none of you keepeth the Law; as St. Paul said, "By 
the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in God's 
sight." Nevertheless, the endeavor of the Jews to obey 
their Law brought a great blessing upon them; though 
some were hypocritical and said prayers, not from the 
heart, others were "Israelites indeed in whom was no 
guile." 

The heart-loyalty of the "Israelites indeed" God appreciated, 
and they were granted the privilege at Pentecost of 
stepping from the house of Moses, as faithful servants, 
into the house of Christ, as faithful sons. (Heb. 2:5,6.) 
"To as many as received Him (Jesus), to these gave He 
liberty to become sons of God." (John 1:12.) They 
were accepted into this sonship after Jesus had laid down 
His life sacrificially, had been raised from the dead to the 
divine nature, and had ascended far above angels, principalities 
and powers to God's right hand of favor and 
had appeared as the Advocate for all "Israelites indeed," 
all willing to walk in His steps. 

OTHER GRACIOUS PROMISES 

All of God's promises were to Abraham and his seed 
(his natural seed primarily). Consequently all through 
the Jewish Age, while they as a people were trying to 
commend themselves as worthy to be the Seed of Abraham, 
by endeavoring to keep the Law, God spoke to them 
prophetically. He informed them that it was His intention 
ultimately to make a New Covenant with them, still 
better than the one which Moses mediated. Under that 
New Covenant He would take away their sins and iniquities; 
but He did not tell them how these would be cancelled; 
that they would be cancelled through the merit of 
"better sacrifices" than those which they offered through 
the Law year by year. 

God assured them that this New Covenant would have 
a Mediator who would be higher than Moses. Of that 
Mediator Moses prophesied, saying, "A Prophet shall the 

R4940 : page 458 

Lord your God raise up unto you from amongst your 
brethren, like unto me (I am a type of Him); Him shall 
ye hear in all things— and whosoever will not obey that 
Prophet shall be destroyed." (Acts 3:23.) That greater 
Mediator would be the One by whom they would be really 
helped up to a place where they could keep the Divine Law 
perfectly and be used of God in blessing all the earth. 
-Jer. 31:31. 
How the Israelites longed thereafter for the New 



Covenant with the better Mediator, whom they styled 

Messiah, or the Anointed of God! Hearken again to 

God's message respecting this glorious Messiah, the Mediator 

of the New Covenant; He says, "Behold, I send you 

the Messenger of the Covenant, whom you delight in (the 

One whom you have been so long praying for, the One 

through whose assistance you will be enabled to keep My 

Law and to become My agents in the instruction and blessing 

of the world); but who may abide the day of His 

coming and who shall stand when He appeareth, for He is 

like fuller's soap and a refiner's fire? And He shall sit to 

refine the sons of Levi that they may offer an acceptable 

sacrifice."— Malac hi 3:1-3. 

Thus the Israelites had the precious promise respecting 
the coming of the Messiah— and not only so, but intimations 
that there would be special trials and difficulties on 
those living at that time. Naturally every mother amongst 
the Israelites longed for the birth of a son, hoping that she 
might be honored as the parent of the Seed of the woman, 
who would bruise the Serpent's head— the great One of 
Abraham's seed through whom, by some unknown arrangement 
or process, a great blessing would come upon the 
sons of Levi, upon Israel and through these upon all the 
nations of the earth. 

These promises led up to and culminated in the birth 
of John the Baptist, the incidents of which constitute the 
study of today. He was not to be Messiah, but His herald. 
He was not born of a miraculous conception of the 
Holy Spirit and without human father, but He was announced 
by a special messenger of God, as our lesson 
most beautifully tells. If Zacharias' faith was tested, it 
was found strong and was assisted by his nine-months' 
experience of dumbness. Thus did God prepare the way 
before sending His only begotten Son to be man's 
Redeemer. 



R4940 : page 458 

THE VERY GREATEST PROPHET 

-LUKE l:57-80-JANUARY 14.- 

"Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for He 
hath visited and redeemed His people."— V. 68. 

OF JOHN THE BAPTIST Jesus declared, 

"Verily I say unto you, of those born of 

women there hath not risen a greater 

Prophet than John the Baptist; and yet I 

say unto you that the least in the Kingdom 

of God is greater than he." (Luke 7:28.) 

These words are valuable as showing us 

that John was the last of the Prophets announcing 

the coming of Messiah and the 



beginning of the great work of selecting 

from amongst sinners a loyal class, to be associates with 

the Redeemer in His Messianic Kingdom and glory. John 

could not be of the Kingdom class. His grand work terminated 

before the Redeemer's sacrifice was finished— 

before Pentecostal blessings came accepting some as joint-heirs 

with Christ in His Kingdom. John himself seemed 

to understand this, for he declared, "He that hath the 

Bride is the Bridegroom," but I am the Bridegroom's 

friend and rejoice to hear His voice.— John 3:29. 

JOHN-'THE FAVOR OF GOD" 

In harmony with the message of the Angel Gabriel, 
John the Baptist was born. On his eighth day he was 
circumcised and named. The family relatives urged the 
name of his father, but the father and mother named him 
John, and immediately Zacharias' dumbness departed. His 
faith had been helped. He had triumphed over all doubts 
and manifested this by giving the name mentioned by Gabriel. 
The name John has a beautiful signification— "The 
favor of God." 

As a man John was peculiar in that he had no other 
aim or object in life than to be God's messenger— to proclaim 
His Anointed One and to prepare the people for the 
trying experiences and character-test which Malachi had 
declared would come with the revealment of Messiah, who 
would "sit as a Refiner, to purify the sons of Levi, that 
they might offer to God an acceptable sacrifice." So it 
was that John in his ministry declared, "The Kingdom of 
God is at hand." Believe the good news. Repent, reform. 
Get ready for a share in that Kingdom. 

The trials came in a way not expected. Messiah was 
not born an heir to earthly wealth or name or fame, and 
His experiences as well as His teachings were different 
from any that the Doctors of the Law had anticipated. 
The opposition of sinners and Jesus' opposition to the errors 
and hypocrisies of His time produced a burning 
which had a refining effect upon some and made of them 
antitypical Levites, consecrated people, many of whom 
became antitypical priests, presenting their bodies living 
sacrifices, walking in the footsteps of the Redeemer. 

THE PROPHECY OF ZACHARIAS 

St. Peter distinctly tells us respecting the Old Testament 
Prophets, that "Holy men of old spake and wrote 
as they were moved by the Holy Spirit." He intimates 
that frequently they uttered deeper and broader truths 
than they themselves comprehended— truths which only 
the future would fully reveal. This is true of the prophecy 
of Zacharias, in this lesson. Verses 68-70 constitute the 
first division of this prophecy; praise to God, the Fountain 
of every good and perfect gift, comes first. To Him 
all honor and praise are to be given for the fulfilment of 
His gracious promises of old, "for He hath visited and 



brought redemption to His people; He hath raised up a 

horn of salvation for us in the house of His servant David," 

in harmony with the promises. Here, after the 

usual manner of prophecies, the thing about to be accomplished 

is spoken of as though it had been done. 

As John the Baptist was born but six months before 
Jesus, it follows that the begetting of Jesus had already 
taken place at the time of this prophecy. The Holy Spirit 
spoke of the things begun, but not yet accomplished, as 
though finished: "He hath visited and brought redemption 
for His people." This word redemption applies not 
only to the redeeming work accomplished by Jesus in the 
consecration of His life at baptism and down to the completion 
of His sacrifice at Calvary, but it is comprehensive 
enough to take in the entire work of reclaiming humanity. 

A small section of our race, the "elect," is being reclaimed 
during this Gospel Age; but the Scriptures assure 
us that the Messianic reign of a thousand years will all 
be for the purpose of redeeming or bringing back from 
the power of sin and death Adam and so many of his children 
as shall be willing to accept the Divine favor, when 

R4940 : page 459 

brought to their knowledge. The import, therefore, of 
this first strophe or section of the poetic prophecy is, The 
Lord be praised that the time has come beginning the 
great blessing which He long ago promised. 

DELIVERANCE FROM ENEMIES 

The second section or strophe of this prophetic poem 
runs from verse 71 to 75. It relates to the deliverance of 
God's people from the power of their enemies. One important 
thought here is that none but God's people will 
ever be delivered from the enemies here referred to. However, 
there have been many in the past, as there are at 
present, enemies through wicked works— not because of 
intentional wickedness, but because blinded by the god of 
this world, the deceitfulness of riches, the weaknesses of 
their fallen flesh, etc. 

During Messiah's reign of a thousand years, when all 
the blind eyes will be opened and all the deaf ears will be 
unstopped, and when the knowledge of the glory of God's 
character will be clearly revealed and the horribleness of 
sin be fully manifested— then many, now led captive by 
Satan at his will, will bow the knee to Emmanuel and confess 
to the glory of God. In other words, as Jesus said, 
His consecrated followers are His "little flock" of the 
present time. But during His glorious reign He will 
gather another flock. As He said, "Other sheep I have 
which are not of this fold— them also I must bring, that 
there may be one fold and one Shepherd."— John 10:16. 

"One fold and one Shepherd" does not signify that all 
of the sheep will be of the same nature. On the contrary, 
the Apostle tells us that God's Plan is ultimately to "gather 



together under one Head (Shepherd) all things, both in 
heaven and in earth." (Ephesians 1:10.) Of these "all 
things" the Church, the Bride, will be chief, on the plane 
of divine nature. The Great Company, cherubim and angels 
will follow in order, and redeemed and restored mankind 
in human perfection will be the lowest order in the 
Divine fold. 

St. Paul tells us about the enemies from whom ultimately 
all of God's people shall be delivered. Satan is an 
enemy. He shall be bound for a thousand years and ultimately 
shall be destroyed. Sin is an enemy, which will 
be stamped out in its various phases during Messiah's 
Kingdom. And we read, "The last enemy that shall be 

R4941 : page 459 

destroyed is death"— and with it will go the tomb. Adamic 
death will be no more. None will be under its power. 
The resurrection power will release all. Only those who 
sin wilfully, deliberately, will die the Second Death, which 
is not an enemy. 

THE PREPARATORY WORK 

The third section or strophe of this prophetic poem 
tells us of a work to be accomplished before the grand 
consummation of the destruction of all enemies and the 
lifting up of all accounted worthy to be sons of God. This 
is recorded in verses 76-79. It tells how John the Baptist 
would be the forerunner of the Lord's special Servant, 
Jesus, to pave the way for His great work. That great 
work would be to give the knowledge of salvation to 
thousands who were already God's people, to show them 
the "high calling" of this present Age. Thus in God's tender 
mercy the Church sees and is enlightened by the 
"Morning Star" or "Day Star" before the Sun of Righteousness 
arises to scatter the darkness of mankind during 
Messiah's reign. This lesser light of the present time 
shines into the hearts of believers with sanctifying power 
and sets them afire with zeal for the Truth. They in turn 
shine forth upon those who are sitting in the shadow of 
death. This "Day Star" guides the feet of the saints in 
the way of peace, even while still in the time of trouble 
and before the New Dispensation is ushered in. 



R4941 : page 459 

A SAVIOR-A LIFE-GIVER 

-LUKE 2:l-20-JANUARY 21.- 

"For unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Savior, which is Christ, the Lord." 



TODAY'S STUDY is a most interesting one, 

relating to the birth of Jesus. The Scriptures 

are most careful to point out to us that 

He was not begotten after the usual manner 

—that He had no earthly father, but was 

begotten by the Holy Spirit. The necessity 

for this is manifest. The father is the 

life-giver, the mother is the nourisher of 

the offspring. If Jesus had received His 

life from a human father it would have 

been tainted, impaired, under condemnation of death, as 

is that of all others. This would have frustrated any 

work on His part as the world's Redeemer, because no 

imperfect man could have redeemed a perfect one, as the 

Psalmist declares— Psa. 49:7. 

In order for Jesus to be able to give His life a redemption 
price for Father Adam's life (and for the life of his 
race, forfeited by disobedience), it was necessary that He 
be perfect, sinless; as we read, "He was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners." And again, "A body 
hast Thou prepared Me," for the suffering of death. 

It is not enough, then, that we recognize Jesus as good, 
well-intentioned in mind. We must see in Him human 
perfection, sufficient as a sacrifice to offset the forfeited 
life of the first perfect man, Adam. And we must see 
also that He was begotten from above— that the holy 
spark of life in Him as the babe was a transferred life-principle 
from a pre-existent condition, mentioned by our 
Lord when He prayed, "Glorify Thou Me with the glory 
that I had with Thee before the world was." St. Paul 
explains to us that "He was rich and for our sakes became 
poor, that we through His poverty might be made rich." 

FOR OUR SAKES HE BECAME POOR 

Few babes in all Judea or in all the world were born 
in a more humble place than Jesus. Joseph and Mary had 
gone to their native city, Bethlehem, for tax registration, 
under the imperial edict. The little city was crowded with 
others on similar errand. And so it came that Jesus was 
born in a cattle stall, where Joseph and Mary had been 
compelled to lodge for the night. Ah! we cannot wonder 
that it is difficult for many to understand why our Heavenly 
Father sent forth His Son for our redemption under 
such ignominious conditions! Only those who have the 
spirit of the Divine Plan, through the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit, can see the wherefore. 

FEAR NOTJ-GOOD TIDINGS-GREAT JOY-ALL PEOPLE 

The Message of the angels was surely an inspired one, 
fully in harmony with God's promise to Abraham— only 
an enlarged statement of the same— the same "all people" 
to be blessed— and it was still good tidings and it still 
meant great joy; but now, two thousand years later, the 
Message pointed out the very Individual through whom 



the good tidings would have fulfilment— the Babe of Bethlehem. 

The angelic announcement, "Fear not," is interesting. 
All humanity realize that they are sinners and naturally 
have forebodings. They find it difficult to believe that 

R4941 : page 460 

God is really gracious and loving. The gods of the heathen 
nations are ferocious, unloving and unlovable. But the 
God of all Grace, the Father of Mercies, is a God of Love, 
who delights to use His Divine power for the blessing and 
uplifting of His erring children. Therefore He was peculiar 
in sending the Message of "good tidings of great joy 
unto all people," as well as in sending His Only Begotten 
Son at great cost to be man's Redeemer— that He might 
be just and still be the Justifier of those who believe.— 
Rom. 3:26. 

The Message declared that a Savior had been born— 
the Anointed, the Lord. He was to be the antitypical 
Moses, the antitypical Aaron, the antitypical Melchisedec, 
the antitypical David. In addition to the qualities pictured 
in these various typical characters, He was, also, the Son 
of the Highest. He was to be the Savior— the Deliverer 
—the Mediator of the New Covenant, so long looked for, 
hoped for, prayed for. 

There is a special force or meaning in this word Savior 
—it signifies life-giver. The Syriac version is the one in 
which Savior is translated life-giver; and Syriac was, 
likely, the language spoken by Jesus and others of Palestine 
at that time. And is there not a special fitness or appropriateness 
in this name life-giver? What had man lost and 
what would he wish to have back? The Scriptures answer 
that Adam lost life and came under the penalty, "Dying, 
thou shalt die." He did not lose heaven, for he never possessed 
it. He lost earthly life, an Eden home, human perfection. 
And Jesus declared that He "came to seek and to 
recover that which was lost."— Matt. 18:11. 

R4942 : page 460 

Hence, as we have seen, He was provided with a perfect, 
human life, that "He by the grace of God might taste 
death for every man," and that by thus suffering, the Just 
for the unjust, the penalty of the sinner, He might become 
the purchaser or the Redeemer of Adam and all his race, 
with a full right to restore to perfect life and to all that 
was lost as many as would receive it at His hand— thankfully. 
Throughout His entire Messianic reign of a thousand 
years He will be the world's Life-Giver, raising the 
willing and obedient up out of sin and death conditions to 
perfection and everlasting life and earthly, human blessings. 

But our Lord also does a work for the Church, the 
"elect," His bride and joint-heir in the Kingdom, and 
this blessing to the Church begins before the setting up of 
His Kingdom. The Church "are by nature children of 
wrath even as others," but they are not to be restored to 



what was lost. The offer to them is that they shall become 

copies of the Redeemer and lay down their lives, walking 

in His footsteps, and that He will make up for all their deficiencies 

and that thus the Father of Mercies will bring 

them like their Lord to the divine nature, will assist them 

in making their "calling and election sure" to the heavenly 

state which God has promised them, for "if we suffer with 

Him, we shall also reign with Him; if we die with Him, 

we shall also live with Him."— 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

THE HALLELUJAH CHORUS 

In verse 14 we have a kind of Hallelujah chorus or 
angelic response to the Message of the angel already given. 
A heavenly host sang, "Glory to God in the highest, and 
on earth peace, good will toward men." How grand! 
How inspiring! But we see not yet this glorious condition 
achieved. The proper glory to God is not yet rendered 
on earth as it is in heaven. Nor does peace yet wave 
her banner, even over so-called Christendom. 

What is the matter? Ah, said the Apostle, that is a secret, 
a mystery, hidden from past Ages and Dispensations! 
The mystery is that God not only intends to have Jesus 
for His Anointed One, to rule and bless the world, but He 
has foreordained also a company of footstep followers to 
be with Him and share His work, and this entire Gospel 
Age has been devoted to the work of selecting this class, 
variously called the Body of Christ and the "espoused virgin," 
which eventually, at the Second Coming of the Lord, 
is to become "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife" and joint-heir. 

It is for this that the Apostle declares that the whole 
creation groans and travails in pain until now— waiting 
for the manifestation of the Sons of God— the revelation 
of Jesus and His Bride in the glory of the Kingdom for 
the blessing of natural Israel and all the families of the 
earth with knowledge and assistance, that the willing and 
obedient may be recovered to the image and likeness of 
God and to everlasting life. 



R4942 : page 460 

CONSECRATION IN THE TEMPLE 

-LUKE 2:22-39.-JANUARY 28.- 

"For mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast 
prepared before the face of all people."— Vs. 30,31. 

WHEN JESUS was forty days old, Joseph and 
Mary took Him to Jerusalem and presented 
Him in consecration in the Temple. This 
was in accordance with the custom which 
related specially to the first-born in each 
family. Although the first-born of the entire 



nation were passed over at the deliverance 

from Egypt, they had been exchanged 

for the one tribe of Levi, which had been 

specially devoted to God's service; nevertheless, 

the same principle was exemplified in respect to 

the first-born of each mother. It was to be devoted specially 

to God and His service. 

The significance of this we see when we remember 
that the elect Church, being gathered during this Gospel 
Age, is styled the Church of the First-borns. Again, St. 
James tells us that we are "a kind of first-fruits unto God 
of His creatures." The clear intimation of all this is that 
after the Church shall have been gathered to heavenly 
glory by the power of the First Resurrection, the Kingdom 
then to be established will bring blessings to all the 
families of the earth, giving them also the opportunity of 
becoming sons of God, on the earthly plane, by restitution 
processes.— Acts 3:19-21. 

Incidentally we remark that it is the custom of some 
parents to make a formal consecration of their children to 
God in the presence of believers. The influence upon the 
children cannot be other than beneficial, as in future days 
they shall look back and realize the parental care and love 
and devotion thus manifested in the giving of the very 
best they possessed to the Lord (the fruit of their bodies). 
Doubtless very many children will thus experience a beneficial 
influence upon their minds as respects their own 
consecration to their Creator. 

Furthermore, we believe that the parents who thus give 
their best to the Lord are really bringing to themselves 
great blessings. Trials and difficulties are sure to come, 
but in all of these their children belong to God. And if 
they can pray, Thy will be done, then they may have a 
peace and receive a joy in the Spirit which others cannot 
know. Of course, this does not take the place of the 
child's personal consecration when it reaches the age of 
discretion and judgment, but we believe that the blessed 
influence will be helpful to the child in mature years, assisting 

R4942: page 461 

to a right decision for God, for Truth and for 
righteousness. 

At the time of the consecration ceremony at the Temple, 
an aged Prophet came forward and took the babe 
Jesus in his arms and praised God. The record is that in 
some manner God had revealed to him that the accomplishment 
of the gracious promises made to Abraham was 
nigh, and that he should not die until he had seen the Deliverer 
of Israel. By some power Divine this aged 
Prophet recognized Jesus, and, after saying, "Now lettest 
Thou Thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen 
Thy salvation"— the way in which Thy salvation shall 
come to Israel and to all the families of the earth— he proceeded 
to say, "which Thou hast prepared in the presence 
of all people— the Light of the world and the Glory of 



Thy people Israel." 

"SET FOR THE FALL AND RISING AGAIN OF MANY IN 
ISRAEL" 

Simeon, addressing Mary, declared prophetically that 
the Child was "set for the fall and the rising of many in 
Israel, and for a sign [mark or standard], which shall be 
spoken against, that the thoughts of many hearts may be 
revealed." How wonderful a prophecy! It reminds us 
of the words of St. Paul, that our Lord is "a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offence" to many in Israel, that 
many stumbled, being disappointed. And St. Paul told 
also of the rising again of many who stumbled. He declares, 
"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for, 
but the election hath obtained it and the rest were blinded" 
—stumbled— turned aside from Divine favor. (Rom. 11:7.) 
Nevertheless he assures us that as soon as "the 
elect," the Church of Christ, shall have been completed, 
by the power of the First Resurrection, then Divine favor 
shall return to natural Israel, through Elect Spiritual 
Israel: "They shall obtain mercy through your mercy." 
—Romans 11:25-33. 

Not a sufficient number of "Israelites indeed" were 
found to complete the foreordained elect, and hence the invitation 
went beyond Abraham's natural seed to gather 
during this Gospel Age the saintly of every nation, people, 
kindred and tongue. These must all be found before the 
blessings shall go to Israel and to the remainder of our 
race, offering to them restitution and human perfection. 

A saintly woman, Anna, a Prophetess, over a century 
old, resided in Jerusalem and in the precincts of the Temple 
courts. She, also, moved by the Holy Spirit, recognized 
the Babe and gave praise to God and mentioned 
the matter to the saintly ones who were waiting for the 
fulfilment of the Abrahamic promise— "for the consolation 
of Israel." 

If the seeing of Jesus as a babe was worthy of praise 
and thanks, still more was it a cause of gratitude to God 
for those who beheld Him at the age of thirty, consecrating 
Himself a living sacrifice even unto death, and who 
realized that He had been begotten again by the Holy 
Spirit to be a New Creature, of the divine nature. Those 
who saw the Master's faithfulness in performing the sacrifice 
of His consecration during the three and a half 
years of His ministry beheld still more for which to give 
God praise. And when He had finished His course at 
Calvary and was raised from the dead the third day, and 
forty days later ascended up on high where He was before, 
happy were they who recognized that further development 
of the Divine Plan for man's salvation— the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. 

Still more blessed were those who at Pentecost received 
the Holy Spirit as a begetting power and those 
who since have received the same, evidencing that they 
are the children of God, and, "if children, then heirs of 



God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ" their Lord to the 
great inheritance— to the oath-bound promise made to 
Abraham, that through them all the families of the earth 
shall be blessed. 

THE FALL AND RISING AGAIN 

The entire nation of Israel stumbled over Jesus, failing 
to recognize Him as the Sent of God— except the comparatively 
few who became His disciples— probably ten or fifteen 
thousand, according to the records. Of the nation 
in general the Prophet Isaiah declared, "They shall fall 
backward and be snared and taken." St. Paul, quoting 
Isaiah's prophecy, proceeds to show the recovery of Israel 
to Divine favor as soon as the elect class of this Gospel 
Age shall have been completed from amongst all nations. 
Then will come the time for Israel's rising again to Divine 
favor. -Isa. 8:15; Rom. 11:9-11. 

Continuing his argument, St. Paul assures us that blindness 
happened to Israel, not permanently, but merely for a 
time, until the full number of the "elect" from the Gentiles 
should come in. He declares that then all Israel shall be 
saved from their stumbling. This is the very "rising 
again" referred to in our lesson. St. Paul declares that 
this is God's Covenant with natural Israel and that their 
sins shall be taken away and they shall obtain mercy, 
through the Church's mercy. In other words, when the 
Church shall be glorified in the First Resurrection, Divine 
blessing shall proceed forthwith to Israel and shall then 
extend to all the families of the earth. God hath concluded 
them all in unbelief that He might have mercy upon 
all.— See Romans 11:25-32. 



R4941 : page 461 

WHAT WE ARE TO EXPECT 

WHILE IT MAY BE difficult to clearly prognosticate 

the future in respect to God's 

"times and seasons" relating to the Church 

and her glorification, the world's time of 

trouble and the New Epoch of "joy for all 

people," we may surely expect all the time 

and increasingly tribulations: "Marvel not 

if the world hate you; ye know that it hated 

me before it hated you; if ye were of the 

world, the world would love its own"; "I 

have chosen you out of the world" and ordained you. 

How should these attacks be received? may be a question 
with some. Our answer is, With patient endurance 
and without bitterness of heart, but with sympathy, recognizing 
that "they know not what they do." The Lord's 
people must never retaliate, must never render railing for 
railing, accusation for provocation, blow for blow, but 



must ever keep in memory the example of the Lord and 
the Apostles. 

This, however, does not mean that the Lord's people 
may not use means provided by law for their defense, 
when it seems wise for them to do so. Jesus protested 
against being stoned in violation of the Law. St. Paul 
defended himself in court before Felix, as well as upon 
other occasions. He became the plaintiff and aggressor 
in his dispute with the Jews when he appealed his case 
to Rome. Similarly we, if persecuted contrary to the law 
under which we live, are at liberty to appeal our case before 
the courts, but not at liberty to take matters into our 
own hands to judge and punish our enemies. 

When the Apostle reproved some of the early Church 
for going to law with each other, the stress of his argument 

R4941 : page 462 

was that brethren should adjudicate their own troubles 
amongst themselves and not go to law before unbelievers 
—not ask unbelievers to judge between Christians. 
This has no bearing upon our dealing with unbelievers, 
who can be dealt with only through the public courts. If 
nominal Christians should set up the claim that they are 
believers, the answer then would be that in the same sense 
the courts are courts of believers and that, therefore, the 
action before them would not be before unbelievers. 

We must expect that the opposition of the world, the 
flesh and the Devil will increase in virulence. Thus our 
faith in the Lord and in each other— our meekness, gentleness, 
patient endurance, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, 
love— will be in the crucible for refining. And the 
experiences, properly received, may be reckoned amongst 
the "all things" guaranteed to work together for good to 
all those who love the Lord, to the called according to his 
purpose.— Rom. 8:28. 

page 462 

"In the furnace God may prove thee, 

Thence to bring thee forth more bright, 
But will never cease to love thee; 

Thou art precious in His sight." 



R5372 : page 462 

IN EVERYTHING GIVE THANKS 

Dear Lord, with sorrow, I confession make 
That while with joy I suffer for Thy sake, 
Yet in the cares with which my days abound, 
Where I should smile, I fear I often frown. 
In days gone by I've murmured o'er and o'er, 
And unkind words have left me feeling sore; 



Those whom I come in contact with each day, 
Disturb me oft by things they do and say. 

And thoughtless actions have left such a sting 
I could not find it in my heart to sing. 
Lord, I'll be honest with myself and Thee, 
I have not been as sweet as I should be. 
And I have said, "Too hard the wind doth blow, 
Too hot the day, too much rain or snow," 
And tho' at times I've checked the hasty word, 
Still, in my heart rebellious murmurs stirred. 

And I have thought that I could grow in grace 
Much better, were I in another's place. 
Lord, to this whole long list I guilty plead; 
And I am grieved o'er it, I am indeed; 
And I am come to make a Vow to Thee, 
That in the coming year, whate'er shall be 
My portion, trials, cares, vexations, pain, 
Dear Lord, I will not murmur nor complain. 

And I will say when I arise each morn, 
This day my Lord wants me to overcome, 
"In everything give thanks," this is His Word; 
And I will school my heart to sweet accord. 
I'll thank Him for the sun, and for the rain; 
I'll thank Him for the sorrow and the pain; 
And in the things which try my patience so 
I'll thank Him that I have a chance to show 

How Sweet and Kind and Loving I can be, 
How much His Holy Spirit dwells in me. 
Dear Lord, I'll trust Thee tho' I do not know 
Why I should walk the path I'm called to go. 
I'll give Thee thanks whatever be the way 
Which Thou shalt lead me in from day to day; 
Relying on Thy grace to see me through, 
Lord, this is what I've promised Thee to do. 

REBECCA FAIR DONEY. 



page 462 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study VII., The Law of the New Creation. 
FEBRUARY 5 

(1) What does the giving of a law imply on the part 
of the recipient? Why are penalties attached to a law? 
P. 349, par. 1, first 6 lines. 

(2) How do we reason with respect to a law having 
been given Adam? And what was the sin of Eden? P. 349, 
par. 1, sixth to fourteenth line. 



(3) What did the just sentence upon Adam imply with 
respect to his knowledge? And what did the absence of a 
Mediator evidence? P. 349, par. 1, fifteenth line to end. 

(4) How was the Divine Law written in the perfect organism 
of Adam and Eve? And why were they without excuse 

for their sin? P. 350. 

(5) What is the condition of mankind today as respects 
the original Divine likeness? P. 351, par. 1, first half. 

(6) How can we account for the more or less crude conceptions 
of right and wrong among even the most depraved 

of the heathen? P. 351, par. 1, last half. 

FEBRUARY 12 

(7) What two kinds of laws prevail among mankind? 
P. 351, par. 2. 

(8) How does this correspond with the Divine Law? 
P. 351, par. 3; P. 352, par. 1. 

(9) Why was it impossible for God to give the fallen 
race a Law of life? P. 352, par. 2. 

(10) Where is the first intimation of an atonement and 
consequent release from the "prison house" recorded? and 
how fulfilled? P. 353, par. 1. 

(11) To whom were still clearer promises stated as respects 
the blessing of the world, and what did this signify? 

P. 353, par. 2. 

(12) Why did God place a special Law upon the Israelites? 
Why were the mediation of Moses and the typical sacrifices 
for sins necessary, and what does this teach with respect to 
the Law in Eden? P. 354, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 19 

(13) Who was the only Jew who ever perfectly kept the 
Mosaic Law, and what double purpose did the Law Covenant 
serve? P. 354, par. 2. 

(14) Although Jesus fulfilled it, what is the position of 
natural Israel with respect to the Law Covenant? P. 355, par. 1. 

(15) What two forms of Divine Law were operative 
previous to the first advent? and what two classes were subject 
to these laws? P. 356, par. 1. 

(16) Give a brief Scriptural summary of the Sinai tic Law, 
and who only kept this statement of the Divine Law? P. 356, 
par. 2. 

(17) How did Jesus keep and fulfil the Sinaitic Law? 
P. 356, par. 3, first half. 

(18) Was it love to God or love for His neighbor that 
required Jesus' self-sacrifice? P. 356, par. 3, last half. 

FEBRUARY 26 

(19) What two things were accomplished by Jesus' death? 
P. 357, par. 1, first eight lines. 

(20) Make a distinction between these two things effected 
by Jesus' death. P. 357, par. 1. 

(21) Has the New Covenant, suretied by Christ's blood, 



gone into effect? P. 358, par. 1. 

(22) Define the purpose and operation of the New Covenant 
as respects fleshly Israel and the world of mankind. 

P. 358, par. 2. 

THE LAW OF THE NEW COVENANT. 

(23) What is the Law of the New Covenant? Does it 
differ from the original Divine standard? P. 359, par. 1. 

(24) What is meant by re-writing the Law of God in the 
hearts of men? P. 359, par. 2. 



