From Our Readers
Singapore  The article “Singapore—Asia’s Tarnished Jewel” (June 8, 1997) exposed the shocking way this modern government has treated peace-loving Christians. I personally know many of the Christian men and women there, and they are all nice, loving people. It encourages me that they serve Jehovah despite persecution.
I. O., Malaysia
Anger  In the article “Why Control Your Anger?” (June 8, 1997), you say that Simeon and Levi were cursed by their father. I’m sure I’ve read somewhere that it was their anger that Jacob cursed.
S. L., United States
Our reader is correct on this point. “The Watchtower” of June 15, 1962, explained: “Jacob did not, in his dying breath, curse Simeon and Levi themselves. He cursed their anger, ‘because it is cruel.’ He cursed their fury, ‘because it acts harshly.’”—ED.
Diet  The article “Your Diet—Can It Kill You?” (June 22, 1997) saved my life. After reading it, I told my wife to call the doctor at once, as the article described me perfectly. After examining me, my doctor scheduled me for surgery the next morning. He had me hospitalized immediately, since he was afraid I wouldn’t survive the night. I am home now, recuperating from a triple bypass.
F. S., United States
At times, my husband and I find it difficult to control ourselves at meals. I have read other articles on diet, but this one discussed things in a simple and practical manner. I am sure that by putting your suggestions into practice, we will be able to keep ourselves in good health.
V. A., Brazil
Thanks for the series “Your Diet—Why Be Concerned.” It helped me to see the risks of being overweight. I have started to follow all the suggestions in it, and with the help of Jehovah, I know I will control my eating.
V. Y. D., Liberia
Dragonflies  Thank you so much for the thoroughly enjoyable article “Jewels of the Riverbank.” (June 22, 1997) It was about one of my favorite aerial performers, the dragonfly. When I work in my garden, a dragonfly is almost always hovering or resting nearby. I asked a man who does landscaping why this is so. He said that a dragonfly’s diet includes mosquitoes and that mosquitoes are attracted to people. So now I view this colorful creature as sort of a personal bodyguard!
J. F., United States
Search for Justice  I enjoyed the article “Our Search for Justice.” (June 22, 1997) God’s righteous qualities certainly draw those who sigh and cry because of injustices. I am especially sensitive to injustice, and I have to make a real effort to adjust my views and actions according to God’s standards.
D. L., Taiwan
I disagree with the introduction. When you speak of the Texan defenders of The Alamo, you do not say that they were bandits trying to snatch a territory that belonged to Mexico.
A. C., Mexico
We did not discuss the complex issues involved in the fight at The Alamo, as they did not seem to be germane to Antonio Villa’s personal story. However, our May 22, 1971, issue of “Awake!” did state: “Most Americans forget, or never did know, that San Antonio had been part of Mexico. Mexico regarded the battle as the putting down of rebellion in her territory. America used it . . . to justify its intervention in Mexican affairs.”—ED.

