Why Stars Cannot Be Seen
WHO has not gazed at the night sky and marveled at the glittering beauty of countless stars stretching far into space? However, this awesome sight is slowly disappearing from our eyes. Why? Light pollution.
Light pollution is the overpowering, blinding glow produced by artificial lighting of streets, homes, commercial properties, public buildings, and sports grounds. As much as half of this light spreads upward into the sky, blotting out our view of most of the stars. How serious a problem is this? On a clear, dark night in northern Europe, for example, the naked eye can see about 2,000 stars. But this number drops to 200 for those living on the outskirts of a town, and in the middle of a brilliantly lit city, one might make out just 20 stars. Some astronomers fear that unless precautions are taken, no stars will be visible in northern Europe in 25 years’ time.
Of course, some lighting is essential. It deters crime and makes vulnerable householders feel more secure. Too much intrusive light, however, contributes to stress and disrupts sleep patterns. Not only humans are affected. Migrating birds and insects can be disoriented by light, and the circadian rhythm of plants can be upset.
But what can be done to alleviate the problem? One helpful measure is to ensure that outside lighting is well shaded and angled downward. Security lights can be sensor activated, rather than permanently lit. A French suburb tackled the problem by introducing outdoor high-pressure sodium lamps, which provide more precisely directed illumination, and by positioning hoods on existing low-pressure street lamps, directing light downward. Roads were resurfaced with light-absorbing black tar, and lights were switched off on public buildings after 11:00 p.m. Not only did this practically eliminate vertical light pollution and reduce reflected light by two thirds but energy efficiency was increased by 30 percent.
Of course, all such solutions take time and money—scarce commodities these days. How good it is to know that soon God’s Kingdom government by his Son, Christ Jesus, will remove all forms of pollution! Then its subjects will once more be able to see clearly our Creator’s handiwork, the beautiful starry heavens.—Psalm 19:1, 2; Revelation 11:18.

