Are Jehovah’s Reminders Rousing Us Spiritually?
1 The psalmist lauded Jehovah, saying: “Your reminders are a concern to me.” (Ps. 119:99) The Hebrew word for “reminders” conveys the thought that Jehovah calls back to our minds what is stated in his laws, his orders, his regulations, his commandments, and his statutes. If we respond, they will rouse us spiritually and make us happy.​—Ps. 119:2.
2 As Jehovah’s people, we regularly receive admonition and counsel. Much of it we have heard before. Although we appreciate this encouragement, we are inclined to forget. (Jas. 1:25) Jehovah patiently provides loving reminders. The apostle Peter recorded some of these reminders in order to ‘arouse our clear thinking faculties that we should remember the commandments of the Lord.’​—2 Pet. 3:1, 2.
3 Again and again we are reminded about the importance of personal study and meeting attendance. This is done because these activities are so vital to our spiritual well-being.​—1 Tim. 4:15; Heb. 10:24, 25.
4 The greatest challenge for some is fulfilling the Christian commission to preach. It takes effort, determination, and perseverance. Even though it requires much of us, we are helped to “stand firm” by having our “feet shod with the equipment of the good news.”​—Eph. 6:14, 15.
5 Our service has to be motivated by more than just mental awareness of Jehovah’s requirements. The apostle Paul reminds us that the heart provides the motivation we need to make “public declaration for salvation.” (Rom. 10:10) If we have strong faith and if our heart is inclined toward Jehovah’s reminders, we will be compelled to speak out in giving praise to his name.​—Ps. 119:36; Matt. 12:34.
6 When we work hard in performing good works, we rightly expect that this will bring us joy. (Eccl. 2:10) Paul identifies joy as a fruit of Jehovah’s spirit, and we should seek to abound in displaying it. (Gal. 5:22) Peter added that an “earnest effort” will be rewarded with a fruitful ministry, which produces joy.​—2 Pet. 1:5-8.
7 When we are faced with a challenge, we should remember the apostles’ firm stand as they declared: “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:20) We are strengthened to carry on when we remember that ‘by doing these things, we will save both ourselves and those who listen to us.’​—1 Tim. 4:16.
8 We do not chafe or feel resentment because of receiving constant reminders. Rather, we deeply appreciate their excelling value. (Ps. 119:129) In these critical times, we are thankful that Jehovah keeps sending us reminders to rouse us up spiritually and to motivate us to be zealous in fine works!​—2 Pet. 1:12, 13.

