Be Upbuilding
1 Since we live in “critical times hard to deal with,” all of us need encouragement. (2 Tim. 3:1) Keenly aware of this need even in his day, Paul was anxious to use contacts with his brothers as opportunities for “an interchange of encouragement.” He urged his brothers to “pursue the things . . . that are upbuilding to one another.” (Rom. 1:11, 12; 14:19) These efforts succeeded in “strengthening the souls of the disciples, encouraging them to remain in the faith.” (Acts 14:22) We sorely need that kind of encouragement today.
2 We can be upbuilding to others by what we say. When used properly, our words can be “as apples of gold in silver carvings.” (Prov. 25:11) By participating in the meetings, we are “encouraging one another.” (Heb. 10:25) Our tongue can be used in a positive way when we share experiences, give commendation, or discuss spiritual matters. Such wholesome use of the tongue ‘is good for building up, imparting what is favorable to the hearers.’​—Eph. 4:29.
3 Talk About Things That Are Upbuilding: At Philippians 4:8, Paul provided helpful guidelines for our speech. He said we should consider whatever things are true, of serious concern, righteous, chaste, lovable, well spoken of, virtuous, and praiseworthy. We can always be sure that what we say will be true and beneficial to others if it is based on God’s Word. (John 17:17) Our Christian dedication, what we learn at the congregation meetings, the way we fully accomplish our ministry, and other such matters are things of serious concern. Positive conversations about the standards and principles of God’s Word are sure to help us become “wise for salvation.” (2 Tim. 3:15) We can express our appreciation for the chaste conduct practiced by those in Jehovah’s clean organization. We can extol the lovable acts of kindness by our brothers. (John 13:34, 35) Things that are well spoken of include the wholesome Christian qualities of faith, joy, peace, and long-suffering that we observe in our brothers. Conversation about such virtuous and praiseworthy things is ‘good for the upbuilding’ of others.​—Rom. 15:2.
4 Every day, we are confronted by the discouraging anxieties of the world. How refreshing to lay these things aside and share loving association with our brothers! The precious time we are able to spend together is a treasure to be cherished. If we are always encouraging and upbuilding, others will truthfully say of us: “They have refreshed my spirit.”​—1 Cor. 16:18.

