Service Meetings for July
Week Starting July 3
Song 194
10 min: Local announcements. Call attention to outstanding April field service report.
17 min: “Keep on the Watch.” Questions and answers.
18 min: “Use a Variety of Brochures in Your Ministry.” Discuss with audience the suggested presentations. Make brief comments about interesting features of the brochures. Have two or three brief demonstrations to show how they can be offered.
Song 213 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 10
Song 110
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Are Jehovah’s Reminders Rousing Us Spiritually?” Questions and answers.
20 min: Making Opportunities to Witness. During the summer months, many of us have opportunity to travel in connection with conventions and vacations, and fine opportunities for informal witnessing arise. Using the School Guidebook, pages 80-2, paragraphs 11-16, review suggestions on how to initiate conversations with strangers. Show how advance preparation helps to get better results. Have three different publishers briefly demonstrate how to start a conversation with a gas station attendant, a passenger on public transportation, and a person standing in line at the supermarket. Remind all to keep record of those who show interest and arrange to have someone contact them later.
Song 154 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 17
Song 192
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
20 min: “Make Return Visits on All Brochure Placements.” Brother assigned this part will discuss with three other publishers why it is important to follow up all interest and placements. They review the suggested presentations and demonstrate to one another how they can be used.
15 min: Conducting a Home Bible Study. A talk by elder who conducts progressive Bible studies. Encourage a greater effort to start Bible studies. Review suggestions offered in Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 89-91. May include brief local experiences.
Song 164 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 24
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements. Review “New Circuit Assembly Program.”
15 min: Local needs. Or give a talk on “Showing Christian Love to the Elderly,” based on August 1, 1994, Watchtower, pages 27-30.
20 min: What Will the Neighbors Think? Talk and demonstration based on April 1, 1974, Watchtower, pages 201-3. Give a talk on why we are often pressured by our worldly neighbors. (Cover page 201 and first paragraph on page 202.) Then have a demonstration showing an experienced couple at a Bible study with a newly interested family that is being intimidated by worldly neighbors who oppose studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Review main points in remainder of the article.) Stress reasons why newly interested family should not be discouraged or give up.
Song 169 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 31
Song 136
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News.
15 min: “Be Upbuilding.” Discussion and talk by an elder.
20 min: Review Literature Offer for August. Mention 32-page brochures that may be used. Invite publishers to relate interesting experiences offering brochures during July. Demonstrate how to start a Bible study using the brochure Does God Really Care About Us? Raise question posed in paragraph 1 of Part 1. Get reaction of householder to thoughts expressed in paragraphs 2-4. Explain that the brochure shows that God really does care and that we can enjoy a life free from suffering in his coming new world. Offer to return for further discussion.
Song 179 and concluding prayer.

