“Keep on the Watch”
1 When Jesus spoke the words recorded at Matthew 26:38-41, he was approaching the most critical time of his human existence. It would prove to be the most important time in all human history. The salvation of all mankind was at stake. Jesus’ disciples needed to “keep on the watch.”
2 Today we stand at the threshold of Jesus’ arrival in the dual role of deliverer and executioner. As watchful Christians realizing the urgency of the times, we do not just fold our arms and wait for deliverance. We know that we must be ready at all times. It is necessary for us to keep “working hard and exerting ourselves” in our service to Jehovah. (1 Tim. 4:10) What about each one of us individually? Are we keeping on the watch?
3 Examining Ourselves: Jesus also warned: “Pay attention to yourselves.” (Luke 21:34, 35) We must be attentive to ourselves, making sure that we are “blameless and innocent . . . in among a crooked and twisted generation.” (Phil. 2:15) Are we living each day as Christians, imitating Jesus and walking in harmony with the principles outlined in God’s Word? We must avoid unchristian conduct characteristic of a world that is “lying in the power of the wicked one.” (1 John 5:19; Rom. 13:11-14) When we examine ourselves in the light of the Scriptures, are we truly on the watch as Jesus instructed?
4 Elders must be alert to be diligent in carrying out their assignments in the congregation, realizing that they will render an account for how they care for the flock. (Heb. 13:17) Family heads have a special obligation to direct their households in the ways of Jehovah. (Gen. 18:19; Josh. 24:15; compare 1 Timothy 3:4, 5.) Also, how vital it is that all of us fulfill the Scriptural command to love one another! It is the mark of true Christianity.​—John 13:35.
5 Be Alert to Warn Others: Keeping on the watch involves more than paying attention to ourselves. We have a commission to make disciples of others. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Love of neighbor should move us to warn others so that they may survive the destruction facing this world. This is a responsibility resting upon all Christians. It is an essential part of our worship. (Rom. 10:9, 10; 1 Cor. 9:16) Often we encounter apathy or outright opposition to this lifesaving work. We have an obligation to persist, even if the majority ignore our warning. (Ezek. 33:8, 9) Genuine love for God and neighbor will move us to persevere.
6 This is no time for complacency. We should neither allow the everyday anxieties of life to distract us nor become so involved in the pleasures of this system that they prove to be a snare. (Luke 21:34, 35) If there ever was a need for a sense of urgency, it is now. The time is rapidly approaching for Jesus Christ to execute judgment against this wicked system. Only those who are awake, alert, and watchful will survive. If we obey Jesus’ instructions and “succeed in escaping all these things,” how thankful we will be!​—Luke 21:36.

