How Family Members Cooperate for a Full Share​—In Congregation Meetings
1 Christian families must heed the command to gather together at congregation meetings. (Heb. 10:24, 25) With good cooperation, all can succeed in preparing for, attending, and participating in the meetings. Family circumstances vary, but there are things that a Christian husband, a believing wife, or a single parent can do to promote family togetherness in spiritual matters, regardless of the number of children in the home and their ages.​—Prov. 1:8.
2 Take Time to Prepare: Family members cooperate to see that each one is suitably prepared for congregation meetings. Many consider the article for the weekly Watchtower Study together. Some prepare for the Congregation Book Study or read the weekly Bible reading as a family. The objective is to get the main points in mind prior to attending the meetings. In that way, all will benefit more from what is heard and will be equipped to participate as there is opportunity.​—1 Tim. 4:15.
3 Plan to Participate: Everyone in the family should have the goal of declaring his hope before others by commenting at meetings. (Heb. 10:23) Does a family member need help or encouragement to do this? What assistance does each one need in preparing assignments for the Theocratic Ministry School? Wives appreciate it when their husbands take an interest and perhaps offer an idea for a fitting illustration or a practical setting. Parents need not feel that they should prepare parts for their young children. Doing so could stifle the children’s initiative. But parents can help their young ones and listen as they rehearse aloud.​—Eph. 6:4.
4 Organize to Attend: Children can be taught from an early age to be dressed and ready to leave for the meeting at a designated time. Family members should cooperate in caring for household chores so that there are no delays.​—See the suggestions in the books Family Happiness, page 112, and Young People Ask, pages 316-17.
5 Parents and children alike can reflect on the words of Joshua of old, who said: “As for me and my household, we shall serve Jehovah.” Then be resolved to cooperate for a full share in congregation meetings.​—Josh. 24:15.

