Invite Them to Come
1 An invitation issued centuries ago is now being sounded in 233 lands around the world: “Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, . . . and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.” (Isa. 2:3) Directing people to Jehovah’s organization is one of the best ways we can help them to make spiritual progress that leads to everlasting life.
2 Some publishers may hesitate to invite people to the Kingdom Hall until after they have demonstrated considerable progress in a home Bible study. However, sometimes people will begin attending congregation meetings even before a Bible study can be started with them. We should not delay in extending a hearty invitation and encouraging people to come to the meetings.
3 What to Do: Make good use of handbills to inform people about our local meetings. Mention that the meetings are free and that no collections are ever taken. Explain how the meetings are conducted. Point out that they are actual Bible study courses and that study material is provided for all to follow along. Call attention to the variety in backgrounds and walks of life of those attending. Mention that they are people from the area and that children of all ages are welcome to come. We should invite those with whom we study, offering to assist them in any way to attend.
4 One of the last things recorded in the Bible is a warm invitation to partake of Jehovah’s provisions for life: “And the spirit and the bride keep on saying: ‘Come!’ . . . And let anyone thirsting come; let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.” (Rev. 22:17) There is no substitute for inviting others to attend our meetings.
5 Isaiah 60:8 prophetically portrays the hundreds of thousands of new praisers now coming into the congregations of God’s people as doves that “come flying just like a cloud, and like doves to their birdhouse holes.” We can all invite new ones to our meetings and make them feel welcome. In this way, we will be cooperating with Jehovah as he speeds up the ingathering work.​—Isa. 60:22.

