Ministerial Servants Render Valuable Service
1 “They have demonstrated themselves to be truly dedicated men whose faith has been made manifest in zealous Kingdom service and in helping others to be made firm in the faith.” So says Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, on page 57, about ministerial servants. Indeed, the spiritual example set by our ministerial servants is worthy of imitation. Working along with them and with the elders “makes for the growth of the body for the building up of itself in love.”​—Eph. 4:16.
2 Ministerial servants perform a vital function in the congregation. Think of all their valuable services! They care for accounts, literature, magazines, subscriptions, and territories; they act as attendants, handle sound equipment, and help maintain the Kingdom Hall. They participate in the Theocratic Ministry School and Service Meeting. Some of them may even give public talks or conduct some of the congregation meetings. Like members of the physical body, ministerial servants perform services that we need.​—1 Cor. 12:12-26.
3 Seeing ministerial servants cooperate harmoniously with the elders as part of one servant body with mutual respect and understanding encourages others to do the same. (Col. 2:19) By faithfully fulfilling their responsibilities week after week and by showing a personal interest in others, they contribute toward a spiritually progressive congregation.
4 What can we do to show our appreciation for the hardworking ministerial servants? We need to be familiar with their assigned duties and show a readiness to cooperate when our assistance is needed. By word or deed, we can let them know that their work is appreciated. (Prov. 15:23) Those who work hard in our behalf are deserving of sincere recognition.​—1 Thess. 5:12, 13.
5 God’s Word establishes the role and qualifications of ministerial servants. (1 Tim. 3:8-10, 12, 13) Their valuable sacred service is indispensable to the function of the congregation. Such men merit our continued encouragement, as they all have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.”​—1 Cor. 15:58.

