Service Meetings for March
Week Starting March 1
Song 33
 8 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
17 min: “Worldwide Commemoration of Christ’s Death.” Questions and answers. Include comments on February 1, 1997, Watchtower, pages 11-12, paragraphs 10-14. Emphasize how Jehovah’s great love prompted him to provide the ransom for us.
20 min: Compelling Reasons to Auxiliary Pioneer in April and May. Talk and audience discussion conducted by the service overseer, urging all to give serious consideration to auxiliary pioneering. Review the adjustments in the hour requirement for regular and auxiliary pioneers, as presented in the January 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 7. This adjustment should enable many more to enjoy the privilege of full-time service. Explain how our appreciation for Christ’s sacrifice compels us to exert ourselves in preaching to others. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15) This year the Memorial falls on the first day of April. What a fine stimulus for all Kingdom publishers to devote the entire month to increased service activity! Review selected highlights from the February 1997 and March 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry inserts dealing with auxiliary pioneer service. Consider ways to adapt sample schedules that were provided. Review local service arrangements, which offer ample opportunity to participate in the ministry with others. Encourage publishers to obtain auxiliary pioneer applications after the meeting.
Song 44 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 8
Song 52
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
20 min: “Invite Them to Come.” Questions and answers. Emphasize the need always to direct newly interested ones to congregation meetings. Demonstrate a discussion with an interested person, using the material in the Knowledge book, page 159, paragraph 20, and pages 161-3, paragraphs 5-8. Encourage everyone to put forth a special effort to help Bible students and other interested ones to attend the Memorial on April 1. Display a copy of the printed invitation, and explain how it can be used effectively. All should begin distributing Memorial invitations this week.
15 min: “How Family Members Cooperate for a Full Share​—In Congregation Meetings.” Discussion by a family group. As they comment on main points in the article, they discuss how they can prepare for meetings as a family. They discuss ways in which they can help each other to participate and what must be done for the family to get to meetings on time.
Song 62 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 15
Song 56
10 min: Local announcements. Consider “Will You Attend?”
15 min: “Ministerial Servants Render Valuable Service.” Talk by a capable ministerial servant. Review main points covered in Our Ministry book, pages 57-9. Explain how ministerial servants are used locally to help the congregation.
20 min: Enjoying the 1999 Yearbook. Discussion between husband and wife. Husband explains that the Yearbook was first published in book form in 1927 and that for over 70 years, it has included the worldwide report of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They review highlights of the “1998 Grand Totals,” on page 31. Then they discuss “A Letter From the Governing Body,” on pages 3-5, and comment on how they will follow through on the encouragement given.
Song 68 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 22
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements. Announce the names of those who will be auxiliary pioneering in April. Explain that it is not too late to submit an application. Outline entire schedule of meetings for service planned for April. Encourage all to follow the Memorial Bible reading scheduled for March 27–April 1, as outlined in Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1999 and on the 1999 Calendar.
15 min: Prepare for the Memorial. A talk. All should make plans to help Bible students and other interested ones attend the Memorial. New ones attending may not understand who may partake of the emblems or the significance of this observance. Review what is stated in the April 1, 1996, Watchtower, pages 6-8, and show how we can help a newly interested one grasp the meaning and purpose of this celebration. Conclude by reviewing “Memorial Reminders” and outlining local Memorial arrangements.
20 min: What Happens to Us When We Die? Elder discusses value and use of brochure with two or three capable publishers. We became better acquainted with this brochure when we studied it at the Congregation Book Study. Are we using it effectively in field service? The panel discusses the following: Why are many people interested in this subject? In contrast with false religious teachings, what hope does this brochure highlight? How can we use the questions on the back cover to stimulate interest? What opportunities exist to offer this brochure? Demonstrate a presentation using the scriptures in paragraph 14 on page 27. Encourage all to be alert to make good use of this brochure.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 29
Song 111
12 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in their field service reports for March. We will offer The Watchtower and Awake! during April. Display current issues of the magazines, suggest articles that may be highlighted, and mention some specific talking points. All should carry along the Require brochure and use it to start Bible studies with interested people.
15 min: Local needs.
18 min: How Should We React to Counsel? Talk by an elder. All of us are subject to counsel related to our attitude, conduct, associations, or participation in congregation activities. Sometimes we are inclined to resist counsel or to take offense. A willingness to accept and apply counsel can be crucial to our spiritual well-being. Review essential factors that emphasize reasons why we should accept and appreciate counsel.​—See the April 1, 1987, Watchtower, pages 27-30.
Song 118 and concluding prayer.

