Worldwide Commemoration of Christ’s Death
1 Jehovah has showered us with many gifts. The sum total of his goodness and loving-kindness is eloquently described as “his indescribable free gift.” Yes, the “undeserved kindness of God” is so marvelous that to describe it surpasses our ability.​—2 Cor. 9:14, 15.
2 His Greatest Gift: Jesus Christ, as mankind’s Ransomer, is the greatest gift of all. In expressing his great love for the world of mankind, Jehovah gave his beloved and only-begotten Son. (John 3:16) Such an undeserved blessing from God deserves worldwide commemoration. When and how? On the evening of Thursday, April 1, 1999, Christians around the world will commemorate the Lord’s Evening Meal, observing the Memorial of the greatest of all sacrifices.​—1 Cor. 11:20, 23-26.
3 Christ died for us even “while we were yet sinners,” and we can show our personal gratitude by observing the Memorial of his death and by inviting others to be present with us on that all-important occasion.​—Rom. 5:8.
4 The Most Important Event: The observance of Christ’s death highlights primarily that he upheld God’s sovereignty flawlessly. It also reminds us that we can enjoy a clean standing before Jehovah by exercising faith in Jesus’ sacrifice, thus being assured of salvation. (Acts 4:12) Truly, this is the most important event of the year!
5 Love for our neighbors is manifested in our inviting them to observe the Lord’s Evening Meal with us. The benefits of the ransom remain available to millions who learn of its excelling value. (Phil. 3:8) Those exercising faith in Christ’s sacrifice can gain the firm hope of everlasting life.​—John 17:3.
6 The Memorial season provides special opportunities for us to show appreciation for the surpassing undeserved kindness of God. This is an excellent time to share zealously in preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom. Great benefits await all who reflect prayerfully on Jehovah’s indescribable free gift and arrange to be present at this year’s celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal!

