Gratitude for Medical Help
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, performed many miraculous healings. Once he healed 10 lepers. But how did they react?
The physician Luke relates: “One of [the ten], when he saw he was healed, turned back, glorifying God . . . he fell upon his face at Jesus’ feet, thanking him.” Jesus then raised these thought-provoking questions: “The ten were cleansed, were they not? Where, then, are the other nine?”​—Luke 17:11-18.
Though God is not enabling humans today to perform miraculous cures, what is our response if we obtain effective medical help from a skilled physician? Are we like the nine lepers, or like the one? It is particularly fitting for a person to express his appreciation if, because of the Christian’s Bible-based objection to accepting a blood transfusion, a surgeon operates without using blood​—Acts 15:28, 29.a
Recently an elderly man underwent a serious operation in Brooklyn, New York. Afterward, he wrote a letter of appreciation to the surgeons, and one to the hospital. In part his letter to the hospital said:
‘Gentlemen:
‘A number of weeks have passed since my return from your hospital. I want to thank you and express my appreciation for your successful replacement of my hip joint.
‘I am 83 years of age. I have been one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for many years. I was fully aware of the fact that my age and my convictions as to the Bible prohibition on taking blood made my case more complicated. Of course, we don’t expect miracles of doctors and hospitals, but we do appreciate their understanding, cooperation and empathy. Your hospital, its staff and the doctors provided these.
‘I can think of only good things to say about your nursing staff. I have been a cook for many years and as such have commendation for your kitchen staff, too. I must add that to see the cleaning personnel move through the hospital effectively adds confidence to a patient, since he knows that the workers care and the administration does as well.
‘Your physical therapy department got me on my feet, moving around, and I could hardly believe how well things went. The doctors with whom I dealt, namely, Drs. Scalafani and Vitali, have my highest respect.
‘Your interest in the human family by rendering this kind of service is commendable. While I can’t perform the same service you do, I try very hard to help people spiritually. Now I am physically much better equipped to continue to show love for my neighbors. My aim is to remind them what a Grand Creator we have in Jehovah God.
‘Sincerely, G. P.’
Such genuine appreciation stands in marked contrast to the ingratitude that abounds today. It indicates that the person showing it is considerate of others. And when a Christian expresses gratitude for medical help, it can create a favorable climate for the next time a doctor or medical staff is asked to use its skills while respecting the Bible position on blood.
[Footnotes]
See the booklet Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.

