
The Bible’s Viewpoint
Do the Stars Affect Your Life?

Does he love me?
Should I travel today?
Will I get that job?




TO ANSWER questions such as those above, many turn to astrology.a But do the stars really affect your life? Can they help you learn about your future, or about yourself? What does the Bible say?



Can the Stars Influence Our Future?

Some people believe that we cannot escape our destiny. The future has already been written, they say, and the stars can reveal it. But the Bible indicates otherwise. It tells us that God gives people a choice, which implies that they have a certain degree of control over what happens to them. For example, he told the Israelites: “I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the malediction; and you must choose life in order that you may keep alive, you and your offspring.”—Deuteronomy 30:19.
With those words, Jehovah God made it clear to his people that they had a large degree of control over their future. If they obeyed his commands, they would experience blessings. If they disobeyed, they would bring hardship upon themselves.
Consider: If the future of each Israelite had already been written in the stars, would it make sense for God to urge them to choose life? Would it even be fair for God to hold them accountable for actions over which they had no control?
The lesson from the Bible is clear: Our life course depends on the choices we make—not on the stars.—Galatians 6:7.



Can the Stars Influence Our Personality?

Most astrologers downplay the idea of predestination. “We control our own destiny,” claims one, but he adds: “On the other hand, the time of our birth has an influence on the structure of our personality.” Many people believe similarly. They feel that since the stars and planets exert a physical influence on our earth, why would they not also have a metaphysical effect? What does the Bible indicate?
The Bible is not a scientific textbook, spelling out every detail about the human body and the universe. However, it does explain the purpose for which Jehovah created the heavenly bodies. Genesis 1:14, 15 states: “God said, ‘I command lights to appear in the sky and to separate day from night and to show the time for seasons . . . I command them to shine on the earth.’”—Contemporary English Version.
Consider: If God had designed the stars to influence our personality, would he not have told us so?
What can we conclude? That the stars are part of God’s creative work but do not influence our personality.



A Better Approach

If we desire to learn about our future or understand ourselves, that is commendable. But there is a better place to look than to the stars.
The Bible describes Jehovah God as “the One telling from the beginning the finale.” (Isaiah 46:10) He has a purpose, which he will bring to success. (Isaiah 55:10, 11) We can learn about God’s purpose by reading the Bible. This ancient sacred book also explains why we suffer and how God will bring an end to the very conditions that plague mankind.b—2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21:1-4.
When it comes to learning about and improving ourselves, the Bible is the best place to look for guidance. Why? Because reading it helps us to take an honest look at ourselves. For example, the Bible states that Jehovah God is “merciful,” “slow to anger,” and “ready to forgive.” (Exodus 34:6; Psalm 86:5) But are we like that? The Bible can expose our erroneous thinking and help us see where we need to improve.
Therefore, we do not need to look to the stars to learn about our future or about ourselves. A better approach is to look to the Bible, which is “inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight.”—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.



Astrology is the study of the sun, moon, planets, and stars, with the belief that these heavenly bodies have an influence on us and can help us to understand ourselves.
For more information on God’s purpose, see chapter 3 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

HAVE YOU WONDERED?
  Why did God create the heavenly bodies?—Genesis 1:14, 15.

  How can you take a more objective view of your personality?—Hebrews 4:12.

  How can you know for sure what the future holds?—Isaiah 46:10.




