
Get Motivated

To be motivated in any endeavor, you need to see its practical value.




WHAT is the practical value of school? It will help you acquire wisdom, and the Bible says that “wisdom is for a protection.” (Ecclesiastes 7:12) How so? To illustrate: Imagine that you are walking through a dangerous neighborhood. Which would you prefer—to be wandering alone or to be with a group of friends who could protect you if necessary? With a good education, you have several strong “friends” always at your side. These include:
Thinking ability. Going to school can help you develop what the Bible calls “common sense and sound judgment.” (Proverbs 3:21, Contemporary English Version) Acquiring these skills will help you to solve your own problems instead of always having to rely on others to bail you out.

Social skills. The Bible admonishes Christians to cultivate such qualities as long-suffering and self-control. (Galatians 5:22, 23) Mixing with a variety of people at school gives you plenty of opportunity to master those qualities, along with tolerance, respect, and empathy—traits that will serve you well in adulthood.

Practical training. School can teach you the value of having a strong work ethic, which will help you to get a job and keep it. Also, the more you learn about the world around you, the better equipped you will be to know who you are and what you believe. (Proverbs 14:15) Armed with such conviction, you will be able to stand up for your beliefs respectfully.—1 Peter 3:15.


The bottom line: Since you need an education, it will do you little good to dwell on the things you dislike about school. Instead, get motivated by considering the incentives noted above. You may even be able to think of a few more!
Why not get started? Think of your greatest incentive for succeeding at school.



Good Teachers Are Appreciated!
  “My high-school economics teacher could have been working at a financial institution, but instead he chose to teach at our inner-city high school—a place where most kids didn’t care about economics. Still, he taught the subject simply, with humor, and in a way that related to us. One time he even called my mom to tell her how well I did on an essay. When students asked him why he taught at our school, he said it was the best place he had ever worked. He understood us, he was concerned about us, and he commended us. He was the best teacher I ever had!”—Reyon, United States.




