From Our Readers
Flirting  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Avoid the Hurt of Flirting?” (December 8, 1991) I recently experienced the feelings of pain and betrayal that result from flirting when the young man I was engaged to ended our relationship abruptly and without cause. Later I learned that he had a reputation for being a flirt and had hurt others before me. I now realize that I am partly to blame for this painful situation because I became too emotionally involved too soon. I just wish that this information had been available months ago.
G. T., United States
A young man told me that he simply wanted me as a friend, and I agreed to that. But he continued to call and ask me out on dates. When he later asked me if I would consider him as a marriage mate, I was thrilled! But a year later he tells me that he never really wanted to get married. He says I shouldn’t have got so emotional about matters since he had told me at the beginning that he wasn’t ready for marriage. Then to “cover” himself, he says he still wants to marry me​—but in the new world. I’m still hurting, but the article is helping me to deal with the situation.
S. Y., United States
Families Draw Close  I am one of those fathers who has never taken an interest in his children. I did not realize the long-​term consequences this could have. Reading your articles on “Families​—Draw Close Before It’s Too Late” (September 22, 1991) cut my heart to the quick! I promise to change and to do my best to show my children more affection.
J. B. M., Gabon
The articles talked about answering a baby’s cry. Does this mean that we should answer every cry? If so, would this not allow the infant to manipulate his parents​—to his eventual detriment?
S. H., United States
We established no inflexible rule but gave general encouragement for mothers to be responsive to their infants. And while there may be some legitimate concerns about spoiling older babies and toddlers, most doctors believe that it is difficult to spoil very young infants by responding to their cries.​—See the article “Johnny, Please Be Quiet!” in the September 8, 1982, issue of “Awake!”​—ED.
Fraud in Science  I was especially interested in the article “Shenanigans in the Halls of Science.” (November 22, 1991) I am affiliated with one of the institutions mentioned in the article, and it is shocking to know that such a scenario could surface in the trusted scientific community. When competition and pressure to be number one outweigh honesty, such things happen. I admire Dr. O’Toole’s courage and honesty​—which cost her her job! The attitude appears to be, ‘Who was Dr. O’Toole to correct Dr. Imanishi-​Kari?’ Open-​mindedness is supposed to characterize scientists, but sometimes the opposite is true.
O. O., United States
Wool  I wish to thank you for the article “The Wonder of Wool.” (September 22, 1991) I am now learning to be a dressmaker, and we have studied about wool. I have made this article the basis for my school project. I was a bit anxious about doing so since my schoolmates made fun of me for being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Our principal even gave a talk to warn the students about Jehovah’s Witnesses! But my teacher read the article with interest and asked for a personal copy of Awake!
P. A., Czechoslovakia

