Recovery Is Possible
“We are faced with a choice: Quit drinking and recover, or continue drinking and die.”​—A recovering alcoholic.
IMAGINE suddenly waking up one night to discover that your house is on fire. Moments later help arrives, and eventually the fire is extinguished. Could you just go back inside and pretend that nothing happened? Obviously not. The house is devastated, and reconstruction will be needed before normal life can resume.
A similar challenge faces the alcoholic when he begins to recover. His life has been ravaged by alcohol, perhaps for many years. Now he is abstinent. The “fire” is out, but major reconstruction in attitudes, life-​style, and behavior will be essential if the alcoholic is to remain abstinent. The following suggestions can help the alcoholic to attain permanent sobriety.
1. Know the Enemy
The Bible states that fleshly desires “carry on a conflict against the soul.” (1 Peter 2:11) The Greek word rendered “carry on a conflict” literally means “doing military service,” and it carries the thought of destructive warfare.​—Compare Romans 7:23-25.
Just as any good soldier takes the time to study his enemy’s tactics, the alcoholic must educate himself regarding the nature of alcoholism and how it destroys the alcoholic and those close to him.a​—Hebrews 5:14.
2. Change Drinking and Thinking
“Sobriety means getting rid of the bottle and the baby,” says one physician. In other words, much more than the drinking must change; the inner man must change as well.
The Bible wisely admonishes: “Be transformed by making your mind over.” (Romans 12:2) “Strip off the old personality with its practices.” (Colossians 3:9) If the actions change but the personality remains, the alcoholic will simply move on to another harmful dependency​—or get the old one back.
3. Get an Understanding Confidant
A Bible proverb says: “One isolating himself will seek his own selfish longing; against all practical wisdom he will break forth.” (Proverbs 18:1) Even with sobriety, the alcoholic is susceptible to rationalization. Therefore, he needs an understanding but firm confidant (often called a sponsor). It is advantageous when the confidant is himself a recovering alcoholic who has been successful in meeting the challenges of sobriety. (Compare Proverbs 27:17.) Such a confidant should respect the alcoholic’s religious convictions and must be self-​sacrificing and available to give ongoing support.​—Proverbs 17:17.
4. Be Patient
Recovery is gradual. It takes time for the alcoholic to reconstruct his life. There may be financial strain, tensions on the job, chaos at home. Becoming alcohol free does not mean becoming problem free. The recovering alcoholic at first may feel anxieties as he faces life without a chemical ‘problem solver.’ When such anxieties seem insurmountable, the recovering alcoholic should remember the comforting words of the psalmist: “Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself, and he himself will sustain you. Never will he allow the righteous one to totter.”​—Psalm 55:22.
5. Acquire Healthy Associates
The alcoholic should honestly ask himself: ‘Do my associates support my sobriety or do they continually talk about the “good old days,” making me feel that I’m missing out?’ Proverbs 18:24 says: “There exist companions disposed to break one another to pieces, but there exists a friend sticking closer than a brother.” It takes perception to see who are true friends and who are potentially damaging associates.
6. Avoid Overconfidence
“I feel great​—I don’t even have the desire to drink anymore!” The alcoholic who makes this statement is overestimating his progress and underestimating his alcoholism. The exhilaration of initial recovery, called a pink cloud, is temporary. “Strive for a balanced perspective,” recommends the book Willpower’s Not Enough. “Without it you’ll be setting yourself up for a fall, and it’s a long way down from a cloud.”​—Compare Proverbs 16:18.
7. Beware of Substitute Addictions
Many stop drinking, but then they develop eating disorders or become workaholics, compulsive gamblers, and so forth. ‘What’s the harm? At least I’m not drinking,’ the alcoholic in recovery may reason. True, some physical outlets may be healthy. But when any substance or activity is used to anesthetize your feelings, this only leads to a false, temporary sense of security.
8. Adjust to New Family Roles
Many alcoholics sabotage their recovery when things start going well! Why? Simply because sobriety is new territory. The alcoholic may feel a pull toward the familiar life-​style. Additionally, when the alcoholic becomes sober, he rocks the family boat. Therefore, each family member must change his or her role. “The entire script for the family performance must be discarded and a new one created in its place,” notes the booklet Recovery for the Whole Family. For good reason, recovery has been called a family affair.​—Compare 1 Corinthians 12:26.
9. Be on Guard Against Relapse
Overconfidence, unhealthy associations, substitute compulsions, and increasing isolation may be stepping-​stones to relapse. Maintain open communication with a confidant about any such tendencies.
One recovering alcoholic says: “All alcoholics quit drinking. Some of us are fortunate to quit while we are still alive.”
[Footnotes]
There are many treatment centers, hospitals, and recovery programs that can provide such information. Awake! does not endorse any particular treatment. Those desirous of living by Bible principles would want to be careful not to become involved in activities that would compromise Scriptural principles. A person who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses will find helpful guidelines in The Watchtower, May 1, 1983, pages 8-11.
[Box on page 7]
If Medication Is Absolutely Necessary
  Any medicine containing alcohol can reawaken craving and set one up for a relapse.
  Dr. James W. Smith writes: “It is not unusual for an alcoholic patient to relapse after years of sobriety as a result of self-​medication with a cough syrup which contained alcohol.” The alcoholic is vulnerable to all sedatives. If sedative medication is absolutely necessary, the alcoholic should . . .
  1. consult a pharmacist to determine the potential hazards.
  2. notify a confidant, and if possible, call him before each dose is taken.
  3. keep a record of every dose taken.
  4. discontinue medication as soon as possible.
  5. dispose of unused medication when legitimate use is ended.

