How Will You Answer?
 1. Why should we look to Jesus’ example when asked a question?
1 To this day, humans marvel at the effective manner in which Jesus handled inquiries and requests. When faced with various types of questions while in our ministry, we do well to imitate Jesus in this regard.​—1 Pet. 2:21.
 2. What may help us to provide an effective answer to a question?
2 Listen First: Jesus considered the viewpoint of the questioner. At times this requires asking questions to ascertain what the person really means. Someone who asks, “Do you believe in Jesus?” may really wonder why you do not celebrate Christmas. If you discern the questioner’s real concern, you can reason with him more effectively.​—Luke 10:25-37.
 3. What do we have available to help us find satisfying Scriptural answers?
3 Respond With God’s Word: It is usually best to show how the Bible answers the question. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17; Heb. 4:12) The Reasoning book and “Bible Topics for Discussion” in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures have proved to be helpful in giving just the right answer. Even if the questioner does not accept the Bible as an authority, you may be able to share tactfully what the Scriptures teach. Encourage the person to give serious consideration to the time-tested wisdom found in the Bible. By your imitating Jesus, your answers will be “as apples of gold in silver carvings”​—dignified, beautiful, and valuable.​—Prov. 25:11.
 4. At what times is it best not to try to answer every question?
4 Should We Answer Every Question? If you do not know the answer to a question, do not feel embarrassed to say: “I don’t know, but I can do research on your question and come back with the results of my research.” Such modesty and personal interest may move the householder to invite you to return. If you discern that a question comes from opposers who may be trying to start an argument, imitate Jesus by limiting your response. (Luke 20:1-8) Similarly, if someone with no genuine interest in the truth tries to engage you in debate, politely discontinue the conversation and use your time searching for those who are sincere.​—Matt. 7:6.
 5. What model did Jesus set for answering questions?
5 Jesus knew that reliance on Jehovah was vital to fulfilling his assignment to “bear witness to the truth,” which included answering sincerely motivated questions. (John 18:37) What a privilege we have to imitate Jesus in giving an answer to those who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life”!​—Acts 13:48.

