Search Out Deserving Ones
 1. How do we show appreciation for the privilege to serve in the ministry?
1 During Jesus’ ministry he went to great lengths to provide comforting good news to the meek. (Isa. 61:1, 2) As ambassadors and envoys substituting for Christ, we today have the cherished privilege of imitating him in our untiring and thorough search for the deserving ones in our territory.​—Matt. 10:11; 2 Cor. 5:20.
 2. How was Paul’s adaptability manifested, and with what results?
2 Be Adaptable: The apostle Paul was accustomed to going first of all to the synagogue to preach to the Jews and proselytes. (Acts 14:1) In Philippi, he and Silas went to look for people where ‘they thought there was a place of prayer.’ They began witnessing to a group of women, and one of them, Lydia, quickly embraced the truth.​—Acts 16:12-15.
 3. What opportunities of service might we enjoy in addition to our house-to-house territory?
3 In addition to your house-to-house territory, could you also preach to people found at transportation hubs, parks, employment offices, busy street corners, business places, and shopping centers in your territory? Perhaps you could witness to those in gated communities and restricted apartments by means of letters or the telephone. Being observant and adaptable to changing needs in your territory will allow you to have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.”​—1 Cor. 15:58.
 4. What other options do we have if our congregation has limited territory?
4 Many publishers have had the opportunity to expand their ministry by moving to another congregation either in their own land or abroad. Others have learned a new language in order to preach to people who have come from another country.
 5. What should be our view of the times in which we live, and what should we be resolved to do?
5 All of us must keep in mind that “the field is the world.” (Matt. 9:37; 13:38) In view of the nearness of the end of this wicked system of things, each one must seriously consider his own situation, talents, opportunities, and possibilities for expanding his ministry. Jehovah gives us the assurance that if we put Kingdom interests first, he will bless our genuine efforts to expand our ministry.​—Matt. 6:33.

