Vol, XXXVTTT 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JULY 15, 1917 


No. 14 


OUR "BLESSED HOPE" 

Waiting for that blessed hope, even the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ.*' — Titus 2:13. — 

Diaglott. 


St. Paul here speaks the sentiment of his own heart and 
that of every truly consecrated child of God who is waiting 
for the full consummation of his hope and for the appearing 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he might be with him forever in 
glory. Hope and faith are inseparably allied, for there can 
be no real hope without a well-grounded faith. 

Hope means a keen desire for a good thing, with the expectation
 of receiving that thing, and with the belief that 
when received it will afford great joy and pleasure. We do 
not hope for a tiling which we do not wish, but for that which 
we greatly desire. There must be, however, a sound basis for 
that hope; for without some sure foundation upon which to 
build there could be no continuing, abiding hope of receiving
 the good thing. 

What is it that all intelligent creatures most desire? 
All will answer, "Life everlasting in a state of perfect happiness
." Yet there might be a strong desire for life, and no 
hope whatever of receiving it. But in due time all will have 
an opportunity to obtain life everlasting. 

THE HOPE SET BEFORE THE CHRISTIAN 

For what great thing, then, do we now as children of 
God hope? What do we expect to receive? And to what 
are we looking forward with rejoicing? Is it that we might 
wield a golden sceptre and exercise power over others? 
No; for that would be selfish ambition. Is it that we might 
be like unto the angels? No; for we are not called to Sat 
position. Or that we might get away from this earth and 
thus see greater things than others of God's human creatures 
see? Could any such hope inspire with zeal and love and 
willingness to sacrifice everything else to obtain it? Without 
the one great thing for which we really hope, all other things 
would fail of accomplishment. 

Standing as we are today in the very last hours of the 
Gospel age — a fearful and wonderful time in which to live — 
and looking back over the way we have traveled, we as children
 of GotLdo well now to pause and with sobriety of mind 
ask, W T hy do w T e find ourselves in our present position? Behind
 us we have left earthly home3, earthly friends, earthly 
hopes and prospects, earthly umbitions and desires. What 
is the reason? With one accord we answer, Because of the 
blessed hope that is set before us. And what is this hope? It 
is that we might have life pverlasting on the divine plane; that 
we might see and be like Jesus, who redeemed us from death 
and called us out of darkness into the glorious light; and that 
we might behold Jehovah in his grandeur, receive his loving 
smile and hear his words of approval. 

If we have such a hope as this, there must be good reason
 for it. How could imperfect creatures such as we dare 
have so wonderful a hope? It is not because there is merit 
in us deserving of such great favor, but because God in his 
loving-kindness has made provision that we might have this 
wonderful blessing, because he has promised it to those who 
exercise faith in his great arrangement and who strive with 
joyful hearts to obey his rule and comply with the terms that 
lead to a consummation of such a hope. Therefore the basis 
for that hope is faith in the exceeding great and precious 
promises of God. 

The Apostle Paul advises us that "faith is the basis of 
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." There 
might be a hope based upon vague and uncertain testimony, 
but such a hope would not bring joy; for it would not bring 
full assurance of receiving that for which we hoped, Hence 


the importance of seeing that our hope has a sure foundation
. Many who claim to be Christians say, "We hope to go 
to heaven*'; yet they are filled with fear and superstition. They 
have no desire for the second coming of the Lord and hi3 
glorious revealment. They do not possess that blessed hope 
which yearns for the coming of the day when they shall see 
him face to face. The reason for this is that what hope' they 
have is based upon credulity, and not upon faith. 

A hope that is based upon credulity merely has the word 
or opinion of another as to what the future holds. A hope 
that is based upon faith has the unimpeachable promise of 
the everlasting God that the things for which the Christian 
hopes are absolutely certain if he continues faithful unto the 
end. 

BEGINNING OF OUR HOPE 

Since no one can have hope without faith, so none can 
have faith without knowledge. "Faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God." It therefore follows that the 
one who knows not of God cannot have the blessed hope mentioned
 by St. Paul in our text. The Apostle points out our 
original condition, and then shows us how we are led to this 
blessed hope. "Wherefore, remember that ye being in time 
past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision by 
that which is called the circumcision in the flesh made by 
hands, that at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens 
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants
 of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world ; 
but now in Christ Jesus ye who sometime were afar off are 
made nigh by the blood of Christ" — Ephesians 2:11-13. 

The hope of the Christian is progressive. First he has 
the desire to live everlastingly. He hears the words of Jesus, 
saying, "I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; no man 
cometh unto the Father but by me" (John 14:6) ; and, "This 
is life everlasting, that they might know thee, the only true 
God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3) 
This knowledge gained from the Word inspires a hope that he 
might attain unto this life. 

The hope of many is that they may escape eternal torment
. Such is not the Christian's hope. That could not be 
a hope attended with joy such as is contemplated by the text. 
Having now gained some knowledge of the way leading to 
life, such an one begins to progress in hope; and to him the 
Apostle says, "This is the promise that he hath promised us. 
even eternal life." (1 John 2:25) Thus the searcher for 
truth sees that eternal life is promised to some, He may ask, 
Why do not all have life everlasting? The Scriptures answer, 
Because death — the absence of life — is the penalty for sin ; 
our first parent brought this penalty upon us by disobedience; 
and by inheritance we are all now imperfect. Our present 
hope is insured by the fact that Jehovah, tnrough Christ 
Jesus, has made provision for the satisfaction of that one offense
 of Father Adam's. "For if by one man's offense death 
reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of 
grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by 
one, Jesus Christ. Therefore, as by the offense of one judgment
 came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the 
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto 
justification of life."— Rom. 5:17, 18. 

StTCH A HOPE DEPENDENT UPON CONDITIONS 


WTiile Jehovah has made provision that all who are 
obedient to his law may live everlastingly upon some plane, yet 

[6114] 


July 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


{2\2 2\$) 


he has set this blessed hope before a limited number and 
has made it dependent upon their compliance with certain 
conditions. What are the conditions? We answer: They 
are (1) Faith in the merit of the precious blood of Jesus; (2 J 
■ Justification ; (3} Spirit-begetting; (4) Sanctification; (5) 
Transformation; (6) Suffering and tribulation. Ultimately 
comes the realization of the hope — the receiving of the glory 
of God. Let us consider these conditions in the order named, 
to the end that our hope may be strengthened. 
FAITH IN JESUS' BLOOD 

Tt ha3 pleased God to arrange that those who may entertain 
this blessed, hope shall base that hope upon the merit of Christ. 
Every doctrine is to be tested by the ransom-sacrifice. It is 
the square, the infallible rule, by which we are to measure 
every doctrine that is presented for our investigation. If we 
find that any doctrine does not square with the ransom-sacrifice
, we may be absolutely certain that such doctrine is false. 

The Apostle Paul presents this argument: "Moreover, 
brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto 
you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand; by 
which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what 1 have 
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain. For I 
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how 
that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures; and 
that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day, according
 to the Scriptures ; and that he was seen of Cephas, 
then of the twelve; after that he was seen of above five hundred
 brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain unto 
the present time, but some are fallen asleep. After that he 
was seen of James; then of all of the apostles. And last of 
all, he was seen of me also, as of one born before the due 
time." (1 Cor. 15:1-8) Faith in the shed blood of Jesus 
means a recognition that we are sinners by nature; that Jesus 
died to save us from our sins ; that he rose again and appeared
 in the presence of God for us. Knowing these facts, 
and relying on them, we have faith. 

JUSTIFICATION FOLLOWS 

Justification means to be made right with God. Nothing 
imperfect is right with God. Before we can be justified, however
, some one must stand for us and make up for our deficiencies
. After Jesus had ascended on high, he appeared 
in heaven and presented the merit of his sacrifice on behalf 
of all who should come to Jehovah through him during the 
age of sacrifice. (Hebrews 9:24) If we believe and rely upon 
these facts, and present ourselves in full consecration by surrendering
 our will to do God's will, our Lord Jesus imputes 
to us a sufficiency of hia merit to make up our deficiencies. 
Thus we stand before God as perfect human beings, and he 
counts to us, or imputes to us, righteousness, thereby justifying
 us. — Romans 4:1-11. 

"It is God that justified." This justification is granted 
upon condition that we become a part of the sacrifice of the 
body of Christ. Therefore our consecration must precede our 
justification. God now accepts us and begets us by his own 
spirit to the divine nature. As St. Paul puts it: ''Therefore, 
being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have access by faith into 
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory 
of God. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also; 
knowing that tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience
, and experience hope; and hope maketh not ashamed, 
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the 
holy Spirit which is given unto us." — Romans 5:1-5. 

According to St. Peter, all such are begotten to a hope of 
life through Christ Jesus, "to an inheritance incorruptible 
[which means the divine nature! and undefiled, reserved in 
heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation, ready to be' revealed in the last time." — 
1 Peter 1:3-5. 

SANCTIFICATION NEXT IN ORDER 

Sanctification means to be completely set apart for the 
purpose of Jehovah, according to his holy will. "This is the 
will of God [concerning you], even your sanctification." (1 
Thess. 4:3) Now, we have left all to follow in- the footsteps 
of the Lord Jesus, obeying the Father's will, saying as did 
our Master, "Lo, I come to do thy will, my God!" This 
setting aside of ourselves to do the Father's will means that 
now, as new creatures, we shall walk in newness of life while 
in the flesh, the complete sanctification, or setting aside, being 
when we have received our glorious new bodies in the first 
resurrection. But how is this sanctification to be accomplished
? The Lord Jesus said, "Sanctify them through thy 
truth; thy Word is truth."— John 17:17. 

THE TRANSFORMATION PROCESS 

The transformation is the process of bringing us to full 
and complete sanctification, preparing us and making us meet 


for the Master's use in glory. St. Paul exhorts, "Be not conformed
 to this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing
 of your mind, that ye may prove [try — put to the test] 
what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God." 
(Romans 12:2) The transformation into the likeness of our 
Lord is accomplished by feeding upon the Word of God, appropriating
 it to ourselves, and having our characters developed
 in harmony with the* principles thereof. For this 
cause the exceeding great and precious promises are given. 
When we enter the narrow way, we begin to hear the words of 
the Lord saying to us, "All things heretofore written were for 
your learning, that ye through patience and comfort of the 
Scriptures might have hope." (Romans 15:4) And thus we 
see that our hope increases as we feed upon the blessed Word 
of promise. 

For our benefit the Psalmist has said, "Thou hast seized 
hold of me by thy right hand ; with thy counsel thou wilt 
guide me, and afterwards take me to glory." (Psalm 73:23, 
24 — Leeser) Jesus is the right hand of Jehovah here mentioned
; his Word by which we are sanctified is his counsel; 
arid thus being led on we shall be received into glory — xhe full 
consummation of that blessed hope! Again the Lord through 
the Psalmist said, "I will instruct thee and teach thee in the 
way which thou shalt go; I will guide thee with mine eye" 
(Psalm 32:8} The eye is a symbol of wisdom; and his wisdom
 is expressed in his Word. Thus by his Word he leads us 
on to a fuller appreciation of our blessed hope. 

Again we read, "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, 
and lean not unto thine own understanding; in all thy ways 
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Proverbs 
3:5, 6) "And thine ear shall hear a voice behind thee, saying
, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the left." 
(Isaiah 30:21) The voice here mentioned is the Word of 
God, written before we knew of it, before we were born ; therefor
 it is said to be behind us. Thus he assures us again that 
he will guide us by his Word. s 

This transformation comes to us gradually, as one beholding
 the Lord's face in a mirror. St. Paul says, "But we 
all, with open face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the 
Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, 
even as by the spirit of the Lord," — 2 Corinthians 3:18. 
TRIBULATION AND SUFFERING NECESSARY 

But this wonderful transformation does not come to us 
with ease and comfort; for, as the Apostle says, "Through 
much tribulation must we enter the kingdom." (Acts 14:22) 
"It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall 
live with him; if we suffer with him, we shall reign with 
him." (2 Timothy 2:11, 12) We shall experience that blessed 
hope, "if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the 
hope firm unto the end." (Hebrews 3:0) Who would care 
to enter the kingdom of the Lord amidst ease and comfort 
when our Lord endured such great suffering on our behalf? 
Truly the poet has expressed the sentiment that should be in 
every Christian's heart: 

"Must I be borne to Paradise 
On flowery beds of ease, 
While others fought to win the prize, 
And sailed through bloody seas? 

"Sure I must fight if I would reign ; 
Increase my courage, Lord; 
I'll bear the toil, endure the pain, 
Supported by thy Word." 
SOME THINGS THE CHRISTIAN MUST SUFFER 

Any suffering that is endured for righteousness' sake 
may be counted as profitable. Physical suffering often results 
from faithful service. For instance, the feet of the dear colporteurs
 grow tired and sore from long journeys and the entire
 body becomes w T orn and weary. /Phis suffering results 
from faithful efforts in trying to deliver the message of God's 
love to others of the groaning creation. Faithfulness in any 
branch of the Lord's service brings physical suffering, and one 
may be said to be laying down life in the cause of the Master 
when faithfulness in service entails suffering and destroys 
(physical vitality, and energy. But the glorious hope set before
 the Christian impels him on, and fills his heart with joy 
when he contemplates the Psalmist's words: ''Precious in the 
sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." — Psa. 116:15. 

Sometimes one suffers mental anguish because of his own 
fault or mistake. The new creature resides in an imperfect 
earthen vessel and is striving to overcome the weaknesses and 
besetments of the flesh. Failures result; and there is much 
suffering of mind, and sometimes the disposition to feel that 
he has been cast off from the Lord's favor. Hope, however, 
revives vfhen he calls to mind the precious promises of the 
Lord : "If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, 


[6116] 


(213-214) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKtYH, K. V. 


Christ Jesus the righteous." "Let us therefore come confidently 
unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need." (1 John 2:1; Hebrews 4:16) 
"Blessed are they that mourn ; for they shall be comforted." — 
Matt 5:4. 

Being misunderstood is the cause of much suffering. So 
it was with the Lord himself. Of him it was written, "I 
have trodden the wine-press alont, and of the people there were 
none with me" (Isaiah 63:3) — because they could not understand
 him. Even so it is with those who are his followers. 
They are misunderstood by the world, and often misunderstood
 by the brethren. One may try to do right in the faithful
 performance of his duty. Being misunderstood by another 
brother, his motives are impugned. His brother may, therefore
, become a conscientious busybody and unwitting persecutor
. 

Trouble in the homes of the consecrated and in the classes 
is very frequently the result of a misunderstanding. Such experiences
 bring fiery trials. The church is now in the midst 
of experiences of this kind, and many think it strange. St. 
Peter responds, "Beloved, be not surprised at the fire among 
you, occurring to you for a trial, as though some strange 
thing was befalling you ; but as you partake of the sufferings 
of the Anointed One, rejoice; so that at the revelation of his 
glory you may rejoice exultingly." — 1 Peter 4:12, 13. — 
Diaglott. 

Because of the Christian's faithfulness in maintaining his 
stand for the principles of righteousness, he is persecuted; 
and such persecution would become unbearable, even overwhelming
, except for the blessed hope lhat is set before him. 
In the time of keenest suffering he calls to mind the precious 
words of the Master; "Blessed are they which are persecuted 
for righteousness' sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for* my 
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad ; for great is your reward 
in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before
 you."— Matthew 5:10-12. 

THE PURPOSE SERVED BY TRIBULATIOH 
Jesua proved his loyalty and obedience to the Father's 
will by the things which he suffered. "The disciple is not 
above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough 
for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as 
his lord/' (Matthew 10:24, 25) The Lord said concerning 
St, Paul, "For I will show him how great things he must suffer
 for my name's sake." (Acts 9:18) And so it is with all 
of the Lord's followers who would continue faithful unto the 
end. To be counted worthy of suffering implies that there is 
a glorious prospect in the future, that the Lord has in reservation
 some great prize. Inspired with such a blessed hope the 
Apostle wrote, "For our light affliction, which is but for a 
moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are 
seen, but at the things which are not seen." (2 Corinthians 
4:17, 18) They are the unseen things for which we hope. The 
Christian possessing such hope of glory rejoices in tribulation
, and therefore patiently endures the same. 

That our hope may grow brighter, our faith must grow 
stronger; and to accomplish this, trials, tribulations and tests 
must come. The Apostle likens our hope to an anchor. A 
ship tossed by the storm drops its anchor for safety. The 
anchor would be of no value without a strong line and a solid 
plaice in which to fasten the anchor. The anchor therefore 
represents our hope; the line or cable, represents our faith; 
and the sure fastening of the anchor is in the exceeding great 
and precious promises that God gives to assure us of entering 
into glory. As St. Paul says, "'Wherein God, willing more 
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability
 of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable
 things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, 
we might have a strong consolation, we who have fled for 
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us; which hope 
we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, 
and which entereth into that within the veil." (Hebrews 
Q:X7'l&) If our faith is strong in his precious promises, our 
hope of entering into life everlasting will be strong; and we 
shall be very desirous of knowing the rules whereby we may 
enter into the fulness of life and of conforming ourselves to 
those rules. 

WHAT ARE THE REQUIRED RULES? 
The Apostle Peter layer down these rules explicitly, saying
: "Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious 
promises, that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature
, having escaped the corruption that is in the world 
through lust. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to 
your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge 


temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience 
godliness; and to godliness brotherly-kindness; and to brotherly
-kindness love; for if these things be in you, and abound, 
they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful 
in the kuowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that 
lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath 
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. Wherefore 
the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and 
election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall." 
{2 Peter 1:4-10) Let us now measure ourselves to see how 
we are coming up to these rules. 

The Revelator says, "And he that talked with me had a 
golden reed to measure the City." (Revelation 21:15) John, 
the Revelator, pictured the church. The golden measuringrod
 represents the divine truths given to the church, whereby 
each member may measure himself. 

The first of these rules is a strong and abiding faith ; 
and to this the Apostle says add virtue, which means fortitude
, the standing firmly upon the precious promises and developing
 that Christian character which nothing can shake. 
To this we are to add knowledge, which means a knowledge 
of the exceeding great and precious promises. Having acquired
 this knowledge, we must rely completely thereupon; 
and this constitutes our faith in God s Word. Hence to grow 
in faith we must grow in knowledge. To these we are admonished
 to add temperance, meaning self-control, or moderation
 in all things. And to these we are to add patient endurance
, which is one of the crowning attributes of Christian 
character, and which results after many and severe trials of 
faith. We must learn to be patient with the babes in Christ, 
patient with those who are more fully developed, patient with 
the slow and stupid, patient with the excitable and quicktempered
, patient with the blundering ones, forbearing one 
another. To forbear means to be patient under provocation. 
The Lord permits these trials to come to us for the very 
purpose of developing the quality of patient endurance; and 
hence we find amongst our number some slow, some stupid, 
some excitable, many blundering, but all striving for one end, 
<all having the same blessed hope. These light afflictions, 
which endure but for a short season, serve to polish us and 
to make brighter the hope set before us, and ultimately lead 
to glory. 

The measuring-rule further requires us to develop godliness, 
which means a joyful and loving conformity to God's holy 
will, thereby proving our love for him, thus growing God -like. 
(1 John 5:3) Furthermore, the rules require the development 
of brotherly-kindness, which means duty love of the brethren, 
acquired by putting into operation the Golden Rule, Finally, 
says the Apostle, we must develop love in its highest form, 
which means an unselfish desire to do good and the doing of 
good to others at a sacrifice to ourselves. The putting on of 
such love leads to perfection. 

THE GLORY OF THE LORD 

If thus we continue diligently and faithfully to the end, 
what will be the result? The Apostle says: "For so an entrance
 shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting
 kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." Ah, 
what a wonderful blessing that will be — to be made in the 
likeness of our Lord and Master! The attaining of this glorious
 hope means to receive life everlasting, life inherent — immortality
. (1 John 3:2, 3; Colossians 3:3, 4) It means 
that we shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever and behold
 his beauty. In all the ages to come the members of the 
bride class will continue to increase in knowledge. (Psalm 
27:4) It means that those who reach this glorious consummation
 of their hope shall shine forth as the brightness of the 
sun in the firmament. — Matthew 13:43. 

Jesus is head over all things, and those who enter with 
him into the kingdom shall be joint-heirs with him of the 
glories and wonders of that kingdom. Concerning these the 
Prophet of the Lord has said, "Thou shalt be a crown of glory 
in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand 
of thy God." (Isaiah 62:3) With Christ Jesus, those who 
reach the fulness of this hope, shall bless and uplift the human
 race, shall wipe away all tears and bring joy to every 
obedient heart. As the poet has aptly said: 

"And thou with grace and glory crowned 
Mayest lavish blessings all around." 

Then, dear brethren, what shall we do? The Apostle 
answers: "He who hath this hope in him purifieth himself, 
even as he [the Lord] is pure." (1 John 3:3) None but 
the pure in heart can truly and honestly entertain this hope. 
When we speak of the pure in heart, we are not to be under- 


[6116] 


July IS, 1917 


THE WA TCH TO IV E R 


(215-220) 


stood as meaning perfect men and perfect women in the flesh, 
perfect in every word and act and thought; for we have God's 
Word that there are none such. But we know from his Word 
that the Lord makes up for our unwilling imperfections. Being
 thus grounded in the faith, and having set before us this 
glorious hope, we shall seek to cleanse ourselves from all 


filthiness of body and mind, perfecting holiness in the fear of 
the Lord. 

"But the blessed hope of sharing, Lord, 
Thy glory from above 
Is linked with that most precious thought — > 
Thine everlasting love." 


MANASSEH'S SIN AND REPENTANCE 

[The first ten paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Manasseh's Transgression and Repentance " published
 in issue of November 15, 1898. The last four paragraphs were reprinted from article entitled "A Dishonor to 
His Father," published in issue of July 15, 1905. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled ''Divine 
Justice and Mercy/* published in issue of June 15, 1911. Please see the articles named.] 


"How shall I praise thee, Savior dear, 

For this new life so sweet, 

For taking all the care I laid 

At thy beloved feet. 
Keeping thy hand upon my heart 
To still each anxious beat! 


MY BEST AND TRUEST FRIEND 


"Oh, thou hast done far more for me 
Than I had asked or thought! 

I stand and marvel to behold 

What thou, my Lord, hast wrought, 

And wonder what glad lessons yet 
I shall be daily taught," 


JOSIAH'S GOOD REIGN 


[The first paragraph of this article was reprinted from article entitled "The Lost Book Found," published in issue of November
 15, 1898. Paragraphs 2 to 10 inclusive were reprinted from article entitled "A Good Son of a Bad Father, " published
 in issue of August 1, 1905. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled ' ' A Godly Young Kinff ' ' 


published in issue of June 15, 1911 


Godly Young King, ' 
Please see the articles named.] 


FINDING THE BOOK OF THE LAW 

LThe first two paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "The Lost Book Found, M published in issue of 

November 15, 1898. The third, *— **■ — J -* s - ±1 - A - x — ■*■*- *-- --■■'■- * ....*'... .. - . 

'Thy Word Was Found, 
reprinted from article < 

the articles named.] 

THE COLPORTEUR FIELD 



"Thrust in thy sickle and reap; for the time is come for thee 

Below we present extracts from a typewritten bulletin issued
 by the Colporteur Department some time ago, and sent to 
all the workers in the field. Throughout the Winter over 300 
of this noble band of sacrificers have braved both storm and 
cold, and each month have received a bulletin from headquarters
, giving crisp and up-to-date information respecting 
conditions at home and abroad and containing advice and letters
 of special interest and comfort. This bulletin has served 
those afield so well, and proved to be such a blessing, that 
it has been thought well to continue it throughout the Spring 
and Summer. 

About three years ago there were upwards of a thousand 
colporteurs at work; but when the world-war broke out and 
disturbed business in every country for a time, many were 
obliged like St. Paul of old*, to resort to "tent-making** for a 
time. Now that business improvement is general, and colporteurs
 afield find wonderful opportunities for placing the 
message of the kingdom, and report their business good, we 
would not be surprised to see many of the veterans of this 
class return to their first love, remembering that "he that 
reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal." 
—John 4:36. 

"THE HARVEST IS WHITE" 

"The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few. 
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send 
forth laborers into his harvest." (Matthew 9:37, 38) While 
thus praying, let us each consider his share in the same and 
see if he cannot increase his efforts in forwarding the message 
in this, the most wonderful period of the age — when the world 
is waking up and signs are multiplying on every hand that 
the overthrow of the present order is fast approaching, to 
make ready for the new order of a thousand years of peace, to 
be inaugurated by Messiah's kingdom I Following are the extracts
 from the colporteur bulletin and a few letters from 
those afield: 
"Dear Fellow Servants in the Lord: — 

"What might be termed the Colporteur's Season begins in 
the Spring and continues throughout the year until the holidays
. During these months the colporteur usually obtains 
the best results. 

"The past year has been a prosperous one in the industrial 
world, likewise to the colporteur, for the success of the latter 
is usually proportionate to the success of the former. 

"Big business reports that 1917's outlook is not a shade 
less favorable than was the past year — in fact, promises to 
eclipse it. 

[61 


to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe." — Rev. 14:15. 

"As has been remarked in the previous monthly letters, 
increased interest in The Watch Tower publications is found 
everywhere, An Ontario colporteur writes: 'I find quite a 
number who bought the books some years ago, and have read 
them; others are interested with a talk on the coming kingdom
. I find many hearing ears.' 

"From New York State a colporteur writes: *It is a common
 occurrence to meet those who are reading the Studies 
and have sufficient interest to stand for the teachings even 
to endurance of persecution. The truth is finding its way 
into the hearts of the truly humble. 1 

"From Florida we hear: 'I find many who are disposed 
to give good attention to the message of present truth. 1 

"A California colporteur writes: 'I find a great many are 
more anxious than ever to obtain books written by Pastor 
Russell/ 

"From Washington come this: *Have found many interested
 ones who have read borrowed volumes or sermons.' 

"A Minnesota colporteur advises: 'I notice quite a difference
 in the attitude toward Brother Russell and his work. 1 

"A successful Virginia colporteur writes: 'Enclosed find 
an order for 100 hz (hell towers.) The reason I am ordering 
so many is that I use them in connection with my canvassing. 
I put about six in my pocket when I go out to canvass, and 
sell them for 5c each, or take orders. I have sold a few every 
trip. I show it only when people fail to order even Vol. I. 
They will often say, *1 don't believe in hell.* Then I explain
 what the pamphlet teaches, and they are anxious for it*' 

"From Arkansas we hear: *It is surprising to see how 
the people take to the Scenario — men, women and children. 
They seem able to comprehend it — the pictures interest them, 
and the lessons are short and condensed. One young man who 
had studied evolution was interested in the first lessons in 
the book on the creation of the earth. He said that he could 
not believe the earth was created in six twenty-four hour 
days. Another man told me he had a discussion with an 
infidel and answered all his objections from the Scenario; 
and now he carries it around with him and settles every 
argument with it.' 

"Another colporteur, ten years in the service, writes from 
Virginia: 'The past year has been the most blessed and successful
 of my ten and one-half years of colporteur service, 
not only in the sale of books, but also in the number of grains 
of wheat gathered. We have knowledge of several who now 
are rejoicing in present truth as a result of our recent la- 

17] 


(220 221) 


T HE W A T C H T W E R 


BROOKLYN, N. V. 


bors. it has been a very busy year. Often 1 am out evenings 
talking to the interested ones; and the present year bids fair 
to be as busy, if not more so. Many who are interested 
desire me to call again; and we are doing onr best to help 
them along.' 

"From (Hah we hear that 'the harvest work is great. Although
 not placing so many volumes, yet we find a, great many 
whose minds are opening up to the great truths of God's 
Word. I had a sweet experience canvassing a lady — was very 
busy, could hardly give me time. I left her a Do-You-Know? 
tract. The following day, when* I was going along the next 
block, one of her neighbors said, JUrs. Forshaw wants to see 
vou. When I met her she said, I read your tract through, 
and [ became so interested that I wanted'more. She ordered 
the six volumes.' 

"Another writes: 'About six weeks ago I called to see a 
lady who had attended the Photo- Dram a. She talked with 
me in her parlor; and a young man, her son, was in the room, 
but apparently engrossed in his newspaper. 1 told her about 
the books; and' finding her not inclined to buy, I told her as 
much as I could of the plan of God. When I arose to go, the 
young man put aside hia paper and said, 'I'll take the books.' 
I delivered them. lie has since read the six volumes, and is 
convinced that he now has the truth. Evidently he is in a 
consecrated condition, though from the world. He took the 
first volume to the Baptist minister, a~nd requested to be baptized
. The minister said that Russell was the greatest impostor
 of the 20th Century. lie did not join the minister's 
church. Then he wrote to Brooklyn to find if there were any 
interested in Boston; and you can imagine his joy when he 
sat in the hall with over 400 of like precious faith. I feel 
that we must be using every minute to spread the truth. People
 are hungry as never before. Thank God for the arrangement
 of the harvest work that gives us a share!" 

We append herewith a letter from our colporteur brother, 
Joseph Greig, which is self-explanatory: 

"Dear Friends: — Enclosed find letter replying to communication
 I had in a local paper. Have not called on the party 
as yet. I am of the same opinion as outlined in a recent 
Tower regarding the changing sentiments of the people. My 
letter also appeared in the Bes Moines Register. The newspapers
 present a bi^ field for feeling the public pulse. Brother 
Wood worth was quite successful along this line. 

Faithfully, Joseph Greig." 

Following is the letter referred to by Brother Greig: "Dear 
Sir: — I was much interested in reading your communication 
in tonight's Messenger. You are evidently a student of 
prophecy, in which I, too, am much interested. May I ask 
you to call and make yourself known to me, as I would surely 
like to meet you and have a talk with you. If you are a resident
 of , it might be that you would enjoy meeting with 

a small company of others who also are interested m the 


study of the future in the light of the Scriptures. Assuring 
you of my desire to meet you, and trusting that I may have 
the pleasure of your acquaintance in the near future, I am 
very sincerely, G. P. Allabd.— Iowa," 

Here is an inspiring letter from a couple who have been in 
the colporteur service for many years: 

"Dear Friends: — Greetings in the name of our dear Redeemer
. Enclosed please find Money Order for $ , for 

books ordered yesterday. Our territory has been worked over 
and over for the Studies. Now we are placing the Scenarios 
and the Mannas in the same homes where the Studies have 
been sold. People will read them who would not read the 
Studies. 

"Our hearts are being greatly refreshed in overcoming some 
of the bitter opposition against the truth. The dear Lord 
has given us great victory in overcoming the fear of what man 
might do to us. We never have experienced such joy and peace 

in the midst of bitter opposition. The little town of — 

has been greatly stirred by one of the D.IX's who tried to hinder 
the Lord's work. The dear Lord showed how he could use a 
weak, broken vessel to confound the wise. The D. D. tried to 
have a public burning of the Studies; but the people refused 
to cooperate. They said that we had been in their homes and 
had ^manifested a nice spirit; that our books seemed to be according
 to the Bible; and that they were going to read them. 
We know of only one burning the book thus far. We asked 
to have an interview with the D, T>. ; but he refused, saying 
that I would come with the intention of convincing him that 
he was wrong. This was the best advertisement he could have 
given us. Some of his flock said that his foundation was not 
very strong if he feared that one woman could upset him. 

"How -we pity these blind leaders! How glad we are that 
soon all the blind eyes shall be opened! We bore with him 
until he slandered our beloved Pastor's- character from the 
pulpit. Then we distributed 1,200 B. S. M/s— 'Why the Preachers
 Attack Pastor Russell.' We have also started a series of 
chart talks. We had twenty out at the first meeting; and they 
are anxious for us to continue the meetings. We are not strong 
physically, so cannot keep at the work as we would like. But 
we do thank the dear Lord for the little share he has given 
us in this glorious work, and we are looking forward to the 
time when in glory we can do his will perfectly. Continue to 
pray for us, as we do for you daily. With warmest Christian 
love to you all, 

(f Your3 in joyful service of our King/' 

J. & E. Hettenbaugh." 

"P. S. We want to thank the dear one who is helping the 
colporteurs materially — and the dear Lord, too." 

Prospective colporteurs should write us at once for information
 respecting territory, etc. Our Colporteur Department is 
keeping close watch upon the field, and from Bradstreet's and 
other sources is obtaining reliable information respecting conditions
 in practically every section of the country. 


REAL TEACHING OF BIBLE VS. THE CREEDS 

Deab Brethren: — 

I heard Brother Russell preach once at the London Tabernacle
; and though we shall never meet again in the flesh, his 
warm hand-grasp will never leave my memory. 

I was brought up a baptized member of the Calvinistic 
Presbyterian church of Ulster. When I reached manhood 1 
deliberately concluded that a God capable of dooming his creatures
 to eternal torture must be the essence of hate, and therefore
 unworthy the worship of any intelligent person. 

I had always been a student of the Scriptures, but the fixed 
ideas of the trinity, hell and human immortality with which 
I had been saturated, prevented my really understanding them. 
I therefore abandoned them as well as the Presbyterian creed, 
taking refuge in agnosticism and indifference. 

Passing through our showroom one day my attention was 
called by t]xe head clerk, who was a papist, saying, "This man 
<a colporteur) wants me to buy and read The Divine Plan 
or the Ages, which the priest would not let me read." 

Not being under such control, I bought the book. I read 
it and, noting its appeal to reason, I reread it, referring to 
the Scriptures cited. This induced a new study of the Bible, 
which proved to me that the crBeds, irrational and illogical 
in themselves, wholly misrepresent the plain Bible teaching. 

I then bought the other five volumes, which confirmed the 
strong impression created by the first one. I have since bought 
and circulated many copies among my friends. 

Invoking upon you the divine blessing, I remain 

Your fellow-servant, R. O. Lkbs. — Eng. 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


MAY THE KEYS BECOME INCBEASINGLY PBEOIOUS 

Dear Brethbej?:— 

The news that our beloved brother and pastor had been 
called away caused a deep impression amongst us. We realize 
our loss to be very great, the extent of which can be appreciated 
only by those who have enjoyed the same spiritual fellowship 
with him, and have learned to love hia words of sane counsel 
and exhortation as "meat in due season." Verily his ministrations
 to us, as "that faithful servant," have been characterized 
by unabating zeal and love; and we earnestly pray that his 
works (the result of faithful service and loyal devotion), the 
key which has unlocked so much of present truth, may become 
increasingly precious and more encouraging as the day of our 
deliverance draws nigh. 

As members of the I. B. S. A., we desire to assure you 
of our united, loyal and continued support in the work in 
which we have been privileged so far to engage; and we trust 
with increased vigor to accept the added responsibilities which, 
we understand, devolve upon every branch of the Society as 
the result of our great loss. 

Wfhile our hearts are wounded by our dear brother's removal
, we rejoice to think that his is the reward of the faithful
, and that he is now crowned at the hands of the dear 
Master, whom he loved and for whom he labored so much. -We 
pray that all our dear brethren will more zealously endeavor to 
emulate the beautiful examples which characterized his noble 
life, so that when the call shall come, each one may be found 
as faithful a follower of our dear Lord and Master. With 
much Christian love, 

Your brethren in Christ, Sydney Class. — Australia. 


[<U18] 


Jui» 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(222-223^ 


8EBI0US MISTAKE MADE BT SOME 

Dear Brethren : — In the issue of The Watch Tower of June 
1, 1916, article on "The Harvest Siftings/' page 172, is found 
this clear, concise statement, "The book, 'Food for Thinking 
Christians' (now out of print), published and circulated during 
the year 1881, 1 no longer commend, because it is less systematic 
and therefore leas clear than later publications." Then in the 
same article reference is made to two other publications, "The 
Three Worlds," and "Day Dawn," and answer is made to a 
suppositional question as to whether these are considered profitable
 books to loan to truth seekers. The reply is, "Certainly 
not!" Then aro given cogent reasons for the reply. It seems 
almost inconceivable that the clearness of the language could 
be misunderstood; but such is the fact. 

The issue of The Watch Tower (the Journal, not book) 
of Jan. 15, 1910, treats the subject of ''Where are the Dead?" 
— -likewise every text in the King James Version of the Bible, 
containing the word hell. This issue is usually referred to 
by the friends as the "Hell Tower." On the top margin of the 
front cover is the suggestive expression, "food for thinking 
christians." Now, how any thinking Christian could confuse 
this expression with the title of a book, I cannot imagine ; yet 
that is just what has resulted in some instances. 

To my astonshment some of the dear friends have told 
me that since the item above referred to in the tower of June 
1, 1916, came to their attention, they had burned the "hell 
towers" they had in their possession, 'thinking" that this was 
in line with the suggestion as noted. 

This matter seems of sufficient importance to merit your 
attention, in order to save some of the unthinking Cliristians
 from unwittingly cooperating with the enemies of the 
truth by burning what you commend and send forth for enlightening
 the blinded minds of Satan's dupes. 

With ever increasing love and abiding confidence in you, 
dear brethren, I am, by his kind favor, 

Your brother and fellow-servant in the Lord, 

W. M. Wisdom. — Pilgrim. 
AS TO THE DES&VING 

Frequently mention has been made in The Watch Tower 
regarding schemes worked by various people for securing 
alms or donations from the friends. We have recently received
 a number of letters, some of them enclosing missives 
from a person in Georgia. These letters have a very pitiful 
tone, and would naturally work upon the sympathies of any 
who are seeking to serve the Lord. A brother who recently 
made inquiries into the case writes as below. As we have 
suggested before, we believe that it would be wise for the 
friends to exercise more caution regarding solicitations for 
funds, by letter or in person. The brother's letter follows: 
Dear Brethren: — 

"The individual knew but very little about his Bible, could 
not locate the chapter (John 12:1) in which the lesson was 
to be found, knew nothing about consecration, etc. Would 
state further that the individual was given a cow by the 
readers of a paper published in Maine, called 'Comfort,' This 
cow keeps the family supplied with milk and butter, and is a 
source of income from a calf each year. They have a good 
house and fine garden spot, free of rent, and about three acres 
of very fertile land, rent free; and the County pays them $5 
per month. 

With much Christian love to each and all, and praying our 
Father's continued love and guidance upon you, 

Very sincerely yours in our dear Redeemer, 

Chas. Owens. — Tenn. 
RENEW VOWS WHILE SOME FALL AWAY 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

Words are inadequate to express to you dear ones the 
feeling of deep appreciation to you, for so kindly remembering
 us at this season. The beautiful hymn books were received
 this morning. The dear Lord has dealt so kindly with 
us, that our hearts are filled to overflowing. Pray for us; 
we need your prayers. We have renewed our vows, and as we 
see many who were once true and loyal fall from their steadfastness
, it drives us closer to the One who never forsakes his 
children. 

Truly your sisters and coworkers, 

Mrs. Ida Zallmanzig, Mrs. H, A. Varro. — Cat 
"WHAT HAVE I THAT I EH) NOT BEGETVE7" 
Dear Brethren: — • 

Greetings in the name of our Lord! 

Please find enclosed Postal Money Order for $ — , to 

be applied to the interests of the harvest work, wherever, 
according to your best judgment, it is most needed. I want 
to assure you of my cooperation in the future as in the past, 
and am glad to observe that the work is going grandly on. 
I am sure we are greatly encouraged with the thought that 

[61 


we did not merely consecrate until Brother Russell's death, 
but until our own death: "Be thou faithful unto death." 

Am still enjoying the Scripture Studies and Towers, 
written by dear Brother Russell's pen. The more I read 
them the more X feel my responsibility increases. We know 
the dear brother didn't write these things for fun nor form, 
but wrote them to impiess upon our minds the necessity for 
putting the admonitions into practice, if ever we expect to gain 
the kingdom. I assure you 1 appreciate his great labor of love 
as much as ever. 

Another thought: I feel I have been greatly privileged 
in the harvest work, yet I have never felt once that I have ever 
done enough; and no matter what I do in the service there is 
no praise coming to me; for ''what have I that I did not receive
?" We are assured that "the meek will he guide in 
judgment; the meek will he teach his way." 

I feel that there are three great tilings to cultivate — love, 
self-sacrifice and submission. How it makes us put forth 
every nerve to yield full submission! But we know that being 
submissive is the road to happiness- — and further, our great 
enemy is "Self." 

I trust 1 have not wearied your patience in the reading of 
this epistle, but it is some time since I have written the Society
, and thought a few words would be in order. 

Bear brethren, I assure you that all will have my prayers 
in future as I have offered them in the past, W T ith much 
Christian love, 

Yours by his grace, Mrs, Daniel F. Robinson. — Pa. 
"HIS WRITINGS OPENED THE BIBLE TO ME" 
Dear Brethren: — 

Though late, accept my heart's deepest sympathy in your 
great loss — it is also my loss — in the death of our beloved 
Pastor, C. T. Russell. What could replace on this earth. that 
pen, that eloquent voice, calling the world to Christ! For us 
it is deep grief, for him joy. What a glorious Christmas must 
have been his! Oh, that God in his mercy may raise one to 
continue his work! Not until the last day will it be known 
the numbers of souls he has been the means of bringing to God. 
As for me, his writings .have brought peace to my soul and 
opened the Bible to me as no preaching in the nominal church 
could ever do. 

Soon my earthly career will be run. Soon we shall be in 
the midst of the dreadful world-conflict, when God seems forgotten
. All the illusions of this world are passing away. 
What joy for us to know we shall be called upon! May the 
Lord Jesus strengthen us, so that our hearts may not fail, 
and that no matter where we may be, we shall be ready to 
give our testimony. 

May God comfort all the brothers and sisters .and assist 
them in carrying out our beloved Pastor's wishes. I remain, 

Your aged sister in the Lord, 

Susanna Rapple. — Ireland. 
LOYAIiTT AND EARNEST COOPERATION 
To the Friends at Bethel: — 

The passing away of "that servant" — loyal, loving, humble 
and faithful — -has deeply affected' the friends in the truth everywhere
. W 7 e all have great love for him and for the fruit of 
the spirit he displayed; but we appreciate the fact that those 
in the Bethel family must feel our Pastor's departure more 
keenly, having been so closely associated with him for so many 
years. 

The Philadelphia Ecclesia, therefore, by unanimous vote, 
extends to the Bethel family their great sympathy in this 
time of *mutual bereavement. We pray that our dear Lord 
will encircle you with his arms of love and give you that 
peace which passeth all understanding, At the same time we 
wish to assure you of our earnest desire to cooperate and to 
assist you in carrying Jorward the great work which our 
Lord has determined and has given to us through "that servant
." W T ith great Christian love, 

The Philadelphia Ecclesia. — Pa. 
"DECETvTNa AND BEING DECEIVED*' 
Dear Brethren: — 

I am enclosing herewith a clipping which is self-explanatory
. I thank you for mailing the Spiritism booklet. We 
have read it with much interest and profit. We are surprised 
at the extent to which Spiritism is spreading throughout the 
world. Not having seen any of the workings of professional 
spiritualists and mediums, we were inclined to disbelieve that 
they actually did the things which we read in the newspapers, 
W 7 hen I was a young man, thirty-three years ago, two of us 
sat at a seance with some professed mediums. When the working
 of the table began, some of us, by prearrangement, directed
 that the knocking indicate two of us to be the chief 
mediums, and it responded perfectly. This aroused the jealousy
 of the professed epi ritualists. Our seances were pro- 

191 


(223-210) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


longed and we met together all winter, often having fifty 
at our Sunday night meeting. This depleted the attendance 
at the village church. We had the table move around the 
room, had it stand on two legs, answer questions, and in this 
way we entertained doctors and bankers, who often sat with 
ua. However, strange as it may seem, we never thoroughly 
believed in it. 

Since reading, What Say the Scriptures About Spiritism
? we have been wondering whether one of the demons was 
assisting us in our seances at that time. Long since, we left 
the village, and have many times thought of how we used to 
talk and laugh over the events of the evening, and as to what 
the crowd would have done to us if they had found out our 
deception. And now comes the thought that perhaps we ourselves
 were the ones deceived. 

Very truly yours, S. P. Grabill. — Mont. 

[We are in receipt of other letters respecting the one published
 in The Watch Tower of March 15, page 93, and headed, 
"One of the Snares of the Fowler." We are not surprised 
that the persons mentioned foregoing were innocent of the 
power that operated the table at their seances. Hundreds of 
letters have come to us relating similar experiences. The object
 in moving the table and in answering the questions is 
doubtle&s intended to excite curiosity and to lead on to obsession
 and later to possession of both mind and body.] 

LOYALTY, LOVE AND STJPFOBT 
Dear Brethren: — 

We have noticed the many letters published in The Watch 
Tower encouraging you and assuring you of the hearty support
 of the writers. The fact that such a letter has not been 
sent by the Chicago class should not be construed to mean that 
those letters do not express our attitude nor that we have 
been so long in determining what stand we would take with 
regard to the changes necessitated by the passing from our 
midst of dear Pastor Russell. 

It will be remembered that one of our elders, when speaking
 at the funeral service of Pastor Russell, expressed the attitude
 of the Chicago class with reference to the matter. However
, it has been thought well by the cjass to approve the matter
 by vote. This was done by a unanimous vote, and the 
secretary was instructed to write you assuring you of our 
hearty sympathy and prayers according to the Vow and earnest
 cooperation to the extent of our ability and opportunity. 
The trial and testing of the church in general seems to be 
progressing with growing intensity, as we should expect, and 
therefore we need the sympathy and aid of eaeh other and, 
realizing that as you have the greater responsibility you would 
also have the greater trial, we want to especially assure you of 
our loyalty, love and support in prayer and all possible ways. 

Yours in Christ, A. L. Seeley.— III. 

"CHART OF THE AGES" 
Dear Brethren: — 

Why not tell speaking brethren through The Tower of 
the great advantage in using the chart in nearly all public 
lectures? Nearly all of the brethren seem "afraid to touch the 
chart" with a pointer. Sometimes we almost feel that the 
public learn more by looking at the chart than from what the 
average class lecturer has to say. That chart, with its Millennial
 age, is a wonderful, Lord-given asset in publw exposition
, and we think should be used more. Brother Russell was 
very favorable to its use. Cannot you get it used more? The 
chart interests the public readily, when it is used, which is very 
seldom. With much Christian love, 

Your brother in the service of the King of kings, 

C. W. Gebdes.— Cal. 
"LET HTM DO WHAT SEEMETH HIM GOOD" 

Beloved Brethren: — 

I want to tell you that the article in The Watch Tower, 
under the heading, "Harvest Gatherings and Sittings," has 
done me a lot of good. I think that it was timely. I had 
heard of some of the things told in this article, but in a disconnected
 way. Now I am better able to look back with 
you and see the winding path which it pleased ! the Lord to 


cause Brother Russell to tread. There is nothing that he 
has said that should be an offense to any. As for myself, I 
am one of those in whom Psalm 1 19-: 165 is fulfilled. I love 
"his law/' I have "great peace," and nothing "shall offend" 
[stumblej me. But as I now note more clearly the Lord's 
providential leadings in the winding, thorny [and yet flowery] 
path in which he had been walking, lo, these many years, my 
heart goes out further to you. My own experiences in the 
painful and joyous winding way cause me to understand and 
to sympathize more deeply. 

I have noted how the Lord at different times in the past 
has delayed different publications, for a wise purpose known 
only to himself at the time of their delay. And although I 
already knew that it was he who was delaying the publication 
of the Seventh volume, I now know it still better, and am 
the better prepared to wait for it. "It is the Lord, let him do 
what seemeth him good." I think there is no doubt that we 
have reached another juncture of the harvest period, in which 
special sifting and testing will take place, and that our hearts 
will again be pained by the various experiences — the parting 
with some friends, etc. But, if it shall prove so, again we say, 
"It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good." 

Yours in his peace and love, waiting for the kingdom, 

Alex. Evans. — Lowauina. 
THINKS THE STONES WOT7LD CBT OUT 
Dearly Beloved Brethren; — 

Often have I felt like writing to you, but knowing of your 
busy life, I have refrained from domg so. 1 can now keep 
silent no longer, as I feel that the very stones around me 
would cry out. I thank my God daily for Pastor Russell and 
for the grand work that he has done in conjunction with his 
beloved colaborers. 

Now that we are in the midst of the evil day, we hourly 
feel the unspeakable benefit of an intellectual understanding 
of God's glorious plan of salvation, when all the conceivable 
wiles of the adversary are at work to deceive, if it were possible
, the very elect. 

As a worthy instrument in the hand of Almighty God 
Pastor Russell has led the little flock in the four corners of 
the earth, and patiently shown them how to adjust the 
"panoply of God," Many are the staunch and loving hearts 
that beat in South Africa for him today-^both black and 
white — and who, in the name of Jesus (that sweetest name in 
heaven or on earth) bless the day that by God's command he 
directed the footsteps of our honored and deeply loved pilgrim 
brother W. W. Johnston to our shores. His grand example in 
laying down his life for Christ and the brethren, no less than 
that of our late and much beloved Pastor, has been an everincreasing
 daily inspiration to us, 

May the Eternal God always be your refuge, and may his 
everlasting arms enfold you and finally take you to himself, 
when your work on earth for him is done! 

With loving devotion, we have the privilege to subscribe 
ourselves by the grace of God, 

Your brother and sister in the Lord, 

Edw. W, and Mabel A. H, Gamble. — 8. Africa. 
"SCBXPTOBE STUDIES*' CHANGED HIS WHOLE XJFB 

Dear Brethren: — 

While sending for supplies, as contained on separate sheet, 
I wish to express, as best I can, the void felt by the writer 
and no doubt by every member of the Bible Students in the 
loss sustained in the death of our beloved Pastor, Brother 
Russell. For the past ten years I have feasted on the words 
of counsel as well as upon the opened Bible as set forth in 
the Scrtpture Studies. Could I have known myself thirty 
years ago as I now understand myself, what a different life 
I would have led! Words fail to express the uplift in character
 his teachings have produced. I am now close on to three 
score and ten, and there remains but a brief time at most 
when I hope to meet him. In the meantime, I am striving to 
so run as to win the prize which his teachings pointed out, in 
the Bible. In love and in the one hope, I am 

Your brother, B. B, Chandler. — Calif. 


SHIPPING DIFFICULTIES 

Since the declaration of war the railroads and other transportation
 companies are practically under the control of the 
Government. Shipping of war supplies and food will have 
preference to all other shipments. We therefore suggest that 
all classes engaged in the pastoral work, colporteur work 


and all persons using quantities of Studies in the Scriptures 
order sufficient books, literature, etc., to meet the probable 
needs for six months or more, if possible. These books, etc., 
might be stored at the various class headquarters and supplied 
to the members of the class and others as they may desire. 


The 


PILGRIM SERVICE FOR COLORED BRETHREN 


Society takes pleasure in announcing that a pilgrim service should be made to the Society; and the brother will 

brother who is able to serve and is well qualified can be sup- be assigned in due course of time. This is without expense 

plied by the Society for the purpose of serving the colored to the brethren, it being understood, of course, that local 

brethren in various parts of the country. Requests for such brethren will be pleased to entertain the pilgrim brother. 

[6120] 


OUR UNDER SHEPHERD 


"0 Under Shepherd of the flock, 

Thou who didst safely keep 
The little ones of God's dear fold 

While hirelings lay asleep, 
Thy watch upon the mountain side 

Is o'er ; and thou hast 
Within the palace of the King, 

With glory crowned at last! 

"Thy lot, faithful one, was hard; 

Sharp were the rocks that tried 
Thy weary feet, when thou didst search 

The rugged mountain side 
For those poor, hungry lambs who strayed 

Far from the Bafe, warm fold, 
Led by the hireling's careless voice 

Into the darkness cold! 

"The Master's staff was in thy hand; 

The Master's rod was thine; 
They comforted the weary sheep, 

They spoke the Word divine. 
They led through thorns and briers rude 

The weakest and the worst, 
Who wandered, in their blindness, far 

In paths of sin accursed. 


"No burning lake of awful fire 

Did thy keen eye discern 
To frighten timid little lambs, 

And faith to terror turn; 
But up the mountain's rugged height, 

A path that ever led 
From darkness into that clear light 

Where dwells our living Head. 

"Beyond the shadows thou hast climbed, 

But still thy clear voice calls: 
'Press onward, little flock, thy God 

Is true; no ill befalls 
The sheep who walk the narrow way, 

The way the Master trod, 
The way which seems all loneliness, 

But where Faith's eye sees God! 1 

"The shadows o'er that mountain top 

Will lift ere long; and we 
Who follow on shall find him there. 

And with him Christ shall see. 
O thou great Shepherd of the flock, 

Whom we, like him, adore, 
Be with us till at last we meet 

To sever nevermore!" 

