From Our Readers
Stress  The series “Relief From Stress!” was so timely for me! (February 8, 2005) The articles came just when I thought I was about to go over the edge, all because I was not coping with stress properly. The suggestions you provided have made a world of difference in my life.
Name withheld, United States
Recently I was diagnosed with depression. So the statement, “It is fine to care for your own needs,” was reassuring to me. The illustration involving filling our “personal-resource bank” was appreciated. I was emotionally bankrupt, but I will try to know my limits from now on.
Y. O., Japan
I have just returned from a seminar in which I gave a short presentation on coping with stress. I was able to touch on the causes of stress and its effects, as well as what can help—all based on this wonderful magazine!
J. L., Germany
Mobile Phones  Thank you for the article “The Mobile Phone—Friend or Foe?” (February 8, 2005) I am 14 years of age, and I have been too dependent on my mobile phone. The article helped me to understand that the phone should not be the most important thing in my life, especially considering the possible health effects. Thank you for your interesting articles.
M. B., Romania
Harp Seals  I want to express my heartfelt appreciation for the enjoyable and educational articles in Awake! After reading the article “Snow Babies of the Magdalen Islands,” I really came to love these darling animals. (January 8, 2005) The pictures helped me understand their interesting growth pattern. Besides moving me to thank Jehovah, who created these animals, the article strengthened my desire to live in Paradise. I have had some stressful problems, and I can’t tell you how much this heartwarming article encouraged me. Please continue to publish articles like this.
N. S., Japan
Sea Horses  I received your magazine from Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I would like to express my gratitude for the article “Dancing Horses of the Sea.” (December 22, 2004) Recently I received an excellent grade for my school assignment on sea horses after making use of the information in your article. As a result of Awake! magazine, I have learned more about science and technology—and especially about God. Thank you, Jehovah’s Witnesses, for your excellent magazines!
T. P., Indonesia
It Is Written . . .  I am so glad that I read the article “It Is Written That I Will See Him”! (December 22, 2004) I am 11 years of age, and until now I have lacked the courage to tell others about God’s Kingdom. But after reading Rosalía Phillips’ life story, I realize that Jehovah will support me. I want to become a courageous publisher of the good news like Rosalía.
P. P., Poland
I am 27 years old, and 24 years ago my mother fell asleep in death. Since becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I have had a firm hold on the hope of seeing her again. I am thankful for articles such as this one—thankful to Jehovah, to Awake!, and to Rosalía for sharing her beautiful experience with us.
A. F., Venezuela

