Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Since Jehovah God loved the world of mankind so much that he gave his only-begotten Son to die on their behalf, those who appreciate that love are likewise under obligation to manifest love. This love moves them to serve God, to expend themselves on behalf of fellow believers, and to carry to others the good news about God’s loving provisions for all mankind. For that reason, Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to call at the homes of people everywhere to discuss the Bible with them, and during June they will be offering the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the book “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” with two booklets, for $2.
IS PEACE POSSIBLE?
Peace is the desire of all people, yet the nations of this world have not been able to attain it, not even within the borders of individual nations. So commonplace has violence become that many persons view it as an inevitable evil of life. But is it? Will conditions never change? For your peace of mind and assurance of future happiness send for and read the beautifully illustrated hardbound book From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained. It is only 75c.
EUROPEAN ASSEMBLIES
Conventions featuring instruction in God’s Word of Truth are being sponsored by the Watch Tower Society in many parts of the world this year. You are welcome to attend. Admission is free. The dates and locations for the European assemblies are as follows:
June 9-13: Tolka Park, Dublin, Eire; Scottish Rugby Union, Edinburgh, Scotland.
June 17-20: Ullevål Stadion, Oslo, Norway.
June 23-27: Olympic Stadium, Helsinki, Finland.
June 30-July 4: Feyenoord Stadium, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
July 7-11: Palais des Expositions, Charleroi, Belgium; Exhibition Hall, Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
July 14-18: Sportfeld St. Jakob, Basel, Switzerland; Stadhalle, Vienna, Austria.
July 21-25: Deutschlandhalle, Berlin, Germany.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
July 4: Joyfulness All the Day Long. Page 328.
July 11: Increase Your Praise of Jehovah! Page 334.

