Fear of the Dead Is Widespread
The sun has long since set. You are returning home a bit later than you would like. As your walk takes you past the local cemetery, your heart begins to beat a little faster. The quietness of the dark night makes you aware of the slightest noise. Suddenly you hear in the distance a shrill, startling sound. You quicken your pace​—your pulse quickens too—​as you head for the protection of home.
HAVE you ever experienced anxious feelings when you were in or near a cemetery? If so, you may have been influenced by a religious concept that is common worldwide​—that the spirits of the dead can help or harm the living.
Many superstitious customs have developed as a result of the belief that the dead need the help of the living or that they may harm the living if not appeased. In some Latin-American countries, for instance, many have the custom of erecting a little dwelling with a cross where a person has died from an accident. People light candles and put flowers there in an effort to show interest in or to help the soul or spirit of the dead person. In some cases, reports about “miraculous” answers to prayers are circulated, so that people begin to frequent the place of the animita, the little dwelling for the soul or spirit of the dead individual. There they make mandas, or promises, that if the dead person will help them accomplish or receive something​—perhaps a miraculous cure—​they will show their gratitude in a special way. On the other hand, it may be reported that the soul of a person appears in the darkness of night, terrifying those present. It is commonly said that such souls are penando, annoying the living because of past events.
In many lands people put forth great effort to appease the “spirits” of the dead. Elaborate feasts are held, sacrifices offered, soothing words spoken​—all in an attempt to ward off retribution from the dead person’s spirit. Placating the spirit, it is thought, will result in rewards and blessings for those left behind.
“Many believe that no event occurs ‘ordinarily or naturally,’” says one report from Africa. “Any incident​—be it sickness, disaster, infertility, economic hardship, excessive rainfall or sunshine, accidents, family disunity, death—​is thought to be caused by unseen spirits having superhuman powers.” Another report says: “People believe that the spirits of their ancestors occupy a place in heaven and are in constant watch over their survivors on earth. The ancestors are believed to possess supernatural powers, which they can use to bless and protect their relatives on earth or to punish them, depending on the relatives’ honor or neglect of the dead.”
But does such harmonize with the Word of God? What is your opinion?
[Picture on page 4]
An “Animita” in Chile

