VOL. XIII. OCTOBER 1, 1892. NO. 19. 

ZEAL ACCORDING TO KNOWLEDGE. 



"The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up."— John 2: 17. 

The correctness of our interpretation of Scripture, 
set forth in these columns thirteen years 
ago, relative to what would be the ground of 
the testing of God's people during this harvest 
time, is year by year more fully demonstrated. 

We then showed that the prophecy which 
declares, "He shall be for a stone of stumbling 
and a rock of offence to both the houses of 
Israel" (Isa. 8:14), refers to Israel after the 
Flesh and Israel after the Spirit; and that as 
the testing and sifting of the fleshly house came 
in the end or "harvest" of their age (the Jewish 
age), so the testing and sifting of the spiritual 
house is due now, in the end or harvest 
of this age (the Gospel age). 

And we showed, to the satisfaction of ourselves 
and the majority of the TOWER readers, 
that the testing of the spiritual house (strange 
though it seems) will be upon the same question 
of faith with which the fleshly house was 
tested— namely, the cross of Christ. Not that 
any now doubt, nor that any in the Jewish harvest 
doubted, the fact that our Lord died, or that 
he died upon a cross; for that fact cannot be 
questioned. The test with the Jews was whether 
or not they would accept the sacrifice there finished 
as the ransom-sacrifice which paid the 
penalty of their sins and justified the believer. 
This they refused to believe; and thus they 
made the cross of Christ of none effect, of no 
value. The Apostle states this pointedly of 
them, saying: "We preach Christ crucified, 
unto the Jews a stumbling-block."— See 
ICor. 1:17-24. 



Similarly the nominal Gospel Church is now 
to undergo a test upon this same subject— 
whether each accepts the work of Christ as the 
full ransom (corresponding-price), the complete 
"propitiation [satisfaction] for our [the 
Church's] sins, and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world." And, the 
Lord's Word for it, the vast majority will 
stumble, and only a faithful remnant will stand 
the test. The Lord's tests are very simple, 
but very thorough. 

It may be said, This is the last issue upon 
which a testing might be expected, since all 
"orthodox" Christians have held it tenaciously, 
even during the dark ages. Yes, we answer, 
this is one item of truth which has been 
constantly held, even though surrounded in 
every case with various contradictory errors: 
it has thus been held unreasonably, held in unrighteousness, 
held without being fully appreciated, 
but nevertheless held. And it is because 
this doctrine of the ransom has been 
held, and that as the foundation of faith, that 
even in the dark ages, and in the midst of great 
corruption, the nominal church has been recognized 
of God at all, or been worthy at all 
of the name "Christian." 

Had the doctrine of the ransom been held 
intelligently and reasonably, it would have 
hindered its holders from falling into any of 
the great errors with which the doctrines of 
Christendom abound. With a correct view of 
the ransom (a corresponding price), where could 
the doctrine come in which claims that the 
wages of sin is everlasting torment? Was the 

R1452 : page 292 

suffering of eternal torment the ransom-price 

which our Lord gave for all? or was his death 

our ransom? What saith the Scriptures? It 

would have settled the question of natural immortality 

of man beyond dispute. It would 

speedily have settled the question of the Trinity. 

The holding of the ransom is the key to 

every truth. It is the center or "hub" from 

which all other truths must radiate to the circumference 

of the divine plan for salvation. 

Because this truth is generally held unintelligently, 
and in the midst of various contradictory 
errors (in unrighteousness), therefore, 
now that the testing time has come, and God 
is bringing it as an issue or "stone of stumbling" 
before Christendom, the large majority 
are willing to cling to the errors and let go the 
ransom. 



And those who reject the errors of eternal 
torment, and who are inclined to go to the opposite 
extreme, and to hope for the everlasting 
salvation of all men, would be saved from that 
error, too, if they would but hold to the ransom, 
giving it its full signification. For, if the 
Scriptural account be admitted, that condemnation 
of death resulted from Adam's wilful 
sin (Rom. 5:12), and that the death of our 
Lord Jesus, finished at Calvary, was the ransom 
(corresponding price— See the definition of "ransom, 
Greek, antilutron, in Young's Analytical 
Concordance), then it must also be admitted 
that whoever will fail in the new trial, and 
hence be condemned in that judgment, will be 
subject to the same penalty that was originally 
inflicted upon all in Adam. This second trial 
results directly, under God's grace, from the 
ransom-sacrifice; and God has appointed that 
the world's Redeemer shall be the Judge, in 
that Millennial judgment-day. (Rom. 14:9; 
Acts 17:31.) Because it is the penalty of the 
second trial, this sentence is Scripturally called 
"Second Death." And it is not difficult to 
see that if God's law was such that he could 
not clear the sinner without giving a ransom 
for the first transgression, so also if any were 
ever to be released from Second Death (which 
God has not even hinted at), it would require 
a ransom for each one tried, found guilty and 
sentenced. 

R1453 : page 292 

But as some are so anxious to hold to eternal 
torment that they will let go of the ransom, 
when they see the two doctrines to be in conflict, 
so others, when they decide that they 
want to believe in the everlasting salvation 
of all men, and find the doctrine of the 
ransom contradicting them, they feel that 
the doctrine of the ransom must be gotten rid 
of, and they drop it. The Scriptures show that 
only such can have everlasting life as come 
willingly into oneness with Christ and his laws, 
when the full knowledge and opportunity are 
offered; and that this opportunity will end 
with the Millennial age, beyond which sin and 
sinners cannot go to mar, or even to endanger, 
the felicity of eternity. 

But since they are very anxious to propagate 
their views, it becomes necessary for us as true 
under-shepherds to point out the fallacy of their 
position, to those sheep who have an ear to 
hear the voice of the Chief Shepherd, and to 
follow him. They perceive that the issue is well 



taken, and hence make every effort to "get 
around" the difficulty. To do this they are 
all agreed; and hence they are in this respect 
in sympathy and fellowship, no matter how 
different their theories may otherwise be, and 
make common cause against the WATCH TOWER 
publications, which defend the doctrine of the 
ransom. 

As a matter of fact, each party (represented 
by a journal) tries to dodge the ransom in a 
different manner. One, totally ignoring the 
meaning of the word ransom, claims that it refers 
to the forcible deliverance of men from 
death; another says the ransom was given by 
our Lord when he left the heavenly glory to become 
the man Christ Jesus; another says that the 
living example of our Lord while among men 
was the ransom; and another now comes forward 
claiming that our Lord is now making 
the ransom, that even since his ascension he 
has been expiating the sins of the world in 
heaven, and that this work of ransoming will 
not be finished until the end of the Millennial 
age.— This last twist becomes the wretchedly 
thin foundation for another "no-ransom" 
journal, just started, called "The Herald of 
Glad Tidings." It is no better and no worse 

R1453 : page 293 

than the others— "The World's Hope," "Spirit 
of the Word" and "Herald of the Morning." 

What wresting and twisting and dodging ! 
one way and another, to avoid the real issue, 
and to get around the many plain statements 
of Scripture to the effect that "Christ died 
FOR OUR SINS;" that it was "the man Christ 
Jesus who GAVE HIMSELF a ransom [a corresponding 
price] for all." The thought of these 
people seems to be, any argument or theory is 
good that sets aside or gets around the Bible 
statements that the ransom for sinners was 
"finished" (John 19:30) when our Redeemer 
died on the cross at Calvary. 

We denominate all of these as "no-ransom" 
views; for although they all use the word 
ransom, it is only to blind, to confuse, and to 
lead the minds of their readers away from the 
real and only ransom-sacrifice, and from the 
real and only meaning of the word ransom 
(antilutron— a corresponding price). 

Let those who seek to serve the Lord know 
that his truth is his representative, and let them 
cast their influence, all of it, on the right side 
of this momentous question which is now the 
testing, the stumbling question, to all those 



who are not loyal soldiers of the cross and 
followers of the Lamb. Show your loyalty to 
him who gave himself a ransom for all. (Tit. 1:13; 
2: 15.) Leave no doubt with any as to 
just where you stand. However much others 
may seek to dodge and evade the truth on this 
subject, let us be true to God and his Word. 
(1 Pet. 2:19; Matt. 5:16; Rom. 3:4.) As 
soon as we see that any teacher (or would-be 
teacher), whether a human being, or a paper 
published by a human being, is wrong on this 
one, central and vital point— the ransom- 
evading, misrepresenting and misapplying the 
word and doctrine to some other sense than 
the true one— "a corresponding price" for 
all— we should have nothing further to do 
with such person or journal until it fully and 
openly acknowledges the error and retracts it 
heartily. 

The Lord's instructions to us are very pointed 
on this matter, and leave no doubt as to the 
course of duty and loyalty. The Apostle Paul 
says (Rom. 16:17), "Brethren, mark them 
which cause divisions and offenses contrary to 
the doctrine which ye have learned [from inspired 
sources]; and avoid them." Surely, 
among all the doctrines taught us by Christ 
and the apostles and prophets, no other is of so 
vital importance as the doctrine of the ransom. 
Hence those who reject the Scriptural statement 
that our Lord Jesus gave himself a corresponding 
price, a substitute, a ransom for all, are 
to be rejected from recognition as Brethren, 
and even to be avoided. 

The Apostle John says: "Whosoever transgresseth, 
and abideth not in the doctrine of 
Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the 
doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father 
and the Son. If there come any unto you 
[man or paper, professing to be a teacher], and 
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into 
your house, neither bid him God speed: For 
he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of 
his evil deeds." (Compare 2 John 9-11; Gal. 1:8,9; 
2 Tim. 3:5; Titus 3:10.) Thus it is 
evident that we who would follow closely the 
way marked out for us have not much liberty 
or choice in our attitude toward those who deny 
the very foundation of our faith— however 
much they may desire to company with us. 
Compare also the rules respecting immoral 
persons who desire fellowship (1 Cor. 5:11; 
Eph. 5:11; 2 Thes. 3:6-14), although there is 
generally less danger from such than from those 
who become doctrinally corrupted. 

The present King commands his faithful 



servants who have not cast off the "wedding 
garment" of his imputed righteousness (faith in 
his blood [sacrifice] for the forgiveness of sins), 
concerning those who reject it, saying, "Bind 
him hand and foot [i.e., restrain his influence 
by thoroughly answering his arguments], and 
cast him into outer darkness." (Matt. 22:13.) 
Reject such a one from any fellowship which 
would mark him or her as a Brother or Sister 
in Christ. Soon such will be in the outer 
darkness of worldly confusion and uncertainty, 
called Agnosticism, saying, "I don't know 
surely what is truth." 

It is not the question whether this course is 
worldly-wise, but whether or not it is in conformity 
with God's Word. The wisdom of 

R1453 : page 294 

men and the policy of men and the theories of 
men are all foolishness with God. It is the 
essence of wisdom to obey God. Let us do it. 

In all this we advocate no harshness, no bitterness, 
no unkindness; but firmness for God 
and for the truth. Let the spirit of love rule 
in our hearts— love which is first of all true 
and loyal to God, his truth and his Church. 
"The zeal of thine house [Church] hath eaten 
me up." 



R1453 : page 294 

PAY THY VOWS UNTO THE MOST HIGH. 



The Fiftieth Psalm furnishes food for most 
profitable meditation to the consecrated. It 
starts with a precious reminder of the glory that 
is shortly to be revealed in and through the 
faithful. Taking the standpoint of the Church's 
future completeness and glory, it says (verse 1): 
"The mighty God, even Jehovah, speaketh 
[through the glorified Church, the Christ, 
Head and body], and calleth the earth from 
the rising of the Sun ["the Sun of Righteousness, 
with healing in his wings"— Mai. 4:2] 
unto the going down thereof" [i.e., from the 
beginning to the close of the Millennial day, 
Jehovah, through his Anointed, will be calling 
the earth to repentance and to righteousness 
and eternal life]. Verse 2: "Out of Zion, the 
perfection of beauty [out of the Church exalted 
and glorified], God shineth forth" [his glorious 



character and plan are made known]. 

But verse 3 reminds us that that time is yet 
future, and begins to describe the coming of 
the Lord, while the following verses discourse 
as to the first work of his presence. 

Verse 3. "Our God shall come, and shall 
not keep silence: a fire ['the fire of his jealousy'] 
shall devour before him, and it shall be 
very tempestuous round about him." It will 
be the tempest of the great time of trouble so 
often and so variously and vividly described 
elsewhere. 

Verse 4. "He shall call to the heavens above, 
and to the earth, to judge his people." In this 
time of the Lord's presence and the harvest of 
the Gospel age, all who claim to be his people 
—i.e., all "Christendom," Christ's kingdom, 
falsely so-called, or "Babylon" as named in 
the Scriptures (Rev. 16:19)— are brought into 
judgment before the assembled hosts of heaven 
and earth— angels and men. Already this judgment 
of "Christendom," "Babylon," is in 
progress: hence the late overhauling and demanded 
revision of the hitherto accepted and 
unquestioned creeds of its various sects. And 
hence, too, the unsparing criticisms of nominal 
Christianity by the world at large, in the 
secular press, etc., calling attention to its traditional 
errors, and to its untenable positions. 
It is now recognized as a self-contradictory 
mouthpiece of God. 

Verse 5 is the command of the now present 
Lord of the harvest, to the reapers, to separate 
the true wheat from the great bundles of tares 
in Babylon— "Gather my saints together unto 
me: those that have made a covenant with me 
[not merely by the lips, but] by [actual] sacrifice" 
—those who have faithfully carried out 
the solemn covenant of entire devotedness to 
the Lord. 

Verse 6. "And the heavens shall declare 
his righteousness; for God himself is judge." 
In that judgment which heaven and earth are 
called upon to witness, and which shall closely 
discriminate between the wheat and the tares, 
and effectually separate them, "the heavens 
[the kingdom of God which will be established 
as the outcome of this judgment] shall declare 
his [God's] righteousness; for God himself 
[who cannot err] is [the] judge." 

The following verses of the chapter sum up 
charges brought against God's nominal people, 
while verses 14,15,22 and 23 interpose a word 
of wise counsel for those who will receive it. 

Verse 7. "Hear, O my people [ye who 
claim to be my people by a solemn covenant], 



and I will speak: O Israel [nominal spiritual 
Israel], and I will testify against thee: I am 
God, even thy God. Not because of thy sacrifices 
will I reprove thee; and thy burnt offerings 
[free-will offerings, such as benevolent 
works, etc.] are continually before me." But 

R1453 : page 295 

such works cannot commend them to God in 
that day of judgment; for, said Jesus, "Many 
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have 
we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy 
name cast out devils? and in thy name done 
many wonderful works? and then will I say 
unto them, I never approved of you: depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity." (Matt. 7:22,23.) 
These have been "false prophets" (Matt. 7:15), 
"teaching for doctrines the commandments 
of men." (Matt. 15:9.) For their own 
erroneous theories they have claimed divine 
authority; and though in going about to establish 
their own righteousness they have done 
"many wonderful works," those works are not 
acceptable to God, because they have not submitted 
themselves to his plans and methods. 

Verses 9-13 declare God's independence of 
their works, and intimate his perfect ability to 
accomplish the blessing of the world according 
to his own plan without their assistance. "I 
will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he 
goats out of thy folds; for every beast of the 
forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand 
hills. I know all the fowls of the mountains: 
and the wild beasts of the field are mine. If I 
were hungry I would not tell thee; for the 
world is mine and the fulness thereof. Will I 
eat flesh of bulls or drink the blood of goats?" 
—Am I in need of your wisdom or works, or 
in any way dependent upon your gifts? No— 
"Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy 
vows unto the Most High." (Verse 14.) What 
have any of us to offer unto the Lord that we 
did not first receive from him, and that should 
not therefore be thankfully received and used 
according to the directions of his plan? And 
this is what all who have consecrated themselves 
to God have covenanted to do. It is therefore 
obligatory upon all such that they pay their 
vows, fulfil their covenant unto the Most High. 

True, in the faithful fulfilling of a covenant 
of entire consecration to God there is much to 
endure in the way of reproach and persecution 
from the world (2 Tim. 3:12), but to such the 
Lord through the Prophet (verse 15) says, "Call 
upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver 



thee, and thou [by thy testimony and faithfulness] 
shalt glorify me." 

Verses 16,17. "But unto the wicked God 
saith" [But bear in mind that the wicked here 
referred to are not unrighteous people of the 
world; for, according to verse 7, this testimony 
is borne against those who claim to be the 
Lord's people, and members of the spiritual 
house of Israel. These "wicked" are the covenant 
breakers among those who still claim to 
be faithful people of God.]— unto these God 
saith, "What hast thou to do to declare my 
statutes [decrees, doctrines] or that thou shouldest 
take my covenant into thy mouth? seeing 
thou hatest instruction and castest my words 
behind thee." The Lord will not hold them 
guiltless who, professing entire consecration to 
him, nevertheless despise instruction and cast 
his words behind them while they cling to their 
own traditions and theories; "For," says the 
Apostle, "the wrath of God is revealed from 
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness 
of men who hold down [Greek katecho— 
hold down or suppress] the truth in unrighteousness." 
(Rom. 1:18.) This is what the various 
ecclesiastical systems of Great Babylon 
have been guilty of for centuries past: they 
have taught their own false doctrines and have 
claimed for them the divine authority of the 
Word of God. In doing so, they have unjustly 
suppressed the truth: they have hated instruction 
and have cast the words of the Lord 
behind them whenever they were brought forward 
to testify against them or their plans. 

What right, the Prophet inquires, have such 
covenant breakers to declare the plan of God? 
None whatever. Such unfaithful and "wicked 
and slothful" servants are hindered by their 
errors from seeing truths now due. Having been 
unfaithful to the measure of truth received, they 
are not permitted to know, and hence cannot 
declare, the deeper things of God— the breadth 
and scope of his wonderful plan. "Light is 
sown for the righteous" who faithfully and 
thankfully receive and disseminate it, "and 
gladness [the gladness which comes from a realization 
of the truth] for the upright in heart." 
-Psa. 97:11. 

But the testimony against this class proceeds 
—Verse 18— "When thou sawest a thief [one 
desirous of robbing God's children of the truth], 

R1453 : page 296 

then thou consentedst with him." All who do 
not guard the truth and the flock of God 



against the encroachment of error, who bid 
false teachers God-speed, or who commend 
wolves in sheep's clothing to the Lord's little 
ones, are, according to the Prophets language, 
wickedly consenting with thieves and robbers. 
And not only so, but he continues— "and hast 
been partakers with adulterers." Such a compromise 
with the spirit of the world is, in the 
language of the Scriptures, defined as adultery. 
For this reason Babylon the Great [Papacy] is 
termed a harlot, and the mother of harlots [of 
the various similar systems that sprang from 
her]; and the principle holds good in every 
case where unfaithful covenant-breakers consent 
to any degree with the thieves and robbers 
who plot and scheme against the truth. 

Verse 19. "Thou givest thy mouth to evil, 
and thy tongue frameth deceit." Such is the 
course of all who in unrighteousness suppress 
the truth and go about to establish their own 
righteousness and their own plans. 

Verse 20. "Thou sittest and speakest against 
thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's 
son." The unfaithful always take the attitude 
of persecutors to some degree of the 
faithful. Such is the attitude of the whole 
nominal church against those faithful servants 
who receive and advocate the truth. 

Verse 21. "These things hast thou done 
["Babylon," "Christendom," the great nominal 
church], and I kept silence: [up to the 
present time, the harvest; and because I kept 
silence and permitted this evil to run and prosper] 
thou thoughtest that I was altogether 
such a one as thyself [that I was consenting 
with thee to thy evil ways]; but [not so; for 
a purpose I permitted you to run your course 
and to make your real character manifest; but 
now, in this harvest and judgment time] I will 
reprove thee, and set them in order before 
thine eyes." Hence the present investigations 
and exposures of creeds, and the growing unrest 
in the various sects of "Christendom." 

Verses 22,23. "Now consider this [reproof], 
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces [destroy 
you], and there be none to deliver." 

"Whoso offereth thanksgiving [thankfully 
receives the reproof and applies his heart unto 
instruction] glorifieth me [or honors me, as a 
faithful and consistent believer and representative 
of the truth]; and to him that ordereth his 
course aright [that conforms his life and teaching 
to the light received] will I show the salvation 
of God." 

How solemn and weighty the admonition, 
and how worthy of the most thoughtful and 



prayerful consideration of all who name the 
name of Christ. The day of reckoning is upon 
the Church— upon all who profess to be members 
of it: "The hour of his judgment is 
come." Who is worthy to stand? Only those 
who gratefully receive the message of divine 
truth, and who faithfully pay their vows to the 
Most High. 



R1453 : page 296 
UNIVERSAL SALVATION. 
(NO. III.) 



One writes us who has been for some time a 
TOWER reader, and who seems to have determined 
that he wants the Scriptures to teach the 
everlasting salvation of all men. We fear he 
has not been much helped by the articles on 
this subject in recent TOWERS. We will answer 
his questions publicly for the good of 
others; hoping also that the objector may see 
the weakness of his position, and come over 
again to the firm foundation of the explicit 
statements of God's Word. He says:— 

(1) There is no Scripture which states that there 
will be no resurrection from the Second Death. 

We answer, The Bible is God's revelation 
of what he has done and purposes to do for 
human salvation. If, therefore, it reveals no 
resurrection from the Second Death, no one 
has a right to believe or teach so— no, nor even 
so to hope. Those who do so are adding to 
God's Word. It is a bold, bad heart which, 
after receiving all the mercies revealed, would 
attempt to set aside those just features of the 
divine plan which an unsanctified will rebels 
against. 

R1453 : page 297 

(2) His mercy endureth forever; and is 
the same yesterday, to-day, and forever. 

Yes, those gracious expressions mean much 
of joy and comfort; but, in the original, the 
word of which our English word forever is a 
translation does not mean exactly the same as 
forever or without an end. It means, rather, 
continuously as long as proper or necessary, 
until a proper end has been reached. To illustrate: 
In Lev. 16:34 we read, "This shall be 



an everlasting (Hebrew, olam) statute unto you, 

to make an atonement for the children of Israel 

for all their sins, once a year." And in 

verse 29 we read, "And this shall be a statute 

FOREVER unto you: That in the seventh month 

and tenth day of the month ye shall... do 

no work at all." (Compare Exod. 21:6.) How 

long did "forever" or "everlasting" mean in 

those cases? Are those statutes still in force? 

No. When did that "forever" and that "everlasting" 

cease? At the cross. These, with 

all the other features of the Mosaic Law, ceased 

R1454 : page 297 

when Christ made an end of the Law, nailing 
it to his cross. 

Just so in the texts quoted by Objector. 
God's mercy toward human sinners will endure 
until Christ makes an end of it in the close of 
the Millennial age. Mercy by that time will 
have exhausted every legitimate means for showing 
to sinners the path of life. More than 
that could not be called mercy. When all will 
have been done that can be done for sinners 
(and God's promises concerning the great work 
of Christ for the world during the Millennium 
are nothing short of this), then, the true, 
proper end of the mercy having come, divine 
Love and Justice will step forward and declare 
that those who have rejected this fulness of 
mercy shall be "cut off [not from their sins, 
but] from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

(3) "Once for all" Christ died to release 
Adam (and all in him), whether it be from 
First Death, Second Death or any other death. 
His blood can never lose its power until all are 
saved, to sin no more; because the man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a ransom FOR ALL. 

We are glad that this Brother holds fast to 
the ransom, and bases all his hopes upon that 
sure foundation. (For this reason we can call 
him Brother.) If he will hold fast to that 
foundation, and test every part of his theory by 
that, he will come out all right. But to do this 
he will need that humility which will say, "Let 
God be true, though it show my theories to be 
nonsense." The words, "once for all," and 
"a ransom for all," while they do teach a salvation 
for all (and not a limited atonement 
and a limited offer of salvation, as most Christians 
believe), do not teach that the salvation 
secured can never have an end. 

Let us keep in memory the Scriptural statements 
that the penalty under which all the race 
fell from divine favor and into death was for 



Adam's transgression (Rom. 5:12), and that 
the recovery from sin and death secured by 
our Lord Jesus' ransom-sacrifice affected THAT 
death and THOSE sins and weaknesses which we 
inherited from our father Adam, and none 
other. Is it not, therefore, logical as well as 
Scriptural to say that wilful sins (intentionally 
committed, under full light and ability to the 
contrary) are not Adam's sins in any sense of 
the word, and that the ransom from Adam's 
sin and penalty would therefore not at all affect 
a release from these sins and their penalty? 
So say the Scriptures concerning all whose 
share in the Adamic sin and penalty has been 
canceled (—through faith in Christ's sin-sacrifice), 
and who are therefore reckoned as no 
longer dead in Adam, but as "alive in Christ" 
—"risen with him." After they have been 
once enlightened— been brought to a knowledge 
of the truth, tasted of the good Word of 
God and the powers of the world to come [the 
Millennial powers— resurrection, etc., tasted 
by faith], and been made partakers of the holy 
spirit— if such shall fall away, it is impossible 
to renew them again— because their course does 
despite to the favor God offers, and counts 
as common and valueless the blood of the New 
Covenant wherewith they had been sanctified. 
-Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31. 

Since God's plan is to save all men from all 
that was lost in Adam— through the Second 
Adam, Christ— it follows that when every child 
of Adam has been brought to a full knowledge 
of God's plan, and a full opportunity for forgiveness 
and restitution to divine favor, all 
have been SAVED from that calamity. Then, 

R1454 : page 298 

however, their individual trial begins; and 

the length or brevity of their salvation depends 

upon their own (not Adam's) course. 

If they after all that sin wilfully, the penalty 

they will get will be their own and not Adam's 

—for which Christ died. And there is no authority 

in Scripture for your statement that our 

Lord's death was for, or that it will have any 

effect upon, those who will suffer Second Death, 

the penalty of wilful sin against full light and 

opportunity. 

(4) Did not Lazarus of Bethany die twice? 
(Although it is not mentioned in the Bible, we 
of course suppose that he died again sometime 
after his miraculous restoration by our Lord; 
for he is not now living.) Surely Lazarus will 
share in the future resurrection; and hence it 



is evident that dying a second or even a third 
or a fourth time is no bar to the power of God. 

Ah! now we see, by this, that you do not 
grasp the subject of the Second Death. Lazarus 
did not die the Second Death. He had 
not yet gotten free from the Adamic or First 
Death when our Lord awaked him. The great 
ransom-sacrifice had not yet been finished, and 
when awakened he was, with the others of the 
human family, still under the original death-sentence 
incurred through Adam's disobedience. 
The only way to get Lazarus out of the 
Adamic death was, first, for our Lord to die as 
the substitute or corresponding price for condemned 
Adam and all his posterity; and afterward, 
for Lazarus to be justified from Adamic 
sin and its penalty— First Death— by faith in 
that sin-offering, based upon a clear knowledge 
of God's goodness and a full consecration to 
him. 

Since these were not the conditions in Lazarus' 
case, his was merely a re-awakening to the 
measure of Adamic life (yet under sentence of 
Adamic death) which he had enjoyed before 
he became sick and fell asleep. Consequently, 
the awakening of Lazarus and others by our 
Lord at his first advent is never spoken of as 
their resurrection; for "resurrection" signifies 
lifting up, out of the Adamic death entirely, 
to full life and perfection. Only those thus 
actually released from Adamic death by such 
an actual resurrection, or such as by knowledge 
and faith come to the justified state (a reckoned 
resurrection condition) are or will be in danger 
of the Second Death— the penalty of wilful, individual 
sin against clear light and knowledge. 
Sanctified believers of this Gospel age (reckonedly 
passed out of Adam into Christ— from 
Adamic death to life) when they die are not 
counted as dying in Adam; for reckonedly 
they are out of Adam. They are reckoned as 
dying with Christ their Redeemer. (See 2 Tim. 2:1 1; 
IThes. 4:16; Rev. 14:13.) But if such 
abide not in Christ (after getting into him as 
members of his body, as branches of the Vine), 
it will be because of wilful sin and rejection of 
his sacrifice and favor. Their death will be 
Second Death— the penalty of second failure 
during second trial. 

As for believers in the next or Restitution 
age, they will likewise be justified by knowledge 
and faith and obedience— reckoned as resurrected 
out of Adam and his death penalty into 
Christ and his life gift. But instead of suffering 
and dying with Christ, as do the faithful 
in this age, they will be gradually restored to 



the perfection and life reckoned to them from 
the moment of justification. Only the disobedient 
will die after the new dispensation opens. 
Their death will not be because of any weakness 
inherited from Adam (all of which will 
have been reckoned paid and canceled in 
Christ's sacrifice), but because of their own wilful 
opposition to the Lord's righteous requirements. 
Hence their death will not be the 
Adamic but the Second Death— the wages of 
their own deserving, for which no ransom was 
given and none is promised— an "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord and 
from the glory of his power"— "cut off from 
among the people." 

(5) Let us try to do a good work for Christ 
in spreading this good news. I hope that you 
will yet spread the glad tidings of a resurrection 
from the Second Death. 

Our reply to this, in conclusion, is, If this 
were good tidings, we could not preach it; because 
we have no authority to declare, in God's 
name and as a part of his plan, what he has 
nowhere revealed. But we fail to see how it 
would be good tidings to any but the wicked. 
To all who love righteousness it would be very 

R1454 : page 299 

bad tidings; just as to-day it would be bad 
tidings to any good community to learn that 
the jails and penitentiaries and work-houses 
and pest-houses were all to be thrown open; for 
no other pest has proved so baneful as the leprosy 
of sin. The righteous might dread such 
a release from the Second Death of those evil-doers 
described in Rev. 22:15— evil-doers for 
whose permanent reform there would be no 
hope; because, before sentencing them to the 
Second Death, their righteous Judge had given 
them every opportunity possible to repent and 
come into harmony with his righteous law, that 
they might live forever. 

Furthermore, let us remember that the Second 
Death will receive the incorrigible at the close 
of the Millennium (Rev. 21:8); and that at that 
time Christ's Kingdom, the thousand-year day 
of judgment, comes to an end. Hence, if it were 
true that there is to be a release from the Second 
Death, it must come after the Millennium. 
This would involve the thought of a continuance 
of sin, and a continued trial or judging 
of sinners, whereas God's gracious promise is 
that the Millennial day of judgment will make 
a full end of sin and sinners, and that beyond 
it, in the everlasting ages, there shall be no 



more sin, sorrow, pain, dying or crying; for 
all those former things will have passed away. 
-Rev. 21:4. 



R1455 : page 299 

THE THIEF IN PARADISE. 



"He said to Jesus, Remember me when thou comest 
in thy kingdom. And he [Jesus] said to him, Indeed I 
say to thee this day, thou shalt be with me in Paradise.' 
-Luke 23:42,43. 

Those who consider salvation to be an escape 
from everlasting torture to a paradise of pleasure, 
and dependent only on accidental circumstances 
of favor, see in this narration the doctrine 
of election exemplified— our Lord Jesus, 
being pleased by the consoling words of the 
one thief, elected him to heaven, and equally 
elected that the other should roast to all eternity, 
unpitied and unrelieved. Truly, if God 
has made salvation such a lottery, such a chance 
thing, those who believe it to be such should 
have little to say against church lotteries, and 
less against worldly ones. 

But this is not the case. This Scripture has 
evidently been much misunderstood. To get 
its true import, let us take in the surroundings 
and connections. 

The Lord had just been condemned, and was 
now being executed on the charge of treason 
against Caesar's government, in saying that he 
was a king: though he had told them that his 
kingdom was "not of this world." There, 
upon the cross above his head, was the inscription 
of his charged crime, written in three 
languages: "THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS." 
All knew of his claims and derided him, except 
one of the thieves crucified with him. Doubtless 
he had heard of Jesus and of his wonderful 
character, and said in his heart: This is truly 
a strange and wonderful man. Who can know 
that there is no foundation to his claims? He 
certainly lives close to God. I will speak to 
him in sympathy: it can do no harm. Then 
he rebuked his companion, mentioning the 
Lord's innocence; and then the conversation 
above noted took place. 

We cannot suppose that this thief had any 
correct or definite idea of Jesus— nothing more 
than a mere feeling that he was about to die, 



and a straw of hope was better than nothing. 
To give him credit for more would be to place 
him in faith ahead of all the Lord's apostles 
and followers, who at this time had fled, and 
who, three days after, said: "We [had] trusted 
that it had been he which should have redeemed 
Israel."— Luke 24:21. 

We can have no doubt as to the import of 
his petition: he meant that whenever Jesus 
reached his kingdom power, he desired favor. 
Now note our Lord's answer. He does not 
say that he has no kingdom; but, on the contrary, 
he indicates by his response that the 
thief's request was a proper one. The word 
translated "verily" or "indeed" is the Greek 
word "amen," and signifies so be it, as you 
have asked: "I say to thee this day [this dark 
day, when it seems as though I am an impostor, 

R1455 : page 300 

and I am about to die as a felon], thou shalt 
be with me in Paradise." 

Now the substance of this is that, when the 
Lord has established his kingdom, it will be in 
Paradise, and the thief will be remembered and 
be in it. Notice that we have changed the 
comma from before to after "to-day." This 
makes our Lord's words perfectly clear and 
reasonable. He might have told the thief more 
if he had chosen. He might have told him that 
the reason he would be privileged to be in 
Paradise was because his ransom was then and 
there being paid. He might have told him 
further that he was dying for and ransoming 
the other thief also, as well as the whole gaping 
and deriding multitude before him, and as well 
as the millions then entombed, and the millions 
yet unborn. We know this because we know 
that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man," and that as all in Adam 
die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive, 
and be privileged to come back to that Edenic 
condition forfeited by the first man's sin, and 
redeemed for men by Christ's righteous sacrifice. 

As already shown, the garden of Eden was 
but an illustration of what the earth will be 
when fully released from the curse— perfected 
and beautified. The word "Paradise" is of 
Arabic origin, and signifies a garden. The 
Septuagint renders Gen. 2:8 thus: "God 
planted a paradise in Eden." When Christ 
has established his kingdom, and bound evil, 
etc., this earth will become a paradise, and the 
two thieves and all others that are in their 
graves shall come into it; and by becoming 



obedient to its laws they may live forever. 
We doubt not, however, that the kind words 
spoken in that dark hour to the Lord of glory 
will no more lose a suitable reward than the 
gift of a cup of water, or other small kindnesses, 
done to those whom this King is "not 
ashamed to call his brethren." 

But have we a right to change the comma? 
Certainly: the punctuation of the Bible is not 
inspired. The writers of the Bible used no 
punctuation. It was invented about four hundred 
years ago. It is merely a modern convenience, 
and should be so used as to bring out 
sense and harmony with all other Scriptures. 
This harmony and sense are obtained only by 
the punctuation we have given above. As usually 
punctuated, the passage would teach that 
the Lord and the thief went away somewhere 
that day, a statement contrary to the following 
Scriptures, which read carefully: Luke 24:46; 
John 20: 17; 3: 13. In the latter text note that 
the words, "which is in heaven," are an interpolation, 
as shown by the oldest MS. 



page 300 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULLNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 
PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1455 : page 300 

THE GOSPEL AT ANTIOCH. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON V., OCT. 30, ACTS 11:19-30. 

Golden Text— "A great number believed, and turned 
unto the Lord."— Acts 11:21. 

This lesson takes us back several years, and 
reveals the persecution against the Church at 
the time of the stoning of Stephen— Saul of 
Tarsus being one of the chief persecutors. It 
shows us some of the results of that persecution, 



and illustrates well the fact that the 
Lord's work is sometimes prospered by those 
very circumstances which to human judgment 
might seem unfavorable, if not disastrous. 
The persecution scattered the light instead of 
extinguishing it. Accordingly, years afterward 
news came to the Church at Jerusalem that the 
knowledge of salvation through Christ had 
spread to the third city of importance in the 
world— for Antioch was such at that time. 

VERSES 20,21. Here we see a difference in 
the Lord's dealings, as compared with our last 
lesson, on the opening of the Gospel Door to 
the Gentiles at the hand of Peter, Cornelius 
being the first received. That event had been 
God's method of drawing the attention of Peter 
and the other believers to the changed and 
widened character of the new dispensation. 
But in this lesson we see how the Lord led 
others to preach the gospel to the Gentiles, 
when the due time had come, without visions, 
etc., such as were proper, and indeed necessary, 

R1455 : page 301 

for Peter and others. These Christians 
had been Jews, born and living in Cyprus 
and Cyrene, and hence intimately acquainted 
with Gentiles; and when God's due time had 
come to remove all differences between Jews 
and Gentiles these were easily led into telling 
the good tidings to their Gentile friends— many 
of whom promptly accepted it. 

VERSES 22,24. The Church, whose chief 
representatives still resided at Jerusalem, having 
already learned, through Peter (Acts 11:1-18), 
of God's favor having been extended 
to the Gentiles, were glad to learn of the good 
work that had been done, and promptly took 
steps to help the new believers by sending 
Barnabas, "a good man full of faith and of the 
holy spirit," to teach them the way of the 
Lord more perfectly. And Barnabas, after doing 
a good work among them, bethought him 
of Saul of Tarsus, converted some years before, 
and who probably had meantime been under 
divine instruction and discipline preparatory 
to his introduction as the great "Apostle to the 
Gentiles," to take the place of Judas as one of 
the twelve (Rev. 21:14); which place the eleven 
had unauthorizedly conferred upon Matthias 
before their anointing with the holy spirit at 
Pentecost. 

VERSES 25,26. Saul— or Paul— was seemingly 
ready for the opening of this door of service 
and entered it with his peculiar fervor— yet 



humbly, remembering his own unworthiness to 

preach Christ, whom he had persecuted and 

slain, representatively, in his disciples. Barnabas 

and Paul, instead of saying to the intelligent 

people of Antioch, "We must leave you 

to go and look up some uncivilized peoples, barbarians, 

cannibals, etc.," took a different view 

of the matter, and, seeking the most intelligent 

auditors they could interest, staid with them a 

year after they were converted— teaching them. 

Alas, that so many now feel that teaching is unnecessary. 

How the actions of the Apostle Paul 

agree with his teachings.— See Eph. 4:11-13. 

"And the disciples were called Christians 
first in Antioch." Whoever may have started 
this name it matters not: it is the most fitting 
title that could be conceived of— followers of 
Christ. What a pity it is that in modern times 
it is considered a valuable addition to prefix 
Methodist, Presbyterian, Baptist, Lutheran, etc. 
Surely, to all who rightly view the matter, our 
Master's name is a sufficient one for all who are 
his. Let us not only adopt the Apostolic simplicity 
in practice and in doctrine, but also in 
name. We do not belong to Wesley, Luther, 
Calvin or any other man; and we should show 
that we are Christ's, and his alone, by refusing 
the names of others than the Heavenly Bridegroom. 
Thus, too, we stand where we can have 
fullest fellowship with all the Lord's true 
followers. 

VERSES 27-30. The fruits of the spirit are 
here shown by the willingness of the Christians 
at Antioch to contribute to the famine-stricken 
and persecution-spoiled brethren at Jerusalem. 
It was a noble return in temporal matters for 
the spiritual favors they had received from the 
believers at Jerusalem, through Barnabas, and 
Paul, whom he had brought. And this seems 
always to be true where the spirit of Christ has 
operated and dwells richly: each is anxious to 
serve the other, first with the spiritual and 
priceless favors, and second with temporal favors 
as opportunity offers.— See 1 Cor. 9:11. 

R1455 : page 301 

PETER'S DELIVERANCE. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VI., NOV. 6, ACTS 12:1-17. 

This lesson enforces the thought of God's 
power to help his servants when his wise purposes 
can best be served by so doing. 



It does not teach us, however, that all of 
God's servants will be miraculously delivered, 
nor that the same servant will be so dealt with 
on every occasion: For was not James, whom 
Herod killed, also a servant of God? See 
verses 1 and 2. 

The lesson to be learned is concerning God's 
ability to do whatever may please him. Then, 
if confident of his love, as all should be who 
have intelligently accepted God's gift to men 
in Christ our Lord, we have only to rely upon 
divine wisdom to feel perfectly content, whatever 
may come upon us,— realizing that all 
things are working together for good to them 
that love God— to those who are called according 
to his purpose.— Rom. 8:28. 



R1455 : page 301 

COLPORTEURS' WEEKLY REPORTS. 

Our request, that we hear weekly from all 
Colporteurs who are giving all their time in the 
work, has been well responded to. But please 
remember both parts: State the spiritual prosperity 
and health, as well as the number of 
orders taken and the physical health. If more 
convenient, a postal card will do; and those 
working together may send their reports in the 
same envelope, if preferred. It will do you all 
good to write to the "home" (office) at least 
weekly, and it will do us good also. You are 
continually remembered in our prayers. 



page 301 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and $2.00 
per thousand. This includes free delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



R1455 : page 302 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 

page 302 



The following letter, from his brother in the 
flesh, was recently received by Brother J. A. 
West. What joy it must cause him to receive 
such a testimony to his faithfulness to the truth! 
How much he would have lost, both for time 
and for eternity, had he put the Light under a 
bushel from fear or shame or policy or other 
selfish motive. 

Brother James is still in the harvest work, 
and although with him, as with all, much of the 
effort shows no fruit immediately, he and all of 
us must go on our way rejoicing, leaving the 
results to our Lord. 

The letter (which follows) was sent us for our 
joy, and we lay it before you all for a similar 
object. It becomes a report from three of the 
harvest laborers.— EDITOR. 

Dear Brother:— We daily invoke our Heavenly 
Father's blessing upon you, you who have 
been used by him in our blessing. We are 
feasting, rejoicing, drinking at the fountain of 
truth, and yet we each now have even a higher 
privilege than this. It is the joy of taking the 
glad tidings to others, and seeing them blest 
as we have been. We meet some of them everywhere. 

At E , Brother P , who was 

considered the best Bible scholar in the city, 
and the most consecrated and spiritual-minded 
man, received us kindly. We had just what he 
needed; and though restitution, the plan of the 
ages, etc., were new to him, he readily accepted 
them; and we left him rejoicing in present truth. 
Another brother and sister also gave us a 
hearty welcome, and happier souls you never saw 
than they were. This book we sell, dear James, 
is certainly a child of Providence— a bearer of 
"meat in due season," simply and truly. 
Praise the Lord! 

Our problem is solved: We have demonstrated 
the fact that we can sell DAWNS, and make 
a living. We economize and work hard; 
and with God's blessing we can and do succeed. 
Accept our united love, and remember 
we think of you every day— especially when 
with the blessed Lord in prayer. 

Your brother and sister in the precious hope, 
rejoicing in our present Lord and busy in the 
Harvest, E. R. WEST AND WIFE. 



R1455 : page 302 

Canada. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-! wish you to send 



me forty-five volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. I. These I shall distribute in Canada, 
enclosing a printed slip, a copy of which I send 
you herewith. The circular reads as follows:— 

DEAR FRIEND:— I commend this volume, 
The Plan of the Ages, to your careful reading. 
It is the best commentary on the Scriptures I 
have read. I value it next to the Bible. It 
develops love for the truth, an eagerness to 
"search the Scriptures," an independence in 
Bible study, a reverence for God's Word and a 
refreshing liberty of mind. It is not written 
in the interest of any religious organization: 
its author is not a member of any sectarian 
body, but simply a Christian. Because of its 
rich helpfulness to me in the unfolding of the 
wondrous truths of the Bible, in the clear presentation 
of God's own gracious plan for the 
blessing of "all the families of the earth," in the 
brightening of my own life by dispelling the 
conflicting doctrines of denominationalism and 
giving the sweet hope of a better and everlasting 
life, possible to every one of my fellow 
creatures, and in heralding the dawn of a glorious 
and lasting day for the whole creation, I 
present it to you with the request that you 
read it twice and examine all the references. 
If, when you are through with it, you will send 
it to other truth-seekers, I shall be grateful. 

In "the good hope through favor," 
E. R. BLACK. 



Indiana. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We 
think it very kind of Sister R. to take the time 
from what we have known must be her very 
arduous duties, to write us so fully concerning 
the matter of which we inquired, especially 
when we remember how many others are seeking 
information at your hands. 

R1456 : page 302 

Loss of sleep is a part of the price I have 
to pay for the truth. It is so precious, and 
sometimes so all-absorbing, that I cannot quit 
thinking about it long enough to go to sleep. 
My present sleepless condition was brought 
about through my efforts to do some missionary 
work among the members of a religious gathering 
in our city. 

They have no organization, and in many respects 
are like us. I have enjoyed their meetings 
and Bible readings very much, and I think 



that they are the Lord's own children; but 
they are handicapped in their search for truth 
by the horrible, blasphemous doctrine of eternal 
torment. I cannot tell you how I longed 
to lead their minds out into the clear sunlight 
of God's truth, and I have done what I could to 
this end. But oh, how Satan uses this horrible 
impeachment of God's character to blind 
the eyes, even of those who love him. How 
subtle the arch-enemy is— whispering as he does 

R1456 : page 303 

to them, This is no concern of yours. You are 
not going to Hell. Why bother your brain 
about the matter at all? Ah, well does he 
know that so long as he keeps this veil over 
their faces they cannot apprehend the truth. 
If there is any thing for which I entertain an 
able-bodied hatred, it is this hydra-headed relic 
of the dark past; and my experience with it 
in the past week has been anything else than 
pleasant. 

Although I have been painfully conscious of 
the fact that the outward man is perishing, yet 
during the past week I have been most blessedly 
conscious of that other fact, that the inner 
man is renewed day by day. It seems to me I 
have never before so fully realized the simplicity 
and security of our refuge in Christ as I do 
now. I am sure I have never before fully comprehended 
Paul's description of it, as we have 
it in Romans 8. 

In comparing the various translations of verses 33 and 34, 
I discovered a marginal note in the 
Revised Version which says that some ancient 
versions read, "Shall God that justifieth," 
"Shall Christ that died," etc. Notice that the 
words "it is" are in italics. This is the same 
sense given to the verses in the Diaglott and 
Rotherham translations. "Who shall lay anything 
to the charge of God's elect? Shall God 
that justifieth? Who is he that condemneth? 
Shall Christ that died? yea, rather, that is 
risen again— who is even at the right hand of 
God, who also maketh intercession for us?" 
No, blessed be his precious name, we know 
that our Advocate is too true to our interests 
to condemn or accuse us in the presence of the 
Father. Oh, no: he constantly says to the 
Father, They have been judged in me. I have 
borne their sins; by my stripes are they healed. 
Lay nothing to their charge. I have met all 
the demands of justice against them, and they 
are free. 

Oh, how blessed to know that "the past is 



under the blood," as well as the present, if we 

abide in him; and thus John says, "In this 

was manifested the love of God toward us, because 

that God sent his only begotten Son into 

the world, that we might live through him;" 

and then he adds, "Perfect love casteth out 

fear." Ah, yes: when we begin to comprehend 

the perfection and measureless depths of 

God's love to us, as manifested in the gift of 

his dear Son as our ransom from death, we are 

lost in amazement; and the testimony of his 

spirit with ours, that we are his children, clears 

all our doubts and fears away, and there is no 

torment. 

"God is love; and he that dwelleth in love 
dwelleth in God, and God in him. Herein is 
our love made perfect, that we may have boldness 
in the day of judgment." This wonderful 
manifestation of God's love to us, through 
its reflex action upon the heart, will deepen 
and broaden our own love, until at last, when 
we partake of his nature, we shall also possess 
the perfection and fulness of his love, and become 
the instruments through whom he will 
manifest this love to the world, as he is now 
manifesting it to us, that they may know and 
believe the love that God has for us, and for 
them also. Sharing with Jesus the "all power 
in heaven and in earth," we shall go forth upon 
our mission of love, lifting up, tenderly nursing 
the groaning creation back to the moral 
likeness of God the Father— which, if willing, 
they may possess and enjoy forever. 

Beloved friends, let us hold fast the profession 
of our faith without wavering; for he is 
faithful that promised. 

May our Heavenly Father kindly lead and 
bless you both. Yours in the service of the 
Master, C. A. OWEN. 



Nebraska. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish I could 
see you and talk to you as my soul desires. I 
am so anxious for a pure heart— one from which 
emanates nothing but purity. As Peter said, 
not only my feet, Lord, but every thought, word, 
act and motive of the heart I desire made 
pure and right. Oh, how I long for this, to be 
able to resist every form of evil. Is it not possible 
for me to live without any evil in my 
heart? I want my environment to be clean; 
or rather, I want to be clean in my environment. 
Any help you may be able to give me 
will be gladly received. Pray mightily to God 



for me, Brother, that I may be in the procession 
with the crown and uniform at the great meeting 
of the elect of God. May God bless and 
keep you! Yours in Christ, 

J. O. DAWSON. 
[Am glad to know that you are desirous of 
living a pure life; for that is an indication 
that you already possess to a considerable degree 
a pure heart. Purity of thought, word 
and act can result only from purity of motive; 
and the best way to cultivate purity of motive 
is to make a friend and companion of the 
Lord, our Redeemer, who is not only pure 
himself, but able to give wisdom and grace to 
all who seek his aid. Then all his desires will 
become yours, his will and work will be your 
delight, and you will become more and more 
impervious to temptation, and able to think 
and live worthy of his friendship. It will be 
no longer you that lives, but "Christ in you." 
-Gal. 2:20.-EDITOR.] 

R1456 : page 304 

Texas. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It has been 
some time since I wrote you, not because I am 
not interested, but I am so busy that I cannot do 
as I would. However, I meet some interested 
ones occasionally, and talk with them about 
the grand things that encourage us so much. 
Thank God for this privilege, that we can 
(though in trouble) look to him who is our 
life; and we are encouraged with the blessed 
assurance that we (in due time) shall be like him. 

I have been traveling a little in the great 
cause, and I do not think that my humble 
effort is in vain. Had a good meeting here 
this summer. It was a time of feast and rejoicing. 
When I left the Methodists, I had a 
large acquaintance, for I had been preaching 
for forty miles around. I have kept up appointments 
in several places, and have some 
who love the truth. I can go to these places, 
preach to them day and night, and not be 
away from home long; and this is the way I 
have to do. I love the truth; I am made free by 
it; and I love to tell it to others; and oh, when 
I can find a hearing ear it does me so much good. 

I have all the reading matter from the TOWER 
office since 1883, and am still feasting on the 
precious Word of God. I love the "TOWER" 
dearly. I love the spirit in which it is written, 
for I believe it to be the spirit of my blessed 
Lord. I love to read the few words from interested 
ones in different places. Surely we 



are drawn nearer together; and though we are 
so far apart, yet we are realizing that we are 
one in Christ Jesus our Lord; and though we 
are strangers and pilgrims, yet we are made 
nigh unto each other by the blood of Christ. 
Oh, the blood, the precious blood, that cleanseth 
from all sin. Praise the Lord! 

I will go on in the good way, trusting that 
I may fill some humble place in which the 
name of our Master will be glorified. 

In the blessed hope, yours, S. WILLIAMS. 



Louisiana. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In a little conversation 
last evening at the home of two 
staunch Presbyterians, I was not a little enthused, 
and was made to see clearer than ever before 
our position regarding the doctrine of the 
holy Spirit. They, of course, maintained that 
the holy Spirit is a person, denying the possibility 
that the mind of God could be infused 
into our minds. 

I drew their attention to the following, which 
nearly all must have experienced, namely: 
When one gets interested in some book, a 
novel, for instance, and gets wrapped up in the 
subject, does not the mind of the writer become 
our mind, until we think the same 
thoughts, love what he loves, hate what he 
hates, etc.? Well, then, the same effect follows 
when one gets thoroughly interested in the 
Book of books. The mind of God is then infused 
into our minds and hearts, and it is thus 
that we are sanctified by the truth— separated 
from the world and the worldly spirit. 

To prove that the apostles named the expression 
of the mind of God through his Word 
"holy Spirit," I referred to Heb. 10:15,16, 
in connection with chapter 8:10-12. The 
Apostle calls this quotation "a witness" of the 
holy Spirit, while verse 16 plainly states that 
"the Lord" is the speaker, as does also 
Chapter 8, verse 10. 

Truly the words that he has spoken are spirit 
and life. I relish this more fully now than 
ever before, and am greatly blessed by the 
Spirit's leading. So you see our controversy 
was profitable to myself, even if I did not succeed 
in convincing my opponents. Yours in 
the Redeemer, CHARLES STRAND. 



page 304 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The package arrived 
safely a fortnight ago. I have been 
waiting to write a letter, but find I cannot work 
it in just now, so please accept this as acknowledgment 
of my great indebtedness and gratitude. 
It is very good of you to so abundantly supply 
us, and we hope to remit for same shortly. 
Do not deduct from previous amount sent. 
The Lord has blessed me very especially, and 
I shall be well able to cover extra cost in a 
month or so. I have sent a goodly number of 
DAWNS and Tracts by a brother going to 
Australia, who will distribute half of them on 
board of ship and the rest on landing. He 
will write you when he has settled down. 

Our little band is making its influence felt, 
though we have never been heard in the streets 
and squares; but a steady and quiet manner 
coupled with a consistent life— being led of the 
holy Spirit— is mighty in reproving the worldliness 
and political spirit of our time. The 
churches are now mostly shows, and political 
agencies. Things are rapidly shaping themselves 
for the battle of the great day. Thank God, 
he has enabled us to see it. Accept our united 
love and a hearty greeting to all our dear 
brethren and sisters, especially Sister Russell. 

Yours ever affectionately in Christ, 
A. P. RILEY. 



page 306 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



We have made arrangements by which we 
can supply our readers with this work, post free, 
at 17 shillings in cloth binding, 20 shillings in 
half leather binding. The usual prices for the 
same are 24 and 28 shillings respectively, postage 
extra. A number of our friends in Great 
Britain have been desirous of securing this volume, 
but we have heretofore been unable to 
offer it at prices corresponding to that of the 
American edition. 

Our friends will please not ask for credit on 
this book, nor on any of those we offer for sale 
(--except the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, to colporteurs 
on special terms). We are enabled to 
procure them at so low prices only by cash in 
advance payments. 



"NEWBERRY BIBLES. "-ERROR CORRECTED. 



This valuable work was recently quoted in these 
columns at lower prices than those at which we 
find it possible to procure them. The corrected 
prices are: In beveled boards, Persian morocco, 
$5.75; in divinity circuit, $7.00. The general 
prices are $7.50 and $9.00. 

This very valuable work is for those who have 
a thorough, grammatical English education. 
It will enable such to form correct, grammatical 
ideas of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures; and 
thus gives to such an advantage above that enjoyed 



by the ordinary Greek and Hebrew scholar 
—for only a few of the latter have a grammatical 
appreciation of the Bible in its originals. 
We describe the Bible in the words of another: 
"Mr. Newberry annotated the Bible throughout, 
with immense care and patience, on a new 
system. By an arrangement of signs attached 
to the words of the text, he conveys to the English 
reader the precise nature of the article, 
moods, tenses and particles. Foot-notes supply 
succinct apparatus for textual criticism. 
Side-notes provide the originals of many of the 
most important words, as well as copious references. 
A work so complete, so ingenious and 
so helpful to the Bible student ought in this 
new form to enjoy extended popularity." 

The late Horatius Bonar said of it: "It is beyond 
all price. Its minuteness of detail, its accuracy, 
its perspicuity, its scholar-like finish, are 
such as to make one of the most trustworthy 
and precious volumes in connection with critical 
study that have ever issued from the press." 



AN INDEX TO YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE. 



This, too, is a very valuable work, but only to 
those who can appreciate it. Indeed, we fear 
that to some, who do not understand something 
about translating, it might be injurious. 
It shows all the various ways in which the Hebrew 
and Greek words have been translated in 
our Common Version Bible; and the unsophisticated 
might get the impression that a 
Greek or Hebrew word may be translated by 
any English word at the caprice of the translator; 
—not knowing the difference in the arrangement 
of English sentences. It is the entire 
phrase of the Greek and Hebrew that must 
be compared with the English phrase which 
translates it and not always word for word. 
Price, postpaid, 50 cents. 



THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 



Murdoch's Translation of the Syriac-Peshito 
manuscript is sometimes inquired for. 

We can supply it in substantial half-leather 
binding, post paid for $2. 



R1457 : page 307 
