Questions From Readers
To what extent do the limits on marriage between relatives set out in the Mosaic Law apply to Christians today?
The Law given by Jehovah to the nation of Israel has little to say about wedding ceremonies and procedures. It does, however, set out prohibitions against certain marriage relationships. For example, at Leviticus 18:6-20, we find a list of prohibited relations involving a “close fleshly relative.” That passage goes into considerable detail outlining which fleshly relatives must not enter into sexual relations with each other. Of course, Christians are not under the Mosaic Law or bound by its decrees. (Ephesians 2:15; Colossians 2:14) Even so, this does not mean that Christians can simply ignore this matter when choosing whom to marry. There are a number of reasons why this is the case.
To begin with, there are secular laws that regulate marriage between close relatives, and Christians are basically obligated to obey the laws of the land in which they live. (Matthew 22:21; Romans 13:1) Such laws, of course, vary from place to place. Most modern laws of this type are based primarily on genetic considerations. It is a known fact that marriage between close fleshly relatives is more likely to expose any offspring to genetic defects and diseases. For this reason and because of their “subjection to the superior authorities,” Christians entering into marriage abide by the local marriage laws.
Then there is the matter of what is acceptable and what is unacceptable in the community in which one lives. Almost every culture has rules and customs that censure marriage between people who are closely related by blood, often viewing such unions as incestuous and hence taboo. Even though the specific relationships proscribed may vary greatly in different cultures, “generally speaking, the closer the genetic relationship between two people, the stronger and more highly charged is the taboo prohibiting or discouraging sexual relations between them,” says The Encyclopædia Britannica. Thus, even where no incestuous relationships are involved, Christians do not want to act with total disregard for established customs or the legitimate sensibilities of the community, so as not to bring reproach on the Christian congregation or on God’s name.—2 Corinthians 6:3.
Not to be overlooked is our God-given conscience. All people are born with a sense of right and wrong, good and bad. (Romans 2:15) Their conscience tells them what is normal and proper and what is unnatural and offensive, unless it has been distorted or deadened by perverted practices. Jehovah alluded to this fact when he gave the Israelites his law against marriage between close fleshly relatives. We read: “The way the land of Egypt does, in which you dwelt, you must not do; and the way the land of Canaan does, into which I am bringing you, you must not do; and in their statutes you must not walk.” (Leviticus 18:3) Christians treasure their Bible-based conscience and do not allow it to be corrupted by the twisted sense of right and wrong of the nations.—Ephesians 4:17-19.
What, then, can we conclude? While Christians are not under the Mosaic Law, their conscience tells them clearly that marriage between close fleshly relatives—such as father and daughter, mother and son, brother and sister—is totally unacceptable in the Christian community.a As the circle of kinship expands, Christians recognize that there are laws and statutes that govern legal marriage and that there are standards that are socially and culturally acceptable. These must be taken into careful consideration so that we can comply with the Scriptural injunction: “Let marriage be honorable among all.”—Hebrews 13:4.
[Footnote]
For a detailed discussion of the subject, please see the article “Incestuous Marriages—How Should Christians View Them?” in The Watchtower, March 15, 1978, pages 25-6.

