Court in Spain Reaffirms a Mother’s Custody Rights
● How would you feel if your fitness as a parent were called into question? What if someone claimed that your children lacked basic social skills, could not distinguish between right and wrong, and were intellectually stunted—all because of your influence?
Rosa López, the mother of two girls in Spain, found herself facing such charges when her ex-husband took action to obtain legal custody of their children. Rosa is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and her ex-husband asserted that her religious beliefs were adversely affecting the girls’ social life, academic performance, and moral judgment. When a local court rejected his arguments, Rosa’s ex-husband appealed to the provincial court.
In a custody case, a properly conducted judicial examination strives to remain impartial; it will not become embroiled in religious debates, in effect putting one’s faith on trial. Instead, it will simply address such issues as: What is in the best interests of the child? Is the influence of the custodial parent harmful in some way? Which parent is best suited to care for the child’s needs?
To address such questions in Rosa’s case, the court appointed a psychologist to interview the children and the parents. The result? The psychologist found that although the children had been in the custody of their mother for six years, they were developing positively in all areas—academically, socially, and within the family unit. Based on the psychologist’s findings as well as testimony from the parents, the judge found no evidence to indicate that “the minors have been harmed in any way in their emotional or socio-cultural development because of their being raised among the religious community of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” He also ruled that the allegations made by Rosa’s ex-husband were “totally arbitrary and without foundation.”
As a result of religious bias or misinformation, some assume that children of Jehovah’s Witnesses are deprived of a “normal” upbringing. However, children who are raised according to Bible principles are not being mistreated. On the contrary, they are being helped to become balanced, caring, well-rounded individuals.—Ephesians 6:4; 2 Timothy 3:15-17.
[Picture on page 14]
Rosa López retained legal custody of her two girls

