Danger at High Altitudes—Treating Acute Mountain Sickness
“In Peru there is a very lofty mountain range that is called Pariacaca . . . When I climbed the Staircases, as they are called, the highest part of that range, almost in an instant I felt such mortal anguish that I thought I would have to throw myself off my mount onto the ground. . . . This was soon followed by convulsive retching and vomiting that made me think I would [die]. I will say that if it had continued I would have been certain of dying, but it lasted only a matter of three or four hours until we had gone a good way down the mountain and reached a more tolerable altitude.”—José de Acosta, from the book Natural and Moral History of the Indies.
NEAR the end of the 16th century, Spanish Jesuit José de Acosta suffered the disagreeable experience described above while climbing the Pariacaca in the Peruvian Andes. At the time, such symptoms were commonly attributed either to toxic emanations from the minerals in the mountains or to the exhalations of mischievous gods. From what we know now, Acosta had the trademark symptoms of soroche—acute mountain sickness (AMS).
AMS is the body’s response to the scant oxygen supply at high elevations. There, the barometric pressure decreases and the lungs absorb less oxygen.a
Symptoms of AMS frequently appear about four hours after a person reaches a high elevation and may last from one to four days. During this period, the limited oxygen in the blood will stimulate the production of more red blood cells, which in time will help the circulatory system supply more oxygen.
However, if a person ascends to a high elevation too quickly or overexerts himself before acclimatizing, fluids may accumulate in the lungs or around the brain. If not cared for, this condition can be fatal.
How to Prevent AMS
Travelers and climbers have tried many methods to prevent or treat AMS. Some steps include the following:
● Avoid traveling to high altitudes if you have a respiratory ailment or anemia.
● Medications such as diuretics, anti-inflammatories, or other drugs are often recommended for treating or preventing symptoms of AMS. Consult your physician.
● The best remedy for AMS is to return to a lower altitude. If possible, keep warm during the descent and rest upon arrival.
Some of the most awe-inspiring scenery is found in the highlands and mountain ranges of the world. (Psalm 148:9, 13) If you travel with care, you will be able to maintain good health as you enjoy the beauty of creation.
[Footnote]
Most people can travel to an altitude of 6,000 feet [1,800 m] above sea level without any problems.
[Blurb on page 20]
Symptoms of AMS frequently appear about four hours after a person reaches a high elevation and may last from one to four days
[Blurb on page 20]
The best remedy for AMS is to return to a lower altitude

