“The Grandest Living Flying Machine on Earth”
THE albatross has been described as “the grandest living flying machine on Earth,” and for good reason. With a wingspan of ten feet [3 m], this largest of all seabirds can reach a flying speed of more than 70 miles [115 km] an hour. The albatross may appear ungainly on land, but in the sky it is simply magnificent to behold.
Of the approximately 20 recognized species of albatross, some 15 species can be found in the ocean waters surrounding New Zealand. The sole mainland breeding colony in the Southern Hemisphere is Taiaroa Head, at the tip of the Otago Peninsula, on New Zealand’s South Island.
There, the northern royal albatross begins breeding between the ages of six and ten years. Breeding continues throughout its life, which can be quite long. Some of these birds have been known to live well over half a century! The albatross lays one egg every second year, spending the interim year at sea. Customarily, the bird stays with one partner for life.
Both the male and the female albatross take part in nest building, which begins in September. Then, in November, the female lays an egg that may weigh up to 18 ounces [500 g]. For some 80 days, the parents share in incubation until the egg hatches in early February. Then, the parents take turns guarding and feeding the chick, whose diet consists of a regurgitated mush of fish and squid. At six months of age, the chick can weigh up to 26 pounds [12 kg]—considerably more than an adult albatross!
After nearly a year, the parents leave Taiaroa Head to spend a year at sea before returning to repeat the breeding process. In the meantime, their slimmer and fully feathered offspring has learned, through trial and error, to extend its wings and take off into the wind. Its destination? The ocean, where the young albatross will live for the next few years. As an adolescent, the albatross will return to Taiaroa Head. There, while older birds are busy with nesting and breeding, the young albatross will pass the time preening, frolicking, and showing off its finely tuned flying skills.
[Box on page 25]
A VISIT TO THE ROYAL ALBATROSS COLONY
  Since childhood, I have been fascinated by stories of the albatross, so I eagerly anticipated my visit to the royal albatross colony. It was a windy day, and as my companion and I got near, we scanned the skies for a glimpse of the aerial display we came to see. We were not disappointed. As the birds came into view, we could only marvel at these legendary specialists of flight!
  Upon arrival, we joined a contingent of fellow visitors for a one-hour guided tour. With the aid of models, displays, and videos, we learned that the northern royal albatross can live entirely at sea, even sleeping on the water! Whether on water or in the air, this fascinating bird is truly a marvel—yet another reason to give praise to the one who “created all things,” Jehovah God!—Revelation 4:11.
[Picture on page 24]
Both parents take turns guarding and feeding the chick, which at six months of age can weigh up to 26 pounds [12 kg]
[Picture on page 24, 25]
Taiaroa Head, home of the northern royal albatross
[Picture on page 24]
The northern royal albatross can live entirely at sea—even sleeping on the water
[Picture Credit Lines on page 23]
Top: © David Wall/Alamy; bottom: © Kim Westerskov/Alamy
[Picture Credit Lines on page 25]
Background: © davidwallphoto.com; page 24, top: Tui De Roy/Roving Tortoise Photos; page 24, bottom: Courtesy Diarmuid Toman; page 25, albatross in flight: © Naturfoto-Online/Wolfgang Bittmann

