Kingdom Proclaimers Report
In New Zealand​—A Day to Remember
“WE ARE absolutely thrilled to be with you. We shall never forget it!”
“In all my theocratic associations, I have never experienced anything like this.”
“It seemed as if we were enjoying a day in the new system of things.”
These were some of the comments of delegates to the dedication program of the branch headquarters of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society in New Zealand, November 29, 1986. Why were these people so moved? Because it truly was a memorable day. Let us share with you some of the reasons why.
First, the beautiful facilities being dedicated made the day memorable. John E. Barr, of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, described the newly built Kingdom Hall and associated branch facilities as “tasteful, elegant, charming . . . The finished work reflects very careful attention to detail, to beauty. It all seems to match.”
A Christian Brotherhood
Then, it was memorable to see together so many old-timers, Witnesses who have been serving Jehovah faithfully for many, many years. In fact, these formed the majority among the 658 invited guests. When they met up with old friends, many of whom they had not seen for decades, they felt like Paul, when, after a long journey, he met up with the brothers from Rome: “Upon catching sight of [his brothers], Paul thanked God and took courage.” (Acts 28:15) To witness such examples of enduring loyalty​—some present despite poor health—​was a source of encouragement and gratitude.
The day was memorable, too, for the warm international brotherhood experienced. Jehovah’s Witnesses belong to an earth-wide brotherhood, and this was evidenced by the guests who came from as far away as Australia, the United States, Canada, Britain, and Taiwan, as well as from Papua New Guinea, Samoa, and other islands of the South Pacific. Telegrams came from many who could not be present personally, including greetings from the Governing Body, members of the Brooklyn Bethel family, and the 82nd class of the missionary school of Gilead. Indeed, it was faith strengthening to be aware of the interest of so many brothers in so many lands in the dedication of the New Zealand branch facilities.
Foundations Laid by Loyal Witnesses
To be reminded of the long history of the preaching work in New Zealand that led up to the building of these latest branch facilities was thrilling and also made the day memorable. (Compare Hebrews 10:32.) As one speaker said: “As important as the physical foundations of the fine new Bethel complex are, the more significant ones are figurative foundations laid by loyal, self-sacrificing brothers and sisters going right back to the beginning of the century.”
This was followed by interviews of 11 faithful men and women who had a combined total of 680 years of dedicated service. They told of one of the earliest conventions in New Zealand, in 1913. They recalled the rigors of pioneering in the South Island in the 1930’s, the hardships of the World War II years when the organization was banned, the formation of the New Zealand branch in 1947, the arrival of the first Gilead missionaries, and the building of the country’s first Kingdom Hall in 1950. A common feeling of those interviewed was: “How grateful we are to be here and to see evidence of an increase that, in earlier days, we would never have dreamed possible!”
Jehovah’s Blessing
Perhaps the main thing that made the day unforgettable was the awareness that Jehovah’s blessing had guided the construction work and brought it to fruition. Appropriately, one section of the day’s program was entitled: “The Good Hand of Our God Upon Us.”​—Nehemiah 2:8.
The good hand of Jehovah was seen in the helpfulness and cooperation of the local businessmen and authorities, as well as in the Christian qualities manifested by the workers themselves on the site. One businessman, visiting the building site, noted: “I have never experienced anywhere else the feeling of peace and tranquillity that I have when I am here.”
Jehovah’s blessing was seen in the generosity of the ordinary Witnesses around the country who supported the project financially. It was also observed in the willingness of those who offered themselves to do the actual work. Altogether, 1,237 filled out applications volunteering their service, some traveling to the site from distant lands and at their own expense to spend a few weeks or months helping in construction work. Said one brother: “Helping out on the site was a turning point in my life.”
As Brother Barr mentioned in the dedication talk, the new branch facilities should be viewed as “an outward, tangible evidence of God’s Messianic Kingdom now established.” Yes, it was truly a memorable day for New Zealand. At the end, there was a heartfelt response on the part of all in attendance to a resolution pledging “full support to Jehovah’s organization as represented by our branch.”

