





Emotional Health

The Bible warns against emotions that are harmful and encourages us to cultivate those that are beneficial.



ANGER

BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man.”​—Proverbs 16:32.
WHAT IT MEANS: We benefit when we develop the strength to control our emotions. Although some anger may be justified at times, uncontrolled anger is destructive. Modern researchers point out that in the heat of the moment, angry people often say or do things that they will later regret.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Learn to control your anger before it controls you. While some people think that uncontrolled anger is a sign of strength, we are wise to recognize that it is really a sign of weakness. “As a city broken through, without a wall, is the man who cannot control his temper,” says the Bible. (Proverbs 25:28) A practical way to control your anger is to get the facts before reacting. “The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger.” (Proverbs 19:11) We do well to listen carefully to both sides of a matter, which may provide insight that can steady our emotions.



GRATITUDE

BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “Show yourselves thankful.”​—Colossians 3:15.
WHAT IT MEANS: It has been said that only a grateful person can be happy. Even those who have gone through tremendous loss can attest to this. They point out that the key to their emotional survival has been to focus on​—not what they lost—​but what they have to be grateful for.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Each day, make a list of the things that you are grateful for. These do not have to be major things. Reflect on even the small things, such as a beautiful sunrise, a pleasant conversation with a loved one, or simply having another day of life. These positive things can do much to boost your emotional health​—if you take the time to notice and appreciate them.
It can be especially beneficial to think about why you are grateful for your family and friends. When you have identified what you appreciate about other people, tell them about it, either in person or in a letter, an e-mail, or a text message. This will likely strengthen your relationships and enable you to experience the happiness that comes from giving.​—Acts 20:35.



OTHER BIBLE PRINCIPLES






You can download audio recordings of the Bible. They are available in some 40 languages on jw.org




WALK AWAY FROM ARGUMENTS.
“Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate; before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave.”​—PROVERBS 17:14.
AVOID UNNECESSARY WORRY ABOUT THE FUTURE.
“Never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. Each day has enough of its own troubles.”​—MATTHEW 6:34.
THINK THINGS THROUGH INSTEAD OF REACTING MERELY ON THE BASIS OF EMOTION.
“Thinking ability will keep watch over you, and discernment will safeguard you.”​—PROVERBS 2:11.



