





Financial Stability

Many people have minimized their money problems by applying Bible principles.



HAVE A GOOD PLAN

BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “The plans of the diligent surely lead to success, but all who are hasty surely head for poverty.”​—Proverbs 21:5.
WHAT IT MEANS: Diligently sticking to your plans is an important key to success. Therefore, plan before spending. Remember, you likely cannot buy everything you want. Thus, spend your money wisely.
WHAT YOU CAN DO:
  Stick to a budget. Write down all your expenses, and put them in categories. Then allocate funds for each expense. If you overspend in one category, take money from another to cover the difference. For example, if you spent more than you planned on automobile fuel, take money set aside for a less important purpose​—for example, dining out.

  Avoid unnecessary debt. To the extent possible, avoid going into debt. Instead, save up to buy the items you need. If you use a credit card, try to pay off your balance in full each month to avoid paying interest. If you are in debt, set up a repayment plan, and then stick to it.
One study suggests that when paying with a credit card, people are prone to spend more. So if you have a credit card, use it with restraint.





BEWARE OF HARMFUL ATTITUDES

BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “The lazy one does not plow in winter, so he will be begging during the harvest when he has nothing.”​—Proverbs 20:4.
WHAT IT MEANS: Laziness can contribute to poverty. Therefore, be a diligent worker, and to the extent possible, plan your financial future.
WHAT YOU CAN DO:
  Work hard. Protect your source of income by being industrious and dependable at your job. Employers appreciate diligence.

  Be honest. Do not steal from your employer. Dishonesty could mar your reputation and make it difficult for you to find employment later on.

  Avoid greed. An unbalanced approach to money can eventually damage your health and your relationships with others. Remember, there is more to life than money.





OTHER BIBLE PRINCIPLES






Read the Bible online, available in hundreds of languages on jw.org




DO NOT WASTE TIME AND RESOURCES ON BAD HABITS.
“A drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty, and drowsiness will clothe one with rags.”​—PROVERBS 23:21.
AVOID UNDUE STRESS.
“Stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear.”​—MATTHEW 6:25.
AVOID ENVY.
“An envious man is eager for wealth, not knowing that poverty will overtake him.”​—PROVERBS 28:22.



