





Physical Health

The Bible is not a medical textbook. Yet, it promotes a healthful course of life. Consider some Bible principles that can improve your life physically.



TAKE CARE OF YOUR BODY

BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “No man ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cherishes it.”​—Ephesians 5:29.
WHAT IT MEANS: This Bible principle encourages us to do what we can to care for our physical health. One study shows that many health problems are related to personal lifestyle choices. Hence, making the right personal choices can lead to better health.
WHAT YOU CAN DO:
  Nutrition. Take charge of your nutrition by eating healthful foods and drinking enough water.

  Stay Active. Physical activity can improve your health regardless of your age, even if you are disabled or limited by chronic illness. While loved ones and health practitioners can assist you with your exercise program, only you can make it work!

  Get Enough Sleep. Prolonged sleep deprivation is associated with risks for serious illnesses. As a result of the choices they make, many people do not get enough sleep. Yet, by choosing to sleep enough, you choose to live better.





AVOID HARMFUL HABITS

BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.”​—2 Corinthians 7:1.
WHAT IT MEANS: We benefit from not polluting our bodies with harmful substances such as tobacco products, which are known to be a major cause of disease and death.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Set a date to quit, and mark it on your calendar. Just before that day, dispose of cigarettes, ashtrays, lighters, and other paraphernalia associated with this harmful habit. Avoid places where others engage in habits like this. Tell supporting friends about your decision.



OTHER BIBLE PRINCIPLES






You may obtain a printed copy of the Bible by contacting one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in your community




BE SAFETY CONSCIOUS.
“If you build a new house, you must also make a parapet for your roof, so that you may not bring bloodguilt on your house because of someone falling from it.”​—DEUTERONOMY 22:8.
CONTROL YOUR ANGER.
“The one who is slow to anger has great discernment, but the impatient one displays his foolishness.”​—PROVERBS 14:29.
AVOID OVEREATING.
“Do not be . . . among those who gorge themselves.”​—PROVERBS 23:20.



