





Spirituality

As noted at the outset, many people consider the Bible to be a sacred book. They find that when they read it and apply its guidance, they feel uplifted spiritually and come to understand their purpose in life.




The Bible uses the word “spirituality” to refer to an attitude or an approach to life. (Jude 18, 19) Unlike a fleshly-minded person, who focuses more on self, those with a spiritual outlook value God’s standards.​—Ephesians 5:1.



HOPE

BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “If you become discouraged in times of trouble, your strength will be meager.”​—Proverbs 24:10, footnote.
WHAT IT MEANS: Discouragement can sap us of the strength we need in order to deal with life’s problems. On the other hand, hope can give us the courage to keep going. It can be comforting to acknowledge that the problems we face may well be temporary; in fact, something good may come from them.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Try to have an optimistic view of the future. Instead of worrying about what might happen or waiting for the perfect set of circumstances, take action in harmony with your goals. Granted, “unexpected events” can occur. (Ecclesiastes 9:11) Realistically, though, things often turn out better than we may expect. Thus, using an agricultural metaphor, the Bible says: “Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening; for you do not know which will have success, whether this one or that one, or whether they will both do well.”​—Ecclesiastes 11:6.



ANSWERS TO LIFE’S BIG QUESTIONS

BIBLE PRINCIPLE: “Give me understanding . . . Your word is truth.”​—Psalm 119:144, 160.
WHAT IT MEANS: The Bible provides answers to the questions that virtually everyone asks. For example, it answers such questions as
  Where did we come from?

  Why are we here?

  What happens when a person dies?

  Is this life all there is?


Millions of people around the world have improved their lives by examining the Bible’s answers to those questions and more.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Examine for yourself what the Bible teaches. Ask any one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for help to understand the Bible. Browse our website, jw.org, or attend one of our meetings, which are free and open to the public.



OTHER BIBLE PRINCIPLES






Watch the video Why Study the Bible? on jw.org. It is available in over 880 languages




BE AWARE OF YOUR NEED FOR SPIRITUALITY.
“Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.”​—MATTHEW 5:3.
LEARN MORE ABOUT THE GOD OF THE BIBLE.
“Seek God . . . and really find him . . . He is not far off from each one of us.”​—ACTS 17:27.
READ AND REFLECT ON THE MESSAGE OF THE BIBLE.
“His delight is in the law of Jehovah,a and he meditates on His law day and night. . . . Everything he does will succeed.”​—PSALM 1:2, 3, footnote.



Jehovah is God’s name as revealed in the Bible.

