
THE BIBLE’S VIEWPOINT
Paradise








What is Paradise?

WHAT PEOPLE SAY 
Some think that Paradise is nothing more than a myth. Others believe that it is a gardenlike utopia where good people live forever and share in joyful and productive activities.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS 
The word “paradise” has been used to designate mankind’s first home, the garden of Eden. (Genesis 2:7-15) The Bible presents that garden as a real place where the first human couple lived free of disease and death. (Genesis 1:27, 28) Because they disobeyed God, the first couple lost their paradisaic home. However, many Bible prophecies describe a future in which humans will enjoy Paradise restored.
WHY SHOULD IT MATTER TO YOU?
 If God is loving, then it would make sense that he would reward his faithful worshippers with a good life in such a place as Paradise. It would also make sense that he would inform people about what they need to do in order to gain God’s approval. The Bible says that you can gain God’s approval by taking in knowledge of him and obeying his commands.—John 17:3; 1 John 5:3.
“Jehovah God planted a garden in Eden, . . . and there he put the man whom he had formed.”—Genesis 2:8.




Where is Paradise?

WHAT PEOPLE SAY
 Some believe that Paradise is in heaven, while others claim that it will be established in the future on earth.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS
 The original Paradise for mankind was on earth. God has clearly designated the earth as the permanent home for humans. The Bible says that God made our planet to last forever. (Psalm 104:5) It also states: “To Jehovah the heavens belong, but the earth he has given to the sons of men.”—Psalm 115:16.
It is not surprising, then, that the Bible holds out the promise of Paradise on earth. In it, God will bless mankind with everlasting life. Harmony and peace will prevail. Pain and suffering will be gone. And people will be able to enjoy to the full the natural wonders of planet earth.—Isaiah 65:21-23.
“The tent of God is with mankind, . . . and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.




Who will live in Paradise?

WHAT PEOPLE SAY
 Many religions teach that only good people will live in Paradise. But there is much confusion as to what “good” means. Some think that it is enough simply to participate in religious ceremonies and ritualistic prayers.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS
 The Bible teaches that “the righteous” will live in Paradise. But who is righteous in God’s eyes? Not the person who engages in the rituals of his religion while ignoring God’s will. The Bible says: “Does Jehovah have as much delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of Jehovah? Look! To obey is better than a sacrifice.” (1 Samuel 15:22) Simply put, “the righteous” who will live forever in Paradise are the ones who obey God’s commands as outlined in the Bible.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
 Obedience to God’s commandments involves more than participation in religious ceremonies. By your everyday conduct, you may either please or displease God. You can learn to please God by carefully examining the Bible. And he is not hard to please. The Bible says that “his commandments are not burdensome.” (1 John 5:3) God is eager to reward your obedience by granting you entrance into Paradise.
“The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”—Psalm 37:29.




