Faith in God, A Way of Life
A POLL of Americans taken by the Center for Policy Research in 1974 showed that 69 percent were “absolutely certain that God exists.” Could this be said to mean that all of these had faith in God? Hardly! Why not? Because faith in God is a way of life.
There is a vast difference between believing that God exists and having faith in God. Thus the citizens of a country might know that a certain politician exists. But would that mean that they all put faith in him to the extent that they would vote for him to be their president? Not by any means!
The Bible writer James makes this very point: “You have faith enough to believe that there is one God. Excellent! The devils have faith like that, and it makes them tremble. But can you not see, you quibbler, that faith divorced from deeds is barren? As the body is dead when there is no breath left in it, so faith divorced from deeds is lifeless as a corpse.” In other words, faith in God is a way of life, it results in action, or else it is a dead corpselike faith.​—Jas. 2:19, 20, 26, New English Bible.
Jesus Christ made this same point time and time again. Thus he concluded his Sermon on the Mount with an illustration contrasting the wise man who acted upon Jesus’ words, making them his way of life, with the foolish man who was content merely to listen to what Jesus said but did nothing about it. Likewise Jesus strongly censured those who ‘drew near to God with their lips but whose hearts were far removed from God.’ He also severely castigated those religious hypocrites who “say but do not perform.” (Matt. 7:24-27; 15:8; 23:1-4) In thus commenting on the hypocrisy of certain ones Jesus was quoting from the prophet Isaiah, indicating that a like situation existed in the prophet’s day.​—Isa. 29:13.
And the same is true of ever so many today who profess to have faith in God. Thus an editorial in Theology Today, April 1974, stated that “Christians, by and large, are not demonstrably more loving, more tolerant, or more humane than those of other religions or of no religion at all.” But should they not be more loving, more humane, more tolerant, since the Teacher and Exemplar whom they profess to follow set the highest standards in these respects? Sad to say, it is today even as it was years ago when a certain popular American essayist was moved to ask, “Every stoic was a stoic, but in Christendom where is the Christian?”
Yes, faith in God as taught and practiced by Jesus Christ is not merely a matter of believing but is a way of life. That is why in the beginning, nineteen hundred years ago, it was known as “The Way.” Thus we read that Saul (Paul) of Tarsus, before he converted and himself became a follower of Jesus Christ, persecuted “any whom he found who belonged to The Way, both men and women.”​—Acts 9:2; see also Acts 19:9, 23; 22:4; 24:22.
Knowledge a Prime Requisite
Well has it been said, “Faith is taking God at His word.” But how can one take God at his word if one knows little if anything about what God has said in his Word? As the apostle Paul wrote: “How will they call on him in whom they have not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard?” (Rom. 10:14) That is why the Christian witnesses of Jehovah do not depend upon charismatic religious orators to convert people. Not at all. Rather, they first go from house to house looking for those who are ‘groaning and sighing’ because of the wickedness that they see in the world and who are ‘conscious of their spiritual need.’​—Ezek. 9:4; Matt. 5:3.
The Witnesses teach such willing learners what God’s Word, the Bible, has to say about God’s qualities and attributes, his deeds and his requirements for his earthly creatures. In this way the Witnesses carry out Jesus’ command: “Go therefore and make disciples . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” Such observing means a way of life.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
Starting Out Right
As a result of such knowledge and faith in God these learners are prepared to pay the cost for making their faith in God a way of life. Typical of what it costs some to do so are the expressions made by persons who were baptized at the “Divine Victory” Assemblies in Argentina early in 1974. There was Mr. C. H., who related: “Four months before entering the military service I came to an accurate knowledge of Bible truth. This presented me with an important decision. I decided for Jehovah. Although I have been sentenced to three years in prison in the Campo De Mayo, I am very happy today to be baptized as a witness of Jehovah.”
And Mr. A. L. said regarding himself: “I was a well-known comedian on television. I learned the truth that Jehovah has a clean organization. Because of my type of work I had a serious decision to make. After much prayer Jehovah gave me the strength to make the right decision. So I began canceling all contracts that required me to act in immoral shows, those out of harmony with Bible principles. I lost much of my popularity on TV as well as much income in doing so. But I was glad to do it for the privilege of serving Jehovah God.”
Successfully meeting another kind of test as to her way of life was Mrs. L. M. As she told it: “When I first began to study the Bible with the Christian witnesses of Jehovah my husband did not oppose me. But as the Bible study progressed he became a real opposer. In my first assignment in the Theocratic School he came to the Kingdom Hall and told me, ‘You will have to choose between Jehovah’s Witnesses and me.’ I told him I would decide for Jehovah God. After fifteen years of marriage, my husband got a legal separation and we actually are separated. Nevertheless, I am glad to be here at this assembly and to be baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Many, many more such examples could be given that serve to show that faith in God involves not merely believing that he exists but living a life in harmony with God’s expressed Word.
Continuing in the Way
After starting out right one must continue in the right way and be rightly motivated. A Christian must ‘pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar,’ by obeying the laws of the land, including those on paying taxes. (Matt. 22:21) He does so, not only because of fear of penalties, but also because of conscience. As the apostle Paul counsels: “There is therefore compelling reason for you people to be in subjection, not only on account of that wrath but also on account of your conscience. For that is why you are also paying taxes.” (Rom. 13:5, 6) In this regard Jehovah’s Christian witnesses have been publicly commended time and time again because of their dutifulness in paying their taxes.
The godly way of life includes also working conscientiously as an employee. Today many workers do as little as possible or are men pleasers, working only when the boss is looking. But the true Christian goes by such Bible principles as: “Be obedient in everything to those who are your masters. . . . Whatever you are doing, work at it whole-souled as to Jehovah, and not to men, for you know that it is from Jehovah you will receive the due reward.” (Col. 3:22-24) As a result of heeding such counsel the Christian witnesses have gained for themselves a good reputation as workers. Typical of the result of their teaching is the course taken by a young woman who had been studying the Bible with the Witnesses only a short time. Her companions taunted her for working so conscientiously even when the boss was not looking. She replied: “But there is Someone above that is looking all the time.”
Among other areas that might be mentioned wherein God is involved in one’s way of life, there is marital fidelity. God’s Word plainly says: “Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge fornicators and adulterers.” (Heb. 13:4) While more and more clergymen disagree with God’s Word in this matter, true Christians will abide by God’s requirements. Here again the Christian witnesses of Jehovah have made a fine reputation for themselves. Thus the New Catholic Encyclopedia in discussing “Jehovah’s Witnesses” states that “their conjugal and sexual morality is quite rigid.” Yes, as rigid as is the Bible.​—Vol. 7, p. 864.
Bearing Witness
Perhaps the most striking aspect of where real faith in God marks it as a way of life is in one’s activity of witnessing, preaching and teaching. Thus Jesus commanded his followers to let their light shine before men, and warned them not to be ashamed to confess him before men or he would be ashamed to confess them before his heavenly Father. (Matt. 5:14-16; Mark 8:38) In particular did he put this obligation upon his followers in his closing words to them: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them.” And his early disciples understood his words, for we read that upon being scattered by persecution they “went through the land declaring the good news.”​—Matt. 28:19, 20; Acts 8:4.
In fact, so industrious were they that the apostle Paul could write of “that good news which you heard, and which was preached in all creation that is under heaven.” (Col. 1:23) Jesus also foretold that “this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” (Matt. 24:14) Here again, Jehovah’s Witnesses today are alone in making preaching and teaching a way of life. Thus during the month of April 1976 an incomplete report shows that 2,153,539 of them shared in preaching and teaching and that they conducted 1,373,707 home Bible studies.
Yes, faith in God is indeed a way of life. It brings satisfaction, peace of mind and happiness. It is not merely a matter of believing in God and Christ Jesus but of living by Bible principles and sharing in making known the truth about God, Jesus Christ and their kingdom. This is what Jehovah’s Christian witnesses are doing and they stand ready to help any who wish to adopt this way of life.

