What Is the Bible’s View?
Will Everlasting Life Be Boring?
THE good news that Jesus Christ preached when he was on the earth included his words: “God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.”​—John 3:16.
Where will those gaining salvation enjoy everlasting life? From the Scriptures we learn that some will gain everlasting life in the heavens. This Jesus made clear when he said to his followers: “In the house of my Father there are many abodes. . . . I am going my way to prepare a place for you. Also, if I go my way and prepare a place for you, I am coming again and will receive you home to myself, that where I am you also may be.” The early Christians had this hope, even as the apostle Paul wrote that there was awaiting him “a house not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens.” (John 14:2, 3; 2 Cor. 5:1) From Revelation 7:4-8 and Re 14:1, 3 it is clear that the number having this destiny is limited to 144,000.
And that there is an earthly destiny for many of humankind is seen from Jesus’ model prayer, for in it he told his followers to pray for God’s will to be done on earth as it is in heaven. (Matt. 6:10) An earthly destiny for many is also indicated by such prophecies as Habakkuk 2:14 and Revelation 21:4: “The earth will be filled with the knowing of the glory of Jehovah as the waters themselves cover over the sea.” “He [God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” This prophetic promise is often applied to the heavenly realm, but is that right? The immediate context of this prophecy refers to “a new earth” and states that ‘the tent of God will be with men and he will dwell with them,’ in a representative capacity, of course.​—Rev. 21:1, 3.
However, there are some who profess not to be interested in everlasting life under these conditions, either in heaven or on the earth. Say they: “I would not want to live forever under such conditions. Life would be boring, yes, insufferably dull if there were no such things as wars, violence and catastrophes. I crave excitement. It takes things like these to make life interesting.”
But will those who gain everlasting life in the heavens be bored? Heaven is not a place of idleness. Thus Jesus said: “My Father has kept working until now, and I keep working.” (John 5:17) Both he and Jehovah God are described as being happy and so they could not be bored; one reason for their happiness is their being busy. And regarding the followers of Jesus Christ who gain heaven, we are told: “Happy and holy is anyone having part in the first resurrection; . . . they will be priests of God and of the Christ, and will rule as kings with him for the thousand years.” As the ‘seed of Abraham’ they will share with Jesus Christ in blessing all the families of the earth.​—Rev. 20:6; Gen. 22:17, 18; Gal. 3:16, 29.
Then, will those gaining everlasting life on earth be bored? Those who profess to need the excitement of wars, accidents, violence and catastrophes to make life interesting are certainly lacking in empathy. Would they themselves want to be the victims of these things so that other people might not be bored with life? Hardly! Such a mental attitude reveals an unthinking selfishness as well as an immaturity of heart and mind.
The Bible tells that Abraham lived for 175 years and then died, “old and satisfied.” He certainly was not bored. (Gen. 25:8) True, old age with helplessness might be boring, but the Bible holds out no such dreary prospect. Perpetual youth will be the lot of those who live forever. A noted Christian minister once painted the following beautiful word picture concerning that time: “Picture before your mental vision the glory of the perfect earth. Not a stain of sin mars the harmony and peace of a perfect society; not a bitter thought, not an unkind look or word; love, welling up from every heart, meets a kindred response in every other heart, and benevolence marks every act. . . . Think of all the pictures of comparative health and beauty of human form and feature that you have ever seen, and know that perfect humanity will be of still surpassing loveliness. The inward purity and mental and moral perfection will stamp and glorify every radiant countenance. Such will earth’s society be.”
Yes, even today, under present imperfect conditions, there are men who live until in their nineties and who are anything but bored. For example, a famous cellist recently died at the age of ninety-six years. Until his death he led a full and happy life, and, without a doubt, he would have liked nothing better than to live forever bringing happiness to people by means of his musical gifts.
That is the way it will be in the new system of things when people begin to enjoy the blessings of God’s kingdom. They will be at peace with Jehovah God, their Creator and Benefactor. They will keep on worshiping Him with spirit and truth. This worship of their God Jehovah will be one of the things that gives their lives richness and happiness. Then too, not only will they be at peace with one another but they will all be so kindly disposed toward one another that they will be doing good to others continually.
Of course, part of their time will be taken up caring for their physical needs; they will need to work to get the necessary food, clothing and shelter for themselves. They will need to eat meals regularly, and eating never gets boring no matter how often we do it. More than that, there will be ample time for relaxation and for visiting with friends, relatives or some noted servants of Jehovah God like Noah or Abraham.
Yes, just as we never tire of eating, so mankind will never get tired of learning new things, acquiring new skills. There will be time daily for such things. Mankind will have ample time to exercise both mind and body. With commercialized, competitive sports a thing of the past, no doubt there will be more healthful ways of expending energy, such as in community games, in hiking, in swimming. Lovers of music will learn to play expertly the grandest of music, that will then be composed, on all the variety of instruments that perfect men will no doubt invent.
Many persons, no doubt, will want to use their spare time throughout the centuries to study the great variety of plant life, of which, we are told, there are at present more than 350,000 known species. They can also spend as many years as they want to in becoming fully acquainted with the many, many different kinds of mammals, reptiles, birds, fish and insects. Others may prefer directing their skills in the line of such arts as painting and sculpture or in the fields of science. Yes, humankind will be ever learning, ever coming up with new ideas. Bored? Never! Not for all eternity!

