Announcements
PROGRESS TOWARD MATURITY
How long have you been a serious student of the Bible? A few months, or a few years? If so, then you still have wonderful new vistas of learning ahead of you as you progress toward spiritual maturity. And this progress is important. Counseled the apostle Paul: “Now that we have left the primary doctrine about the Christ, let us press on to maturity.”​—Heb. 6:1.
Would you like additional help in progressing toward spiritual maturity? Then we strongly recommend that you obtain and read the two informative books “Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie” and Life Everlasting​—in Freedom of the Sons of God.
These practical Bible-study aids will help you to press on to spiritual maturity, as they bring you, among other things, a richer understanding of God’s Word, a delightful synopsis of the whole Bible and answers from the highest Authority to many of today’s perplexing problems. Each book is illustrated and hardbound, having 416 pages. Send only $1, and both volumes will be sent to you postpaid. Send today and receive with them two free booklets on timely Bible subjects.
ANNUAL MEETING, OCTOBER 1, 1970
On this date (Thursday) the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held, 10:00 o’clock in the forenoon, at the Society’s office located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The regular letters of notice will be sent to all the members of the corporation and it will be appreciated if at this time they will see to it that the Secretary’s office has their present mailing addresses so the letters and proxies will reach them shortly after September 1.
The proxies will be sent to the members along with the notice of the annual meeting and are to be returned so as to reach the office of the Secretary of the Society not later than September 15. As each member knows he should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 20: Jehovah’s Servants Are Different. Page 489. Songs to Be Used: 37, 42.
September 27: Is the World Puzzled at Your Course?​—It Should Be! Page 495. Songs to Be Used: 77, 73.

