Questions From Readers
Was it not wrong for Jacob to misrepresent himself as Esau, as recorded at Genesis 27:18, 19?
You may be familiar with this account. Isaac in his old age told Esau to hunt some venison, saying: “Let me eat, in order that my soul may bless you before I die.” Having heard what her husband said, Rebekah prepared a tasty dish and instructed Jacob: “You must bring [the food] to your father and he must eat it, in order that he may bless you before his death.” Then Jacob, wearing Esau’s garments and having the skins of young goats on his neck and hands, went in to his father with the tasty dish. When Isaac asked him, “Who are you, my son?” Jacob replied: “I am Esau your firstborn.” Isaac believed him and bestowed the blessing upon him.—Genesis 27:1-29.
The Bible does not give all the details as to why Rebekah and Jacob acted as they did, though it does indicate that the situation arose suddenly. We should note that God’s Word neither justifies nor condemns what Rebekah and Jacob did, establishing no precedent for lies and deception. The Bible does, however, shed light on the situation.
First, the account makes clear that Jacob was entitled to his father’s blessing; Esau was not. Earlier, Jacob had legally purchased the birthright from his unappreciative twin brother, who sold it for a meal to satisfy his hunger. Esau “despised the birthright.” (Genesis 25:29-34) So in approaching his father, Jacob was seeking a blessing that rightfully belonged to him.
Second, when Isaac realized that he had given the blessing to Jacob, he did not seek to change what he had done. Perhaps he recalled what Jehovah had told Rebekah before the twins were born: “The older will serve the younger.” (Genesis 25:23) It is noteworthy too that when Jacob was about to depart for Haran, Isaac expanded the blessing that he had given earlier.—Genesis 28:1-4.
Finally, it should be remembered that Jehovah was both aware of and interested in all that was happening. The blessing that Isaac gave was tied up with God’s promise to Abraham. (Genesis 12:2, 3) If God had not wanted the blessing to go to Jacob, he could have intervened in some way. Instead, Jehovah confirmed the matter to Jacob, saying: “By means of your seed all the families of the ground will certainly bless themselves.”—Genesis 28:10-15.

