VOL. XXVIII AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

"Fighting Against God" 227 

Hospitality at Conventions 228 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 228 

In the Presence of the King (Poem) 229 

"Better Sacrifices Than These" 229 

The "Mystery"-the Church 230 

The Merit was in the Bullock 231 

All the Righteous Blood Required 232 

Guided in a Long Journey 233 

Set Forth for an Example 234 

"Much Advantage Everyway" 234 

Spiritual Israel Still More Blessed 235 

The Far-West Convention Tour 236 

An Interesting Question Answered 239 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



A STRIKE at the bindery which does our work has delayed 
shipment of MANNA to Great Britain and also the orders 
of some colporteurs. It is over now, and all orders will soon 
be filled. 

1907--VOLUNTEER TRACTS--1907 



This year's Volunteer tracts are going out very rapidly. 
We are doing our best to keep up with the increased demand 
and rejoice that an increasing number of the Lord's people 
are appreciating this privilege and will gain a spiritual blessing 
therefrom. We request that all who send in orders specify 
particularly the quantities they can and will use judiciously 
and promptly. We will be glad to double the shipments. 

THE TABERNACLE AND THE PRIESTS 



These two beautiful chromos, considerably delayed, are 
now in good supply and should be in all of our homes— to remind 
us of their glorious antitypes, of which we have been 
studying for some time past in our "Berean Lessons." 

By getting them out in large quantities we can supply 
them at 30c per pair, or 4 pairs for $1.00, post or express prepaid 
by us. They are very handsome and easily worth several 
times the price. We merely aim to meet the cost. The 
foreign shipments will go forward at once. We regret the 
delay. 



R4033 : page 227 

"FIGHTING AGAINST GOD" 

GAMALIEL gave evidence of his wisdom in the 
advice he proffered to his Jewish friends 
of the Sanhedrin when they were about to 
deal harshly with the early disciples. His wise 
words were, "Ye men of Israel, take heed to yourselves 
what ye intend to do as touching these men. ...Refrain 
from these men, let them alone; for if this counsel 
or this work be of men it will come to naught: but if 
it be of God ye cannot overthrow it; lest ye be found 
to be fighting against God." (Acts 5:35-39.) Alas 
that so many who have named the name of Christ, and 
to some extent become partakers of the holy Spirit, 
and to some extent been taught in the school of Christ, 
and to some extent possess the wisdom that cometh 
from above— alas that so many of these seem to have 



less wisdom than is expressed in Gamaliel's words 
just quoted. 

Some people by nature have so little combativeness 
that they lack strength of character, are too pliable, 
"wishy-washy": they lack the qualities of an overcomer, 
and need continually to seek grace and help from on 
high to take a stand for the truth and for righteousness. 
Otherwise they surely cannot be expected to come off 
more than conquerors. The Lord is seeking for his little 
flock those who have character, firmness, strength, 
as well as gentleness, meekness, patience, love. The 
happy combination which the Lord seeks is not found 
anywhere, however. All who come to him need to be 
refashioned in some respects to make them acceptable. 
Consequently on the other side of the question we find 
that some who have strong characters naturally have 
such strong combativeness that it is continually bringing 
them into trouble and needs to be curbed, brought 
under restraint. 

It is difficult to say which of the two classes referred 
to has the advantage over the other. The one class 
must cultivate what the other class must restrain, and 
probably, all things considered, their chances are about 
equal in the matter of winning the race. However, 
those who have large combativeness, who are aggressive, 
forceful, usually attract more attention in the 
Church by reason of these qualities, and usually awaken 
more opposition even though they do not make 
enemies amongst those who love one another. The too 
pliable and docile are apt to think of themselves too 
favorably, and are very likely to be too favorably 
thought of by others as respects their qualifications for 
the Kingdom. Those who are strong and forceful are 
apt to be too roundly censured by others and to be too 
blind to the fact themselves. Oh, that we all could have 
sound minds! but since this is impossible, Oh, that we 
all could have a large measure of the spirit of a sound 
mind, and the ability to weigh ourselves according to 
the divine standard! 

These words are specially intended to assist the 
dear brethren and sisters troubled with too large a degree 
of combativeness, disposed to be too aggressive. 
The Lord certainly showed markedly, particularly, his 
love for the strong characters when from amongst the 
twelve he selected Peter, James and John, the three 
most radical and aggressive of the apostles, as in 
some respects his favorites. So, then, those who 
have the aggressive quality by nature must not feel that 
it is a bar to their attainment of the Lord's "Well 
done," but rather that it is a good quality of itself if 
only it can be restrained and brought within proper 
bounds. They should see, as Gamaliel did, the danger 
of using their combativeness and aggressiveness against 
the Lord, against the Truth, against the brethren. 

Our Lord says, "His servants ye are to whom ye 
render service." (Rom. 6:16.) The question is not, To 



whom do we profess to render service? nor, To whom 
do we think we are rendering service? but, Whose 
cause do we actually serve? From this standpoint, 
looking out over Christendom today, we ask ourselves, 
How many are serving God? and How many imagine they 
are serving him while they are really serving the Adversary? 
—really "fighting against God"? Serving Christendom 

R4033 : page 228 

we find hundreds of thousands of professed 
ministers of the Gospel, and millions of professed 
Christians fighting under various banners, Methodist, 
Baptist, Catholic, etc.,— but whom are they fighting? 
Satan? Error? Like Saul of Tarsus many of them 
will shortly have their eyes opened to the fact that, so 
far from being soldiers of the cross, they are fighting 
against God, against the real soldiers of the cross, the 
followers of the Lamb. What a bitter disappointment 
will be theirs! how we wish that we could awaken them 
now to an examination of the commands of the great 
Chief Captain, that they might see that they are working 
and fighting under orders and directions not from 
him, but from human leaders and captains, some of 
these from the "dark ages," dead and buried. 

We are glad to hope that if the Truth could be 
flashed from heaven many of these strong characters 
that are now fighting for sectarianism, and some of 
them for Antichrist, would fall astonished, humiliated, 
at the Master's feet, crying, "What wilt thou have me 
to do?" 

Let us remember the Lord's words through the 
Apostle: "The Lord resisteth the proud but showeth 
favor to the humble. Humble yourselves, therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in 
due time." These verses, we believe, are a key to much 
of the error along the lines we have indicated. A strong 
character affected by a measure of pride is apt to take 
a wrong course from which it is almost impossible for 
him to recede. But if humility be there the strength, 
the combativeness, will be under proportionate control, 
and that much easier will it be for the individual to receive 
the proper instructions from the Lord, and to follow 
them, and to be fitted, polished and prepared for a 
place in the Kingdom. This same principle applies 
amongst those who have already received as a blessing 
from the Lord the light of Present Truth. We still 
need the humility that will enable us, if too lacking in 
character, strength, to acknowledge the same and seek 
it from the Lord. And we still need the humility which 
will keep close watch upon every word and act and 
thought, even with a view to having all in complete 
subjection to the will of the Lord that we be found not 
fighting against the Lord or against the Truth or against 
the brethren. How careful we should be to watch for 
the leadings of the Lord's providences, not only in our 



own experiences, but also in the words and experiences 
of others, and particularly to measure everything by 
the divine standards and not by our own opinions and 
preferences! 



R4034 : page 228 

HOSPITALITY AT CONVENTIONS 

THE Scriptures everywhere commend hospitality, 
and the Apostle points us to the fact that Abraham 
entertained three men who were strangers, 
and knew not until afterward that they were angels. 
We are glad to note the growth of a hospitable spirit 
amongst all the dear friends of the Truth everywhere. 
We would not say a word in restraint of this, believing 
that it signifies an enlargement of heart that is pleasing 
to the Lord and profitable to the individuals themselves. 
We do wish, however, to suggest that there are times 
when hospitality in the way of entertaining the friends 
at our homes might really be injurious to the interests 
we desire to serve. For instance, at Convention times 
those who endeavor to be hospitable will usually find 
their strength so taxed, their time so taken up, that 
they fail to get the spiritual blessings which 
they had anticipated. This is not right— not wise. 
Your first obligation is to yourself and your own family. 
We urge, therefore, that at Convention times you 
seek to have everything as simple and plain as possible, 
that your mind may be given to the spiritual food and 
to the arrangement of the Bridal dress, remembering 
that it is written of the Bride class, "The Bride hath 
made herself ready," and that this means special care 
of our wedding-garment. 

It would be well for visiting friends to come expecting 
to take their meals at a restaurant, and if they 
lodge with others, to do their share or a little more 
in the way of lightening the home burdens, that 
all may rejoice together and have a spiritual feast. 
At an economical restaurant dinners need cost little 
more than they cost at home, and that little is more than 
offset by the increased rest and peace which this method 
affords. "Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever 
we do, let us do all to the glory of God."— 
I Corinthians 10:31. 



page 228 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
SACRIFICES SUBSEQUENT TO THE DAY OF ATONEMENT 



SEPT. 1 

1 . To what time do the sacrifices of the children of Israel, 
offered after the Day of Atonement, apply? 

T.93, par. 1 (first five lines). 

2. Is there any sense in which they apply to any other 
time? Luke 16:1-8; Matt. 10:42. T.93, par. 1 (commence 
5th line). 

3. Why do the Day of Atonement sacrifices precede all 
others? T.94, par. 1 (down to sixth line). 

4. After the sacrifices of the Gospel Age have brought 
the world into a justified condition (justified to 
life-rights) will there still be need for further reconciliation? 
and why? T.94, par. 1 (6th line down). 

5. Explain the difference between the Atonement Day 
sacrifices, offered during the Gospel Age, and the 
"trespass-offerings," or "sin-offerings," of the 

world during the Millennial Age. T.94, par. 2. 

SEPT. 8 

6. Will "consecration" be in order during the next 
age? and if so how will it differ from consecration 
now? T.94, par. 3. 

page 229 

7. How will the fact be shown in the next age that the 
people recognize the sacrifices of this age as the 
basis for the forgiveness of their sins? and how 

was this indicated in the type? Lev. 17:1-9; see 
also Lev. 1-5. T.94, par. 4. 

8. Will all the blinding influences of the present be 
done away with during the next age? I Tim. 2:4; 
Isa. 29:18; 25:6-8; 1 1:9; 42:6,7,16; T.95, par. 1 

(1st three lines). 

9. What is included in the term "Adamic death"? T.95, 
par. 1 (4th line to 9th). 

10. Will each one of the world be required to cooperate 
in his own salvation? T.95, par. 1 (9th line on). 

11. When will the people be able to offer "bullocks" to 
the Lord? Psa. 51:19; Lev. 1:3; T.96, par. 1. 

SEPT. 15 

THE PEOPLE'S BURNT -OFFERINGS 

12. Were the "burnt-offerings" of the people, in the type, 
offered only occasionally? Lev. 6:9,12,13. T.97, 

par. 1. 

13. What did this represent to the mind of each offerer? 
Lev. 1; T.97, par. 2. 

THE PEOPLE'S PEACE-OFFERINGS 

14. What was the "peace-offering"? and what did it typify? 



Lev. 3; 7:11-18,30-34; 7:19-21; Rev. 20:9,13-15; 
T.98, par. 1 and 2. 

15. What other offering accompanied the "peace-offering"? 
and what did this signify in the antitype? 

Lev. 7:11-13; T.98, par. 3. 

THE PEOPLE'S MEAT-OFFERINGS 

16. What were the "meat-offerings" of the people? and 
what did they represent? Lev. 2:1-11; 7:9,10; 

Eph. 3:21; T.98, par. 4. 

SEPT. 22 
THE PEOPLE'S TRESPASS OR SIN-OFFERINGS 

17. What were the "sin-offerings" or "trespass-offerings" 
of the people? and what did these typify? 

Lev. 5:15-19; 6:1-7; T.99, par. 1 and 2. 

18. Show the difference in the treatment of these "sin-offerings" 
and the "sin-offerings" of the Day of 

Atonement, and apply it to the antitype. T.99, 
par. 3, and 100, par. 1. 

19. State in what manner this "ministry of reconciliation" 
can be applied during the present age. T.100, 

par. 2. 

20. In what further particular did the treatment of the 
Atonement Day sacrifices differ from that of the 
people's "sin-offerings"? Lev. 6:24-26,29,30; 

Heb. 13:11; T.100, par. 3. 

SEPT. 29 
MALE AND FEMALE DISTINCTIONS TO CEASE 

21. Are the distinctions of "male" and "female" always 
to exist? T.100, par. 4. 

22. If not, why and when will such distinctions cease? 
T. 101, par. 1. 

23. Is the Church the Bride of the man Christ Jesus? 
Rom. 7:4; T. 102, par. 1. 

24. Will these distinctions of sex cease both with the 
human race and with the glorified Church? Jer. 33:16; 
23:6; Isa. 9:6; E.44, 45; T.102, par. 2. 

25. How is this thought shown in the type: that when 
the Church is glorified all sex distinctions will 
cease? T.102, par. 3 (1st four lines). 

OCTOBER 6 

26. Do the teachings and example of Christ and the 
Apostle show that woman in the Church in the 

flesh is not to be a public teacher or leader? Eph. 4:11,12, 
Diag.; I Tim. 2:11-13; I Cor. 14:34,35; 
T.102, par. 3 (from fourth line down). 

27. Are the sisters, equally with the brethren, prospective 



members of the Body of Christ? 2 Cor. 5:17; 
Gal. 3:28,29. See F.491, 492. T.103, par. 1. 

28. How has the Adversary entrapped and deceived the 
world along this line? T.103, par. 2. 

29. Has this unscriptural course been a real advantage 
to women? T.103, par. 3. 

R4034 : page 229 

IN THE PRESENCE OF THE KING 

If we could always feel each little thing 

We do, each hour we spend 
Within the presence of the King, 

What dignity 'twould lend! 

If we could realize our every thought 

Is known to him, our King, 
With how great carefulness would it be fraught, 

And what a blessing bring! 

If, when some sharp word leaves a cruel sting 

Our faith could know and feel 
'Twas heard within the presence of the King, 

How soon the wound would heal! 

Oh, when the song of life seems hard to sing, 

And darker grows the way, 
Draw nearer to the presence of the King, 

And night shall turn to day! — G. W. S. 



R4034 : page 229 

"BETTER SACRIFICES THAN THESE" 

--LEVITICUS 16:5-22.-AUGUST 18.- 

Golden Text:— "Wherefore he is able to save them to the 
uttermost that come unto God by him."— Heb. 7:25. 

ONLY those who through the teachings of the New 
Testament discern that the divine arrangements for 
fleshly Israel were typical of higher things pertaining 
to Spiritual Israel— only these are prepared to get 
proper lessons from the Old Testament Scriptures, and particularly 
from the institution established by the Lord with 
Israel through Moses, the mediator of their Law Covenant. 
The Apostle refers to this on various occasions, assuring us 
that Israel's arrangements were shadows of better things to 
follow, and that the substance belongs to Christ, Head and 
Body, the Church. As those to whom the substance belongs, 
it is proper that we should understand the types that we 
may better appreciate the substance, the reality. 
To fleshly Israel God appointed five great festivals, all 



R4034 : page 230 

typical. (1) The Feast of Trumpets— welcoming the new 
civil year on the first of Tizri (September, October), one 
day only. The feast was of special significance every fiftieth 
year, when the blowing of the silver trumpets announced 
the jubilee— typical of the "times of restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:21. 

(2) The Passover on the 15th of Nisan or Abib (April) 
—the first month of the sacred year. It lasted seven days. 

(3) The Feast of Pentecost (in Sivan, end of May)— 
the first-fruits of the harvest. 

(4) The Feast of Tabernacles, in Tizri (beginning the 
15th),— the Feast of In-gathering or thanksgiving. 

(5) The great Day of Atonement (the 10th of Tizri) 

lasted one day only. While it is named as one of the enjoined 
festivals it was not a joyous one, but was observed 
with fasting, mourning (for sin) and prayer, and was 
esteemed a time for reformation and good resolutions, and a 
desire for divine favor for the year in advance. It is the 
work of this day which constitutes our present lesson. Its 
sacrifices and offerings were not in respect to the sins of 
the preceding year, as some have suggested. Each Atonement 
Day made reconciliation for the sins of the people for 
the ensuing year, and under its arrangement they were God's 
people and treated as though they were free from original 
sin, the sacrifices of the Day of Atonement being reckoned 
as covering the Adamic condemnation. At the close of each 
year, therefore, the people were reckonedly back again under 
Adamic condemnation, and fresh offerings, sacrifices, were 
made to bring them again into God's favor for another year. 
The Apostle points out that these remembrances of sin every 
year— "year by year continually"— (Heb. 10:1), evidenced 
the fact that the Adamic guilt was not actually cancelled, 
but merely temporarily covered. But he also points out that 
the better sacrifices, the real sin-offering which God has 
ordained and which will be effected through the Christ, will 
need no repetition, because its cancellation of sins will be 
forever,— "For by one offering he hath perfected forever them 
that are sanctified"— set apart as members of his Body.— 
Heb. 10:14. 

The sin-offerings of this Day of Atonement were two— 
a bullock and a goat— the "Lord's goat" as in contrast with 
the "scape-goat." Our lesson should properly have begun 
with the opening of the chapter, had those who arranged it 
studied the "key of knowledge" respecting the anti-typical 
meaning; for the bullock of the sin-offering was by far the 
more important of the two. Not only did it take precedence, 
but it was a larger and better sacrifice. The bullock, as we 
have shown,* typified our Lord Jesus in his person, the 
great sacrifice for sins. The application of the atonement 
made by the sacrifice of the bullock— the sprinkling of 
its blood upon the Mercy Seat— was specially stated to be for 
the Priest and his house. 



THE "MYSTERY"-THE CHURCH 

The Apostle frequently refers to the "mystery" hidden 
from past ages and dispensations, but now made known unto 
the saints, namely, "Christ in you, the hope of glory." 
(Col. 1:27.) Only those who discern this "hidden mystery" 
(see "The Divine Plan of the Ages," Chap. V.) can appreciate 
the meaning of the statement that the atonement made 
by the blood of the bullock was for the Priest and his 
house. The majority of readers would get the thought that 
it was made for the High Priest's own sinfulness, and constituted 
his cleansing and the Lord's blessing upon his home. 
But those who understand the "hidden mystery" perceive 
that the High Priest himself represented Jesus, the Head, 
and the Church, his Body— in another figure Jesus the High 
Priest and the Church the under-priesthood— the "little 
flock." And these understand that his "house" refers not 
to his abode, but to his family or household, which in 
Aaron's case was the tribe of Levi, and antitypically represents 
the household of faith, related to Christ, the Head of 
the Church, his Body. From this standpoint of appreciation 
of the "hidden mystery" we perceive that the killing 
of the bullock represented the sacrifice of our Lord as the 
man Christ Jesus, and that the benefit, the result of that 
sacrifice, applied to the entire household of faith, especially 
the Church, which is the Body of Christ— the Head not 
needing the atonement, as indicated by the fact that the 
head of the High Priest was uncovered. 

Had God so pleased he might have had only the one 
sacrifice on the Day of Atonement— the sacrifice of the bullock, 



*See "Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices," 10c 
per copy; also Tabernacle and Priests, illustrations, with 
metal mountings, 30c for both, 4 sets $1. 

R4035 : page 230 

representing the death of our Lord Jesus. But it 
pleased God to arrange otherwise in the ceremonies of this 
Atonement Day. God purposed, as the Apostle declares, not 
only to accept the consecrated believers as members of the 
Body of Christ, but to give them a share with the Lord in 
his suffering as his members, and ultimately to give them 
also a share as his members in the glory that should follow 
—the glory, honor and immortality of the Kingdom. The 
New Testament abounds with exhortations to the Lord's disciples 
to make a full consecration of themselves, even unto 
death, to be baptized with Christ's baptism unto death, to 
suffer with him that they might also reign with him, to be 
dead with him that they might also live with him. The 
Apostle also declares that we fill up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ— suffering for the sake of being 
members of his Body, the Church. 



It should not surprise us to find that this sacrificing on 
the part of the Body of Christ, which has been in progress 
for more than eighteen centuries, and which is so prominently 
marked throughout all the exhortations of the New Testament, 
is also marked with prominence in the type. Many 
have treated lightly and as hypocritical language the words of 
the Apostle, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies 
of God that ye present your bodies living sacrifices unto 
God, holy, acceptable, your reasonable service. (Rom. 12:1.) 
But as we look into the typical picture of this Gospel Age— 
the Day of Atonement— we find the sufferings of the Body 
of Christ clearly set forth, represented in the sacrifice of the 
Lord's goat. The leanness of the goat as compared with the 
young bullock fitly represents the inferiority of the Church 
and anything she has to offer unto the Lord in sacrifice, as 
compared with the riches of grace which reside in her Lord, 
who gave the important sacrifice, the basis of our offerings, 

R4035 : page 23 1 

without which nothing that we could offer would have any 
value or be at all acceptable before the Father. The fat of 
the sacrifices was offered to the Lord upon the altar, and 
represented the love and zeal of the sacrificer. In the case 
of the bullock there was much fat, in the case of the goat 
little, representing that the followers of Jesus have by nature 
comparatively little that they can offer to the Lord at all. 

THE MERIT WAS IN THE BULLOCK 

The type also shows that until the bullock was offered 
the goat's sacrifice would count as nothing, because it is 
distinctly stated that everything was to be done to the goat that 
had previously been done to the bullock, just as we are told 
by the Lord that we must walk in his steps, must suffer with 
him, must take up our cross and follow him, must go to him 
without the camp bearing his reproach, so the hoofs, hides, 
etc., of the goat were burned without the camp, in the place 
and after the manner that the hoofs, hide, etc., of the bullock 
had previously been burned. (See "Tabernacle Shadows.") 

Both sacrifices— that of the bullock and that of 
the Lord's goat— were requisite to complete the atonement 
for the sins of the people. The Body of Christ and the 
household of faith have imputed to them the merit of Jesus' 
sacrifice for sins, and they are thus counted as justified 
freely from all things through faith in his blood. And before 
our sacrifices could have any value in God's sight it was 
necessary that first we should be adopted or accepted as 
figurative members of the High Priest. Thus the Apostle 
declares, "Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price," 
and recognizing this we have given over our wills, ourselves 
to the Lord, agreeing to be dead to self and alive only as 
his members, and as his members we suffer under his direction 
as our Head. From this standpoint the sufferings of the 
members of the Body of Christ are the Lord's own sufferings. 
From this standpoint the prophets speak of the sufferings 



of Christ— Jesus, the Head, and the Church, his members 
—and the glory that should follow. The revelation of 
divine glory and the blessing of the world do not follow the 
sufferings of Jesus alone, but will follow the completion of the 
sufferings of Christ when all of his members shall have been 
offered— presented as living sacrifices. 

Looking at the type we see the clear distinction between 
the result of the sprinkling of the blood of the bullock on 
the Mercy Seat and the result of the sprinkling of the blood 
of the Lord's goat upon the Mercy Seat. When the former 
was accomplished it meant the forgiveness and reconciliation 
of the members of the Priest's body and all of his household, 
the household of faith. When the latter was accomplished 
it meant the forgiveness of the sins of all the people 
—the taking away of the sin of the world. It was the Lamb 
of God which was to take away the sin of the world, and 
our Lord Jesus was that Lamb of God; and it is through his 
merit that Adam's sin, the sin of the world, shall be forgiven, 
blotted out, set aside. He was in a particular sense the 
Passover Lamb, not one bone of which should be broken; 
but the little flock, his members, are in a larger sense his 
flesh and his bones, and are never to be separated from him, 
but to be forever with the Lord in heavenly Kingdom and 
glory. From this standpoint it will be seen that the antitype 
of the Day of Atonement is the entire Gospel Age— in 
which from first to last Jesus and all the members of his 
consecrated "little flock" will suffer, and by the end of 
which all sin atonement will be completed and the blessing 
of the divine forgiveness be extended to all the families of 
the earth, in harmony with the Abrahamic Covenant— "In 
thy Seed (the Christ, Head and Body) all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed." 

CASTING LOTS ON THE TWO GOATS 

The two goats standing at the door of the Tabernacle 
represent all of the Lord's consecrated Church at this present 
time, but show us that it consists of two classes. Both classes 
were consecrated alike, but both do not go through the same 
experiences. The one class follows precisely the experiences 
of the Lord, as the goat's experiences corresponded to those 
of the bullock; but the other class, typified by the scape-goat, 
is the Great Company, who, while making a full consecration 
of self-sacrifice in the same manner as do the little flock, 
hold back, neglect to lay down their lives sacrificially and 
experience therefor the destruction of the flesh, that 
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 
(1 Cor. 5:5.) These two classes, we remember, are distinctly 
shown in Revelation 7. The little flock— 144,000, the Spiritual 
Israelites— represent the faithful members of the Body 
of Christ glorified; the other, a great multitude whose number 
was not fixed or predestinated by the Lord, which will 
come through tribulation and receive palm-branches as servants 
before the throne, rather than crowns as overcomers in 
the throne. 

The casting of lots as between the two goats seems to 



have been intended to signify that the Lord does not arbitrarily 

determine which of the consecrated shall go into either 

of these classes, but rather that he leaves the matter to us, accepting 

whomsoever manifests the proper zeal in sacrifice and 

thus attests his loyalty, showing that he is a copy of God's dear 

Son. This shows that it is not sufficient to make consecration 

to the Lord, but that we must proceed to fulfil the 

terms of our covenant if we would belong to the Lord's goat 

class— we must suffer, we must sacrifice, and thus 

make our calling and election sure as members of the Body 

of the Priest. 

"FOR JEHOVAH" OR "FOR AZAZEL" 

We shall not go into all the details of this Day of 
Atonement, surmising that all of our readers possess the little 
pamphlet, "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices," in 
which the matter is treated in considerable detail. In harmony 
with the arrangement of the lesson we are giving 
special prominence to the two goats. 

In the Hebrew, when the lot had been cast upon the 
goats, one was declared to be for Jehovah and the other for 
Azazel. The significance of the word Azazel is not very 
clear, but according to the majority of modern scholars it 
stood for the prince of darkness; and in Milton's "Paradise 
Lost" Azazel is represented as the standard-bearer of 
the infernal hosts— the prince of devils. We agree with this 
interpretation because it corresponds well with the expression 
of the Apostle, who— when referring to one class of the 
consecrated members of the Body of Christ who had not 
been living up to their privileges— declares, "Absent in body 
but present with you in mind, I have delivered over such an 
one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 5:3-5.) 

R4035 : page 232 

Similarly we understand that the Great Company, those 

who have consecrated but failed to sacrifice voluntarily, will 

be delivered over to Satan for his buffetings, and pass 

through a great tribulation, with a view to effecting in them 

by this means a proper penitence for sin and a proper appreciation 

of the divine standard of truth and righteousness. 

The majority of this neglected class the Scriptures seem to 

intimate will be found in the end of this age— though doubtless 

there have been some of the same class throughout the 

age. 

The scape-goat does not represent a sin-loving class 
nor a class which has denied the Lord, but a class of consecrated 
believers overcharged with the cares of this life and 
the deceitfulness of riches, and not sufficiently loyal to the 
Lord and their covenant to forsake all and walk in the footsteps 

R4036 : page 232 

of the Master in self-sacrifice. This class, particularly 



large in the present day, will be delivered over to the Adversary 
—to suffer in a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation— the great time of trouble with 
which this age will end. Such of them as fail to respond to 
those tribulations and to seek the Lord will die the Second 
Death, but such as respond faithfully and loyally will be 
counted as overcomers, and be granted the palms of victory 
shown in Revelation 7, and be privileged to a share at the 
Marriage Supper of the Lamb and the glories and honors of 
that occasion. It is only their failure to appreciate their present 
privileges in voluntary sacrificing that will deter them from 
gaining membership in the Bride class, and their highest position 
of honor will be as the "virgins, her companions, who 
follow her [the Bride.] "-Psalm 45:14. 

TWO CLASSES OF SINS 

This scape-goat is not sacrificed, does not come upon 
the Lord's altar, but is sent away into the wilderness for 
the "destruction of the flesh." The wide difference between 
sacrifice and destruction must be observed and appreciated. 
The Apostle reminds us that the bodies of those beasts 
(whose blood was brought within the vail to make atonement 
on the Mercy Seat) were burned outside the camp, and then 
he urges the faithful, "Let us go to him without the camp, 
bearing the reproach with him." (Heb. 13:13.) Thus the 
Apostle shows that our Lord Jesus was represented in one of 
those animals and that we were represented in the other— if we 
are willing to go with him outside the camp into disrepute, bearing 
his reproaches and sharing them as members of his Body. 

Let us notice the two classes of sins referred to in our 
lesson, the one propitiated by the blood of the bullock and the 
goat in the Most Holy, and the other confessed upon the head 
of the scape-goat, which bore them away. The propitiated 
sin is the Adamic sin, on account of which the sentence 
of death passed upon all and weaknesses and imperfections 
have thus come upon all. This is what is termed original 
sin, whose curse or blight rests upon the race as 
a whole. But there are other sins than the original one and 
its weaknesses and imperfections which we inherit, and 
which the Lord has cancelled so far as the household of 
faith is concerned, and which he has arranged to cancel 
so far as the world is concerned. The other sins are 
stipulated as iniquities, transgressions— in fact, embrace all 
sins not included in those atoned for by the blood of the 
bullock and of the goat. 

We have not far to look if we would see these iniquities 
or inequities of the world, especially of "Christendom." 
There is today considerable light shining upon the whole 
world, especially on the civilized portion. The principles of 
righteousness set forth in the Jewish Law and subsequently amplified 
by the Lord and the apostles, have enlightened the 
minds of the public in general in respect to justice and injustice, 
right and wrong, good and evil, so that there never 
was so responsible a generation as the one now living. Notwithstanding 
this increase of knowledge, and notwithstanding 



that there are gross iniquities prevailing throughout the 
world, we find comparatively few willing to do anything 
toward a readjustment and equalization of the world's 
affairs, financial, social and religious. Rather it seems 
that the majority of those possessing advantages are quite 
willing to hold to them even though recognizing that they 
are inequitable, iniquitous. 

Meantime, the light of the morning is also awakening the 
masses, who are more and more crying out for their rights and 
against the inequities. The Lord is not only permitting this 
condition of things but is favoring it and helping it along, 
and informs us that the result will be a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation. He tells us that 
in that great final struggle the kings of the world— financial, 
social, religious and political— will with practical 
unanimity be found on one side of the question, and that on 
the other side will be the Lord's "great army," the people 
for whose equities and for whose rights he will plead, 
will contend. True, the common people will not realize 
that the Lord is on their side, and many of them will even 
ignore him and trust simply to their own contrivances and 
devices, socialistic and otherwise. Similarly those who are 
on the side of the kings and princes of earth and their 
armies will not recognize the kind of battle they are engaged 
in, that it is one in which the Lord is taking a hand, 
with the view to the overthrow of present institutions and 
the preparation of the earth for the rule of righteousness— 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son— the Millennial Kingdom. 

Look now at the scape-goat class: Not faithful to their 
covenant of sacrifice they are not counted worthy to escape 
those things coming on the world, and hence will have their 
portion with the hypocrites and with the world in that 
trouble, notwithstanding the fact that they are God's sincere 
children, but overcharged with the cares of this life and not 
properly zealous for the fulfilment of their covenant and a 
share in the Kingdom. It is in mercy for this class that the 
Lord consigns them to that trouble, that in its bitter experiences 
they may learn the necessary lessons and attest finally, 
under stress, their loyalty to him and to righteousness. They 
are represented as having confessed upon them the iniquities 
of the people— this is from the standpoint of divine justice. 
Their own sins were forgiven through Christ, as they 
were reckoned in as members of the household of faith. 
Hence their sufferings must be for the sins of others; and as 
they did not suffer as willing sacrificers they are then made to 
suffer unto death— that the spirit may be saved in the day 
of the Lord Jesus. 

ALL THE RIGHTEOUS BLOOD REQUIRED 

Let us not forget our Lord's words respecting a somewhat 
similar class which suffered in the time of trouble at 

R4036 : page 233 

the end of the Jewish Age. He said that all the righteous 



blood shed from Abel's time down to the death of Zacharias 
should be required at the hand of that generation. In one 
sense of the word this has the appearance of injustice. We 
are inclined to ask— Why should that generation be penalized 
for the transgressions committed centuries before their 
day? The Lord does not particularize— does not explain 
the operation of divine justice in the matter, but we may 
reasonably infer that the answer to the query lies in the 
fact that the generation of our Lord's day had so many more 
advantages than all the generations preceding that it deserved 
severer penalties. As our Lord points out, they had 
the experiences of the past and disapproved the doings of 
their fathers who slew the prophets; nevertheless with 
greater light they did worse, they slew the Son of God and 
persecuted the members of his Body— his Church. 

Similarly the Scriptures indicate that in the end of this 
age the Lord will require of the living generation a penalty 
for much of the unrighteousness of the past— and especially 
for the blood of all the saints shed throughout this Gospel 
Age in civilized lands. We perceive that much of the evil 
done against the Lord's holy ones of the past has thus far 
failed of punishment. Great systems which, in the name of 
the Lord and in the name of religion, persecuted the true 
Church have practised and prospered and not yet received 
their just recompense of reward. Some of these martyrs of 
the past are pictured to us under the fifth seal as inquiring, 
"How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and 
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth." This 
is a symbolical picture of justice long deferred crying for 
vengeance, representing those who are actually dead and 
know not anything, and cannot know anything until the resurrection. 
The answer to this query before the seat of Justice 
is given. We are told that it would be but a little while 
until others are similarly maltreated, and the intimation is 
given that then the judgment will come which will compensate 
for the whole. This is the awful trouble of the near 
future, when great Babylon will go down as a great millstone 
into the sea, when every man's hand will be against 
his neighbor's in anarchy, when there will be no peace to 
him that goeth out or to him that cometh in— a time of 
trouble such as was not since there was a nation nor ever 
shall be afterward. 

It is that trouble which the little flock, the Lord's goat 
class of faithful sacrificers, will escape directly or indirectly, 
and that the Great Company class will not escape 
—but on the contrary share. They will come up out of this 
great tribulation with washed robes, made white in the blood 
of the Lamb. Not that their sufferings will wash their 
robes, but that in their sufferings they will learn to appreciate 
as never before their relationship to the Lamb of God 
and to his atoning merit, and by faith will be permitted to 
apply the same to their own cleansing. 

ONCE IN GRACE ALWAYS IN GRACE 

These words represent the Calvinistic sentiment that 



whoever the Lord accepts into his family and begets of the 
holy Spirit will somehow or other, sometime, in some way, 
gain the heavenly estate. There is more of truth in this 
sentiment than some of the opposers of Calvinism realize. It 
is true that whoever draws back from the Lord, either in 
repudiation of the atonement sacrifice of our Lord Jesus or 
by a repudiation of the narrow way and a turning like the 
sow to wallowing in the mire, goes into the Second Death, 
"the blackness of darkness"— utter extinction; yet these, we 

R4037 : page 233 

have every reason to hope, will be few in comparison to the 
whole number begotten of the holy Spirit during this Gospel 
Age. 

Of the whole number of Spirit-begotten ones only a 
"little flock" gain the prize, and the others, failing of compliance 
with the terms of their covenant, might be utterly 
repudiated of the Lord, but he will not do this so long as 
they do not entirely repudiate him. Their failure to sacrifice 
willingly will not debar them from his care so long as 
they are at heart loyal to him. Since the seat in the throne 
provided for the "little flock" of sacrificers (represented by 
the Lord's goat) cannot be theirs, it is in mercy that the 
Lord permits them to become the scape-goat class, and to be 
driven into the wilderness and severely tried in the great 
time of trouble— that all faithful at heart may be delivered 
from the bondage of fear and share a heavenly estate on a 
lower plane than the Bride. Let us, nevertheless, so far from 
taking advantage of the Lord's grace and goodness in this 
manner, feel all the more love for him, so that we will the 
more valiantly and the more faithfully seek to lay down our 
lives in divine service and in behalf of the household of 
faith. 



R4037 : page 233 

GUIDED IN A LONG JOURNEY 

-NUMBERS 10:ll-13,29-36.-AUGUST 25.- 

Golden Text:— "And the Lord went before them by day in 
a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in 
a pillar of fire to give them light."— Exodus 13:21. 

THE Israelites spent nearly a year at Mount Sinai before 
they were ready to begin the march for the land 
of promise. During that period quite a constructive 
work was accomplished amongst them, which transformed 
them from a horde of comparatively unorganized emigrants 
into a powerful nation, with covenant relationship to God. 
At Mount Sinai the Law Covenant was instituted, by which 
the nation was accepted of the Lord as his special people, 
distinguished from the other nations of the earth, they 



pledging themselves to full loyalty to the Lord and all the 
principles of his righteousness, and he pledging himself to 
them as their God, their guide, their protector. All of this 
arrangement, however, was centered in Moses, the mediator 
of that Law Covenant; he was the people's representative 
before the Lord and the Lord's representative before the 
people. 

Their organization now was a combination of political 
and military arrangement under judges and officers over 
thousands, hundreds, fifties and tens. (Ex. 18:25; Deut. 1:15.) 
Besides this they had a general council of seventy 
—supposedly the original Sanhedrim— Exodus 24:1; 
Num. 11:16. 

R4037 : page 234 

During this stay at Sinai the priesthood was organized, 
also the Tabernacle constructed and its religious services 
instituted, with the outlines of the feasts and fasts 
appointed of the Lord for perpetual observance throughout 
their generations. That certainly was a year of great 
advancement with them as a people— a year of great accomplishments 
in making them ready for the land. 

The wilderness of Sinai possessed rich though small 
valleys, and while there the people and their flocks and 
herds evidently prospered. The census according to Numbers 1:2 
showed their enumeration to be 603,550 men of twenty 
years old and upward, besides 22,273 Levites. This would 
imply a total number of about 2,000,000. 

When the time came to journey the Lord intimated it 
by causing the cloud to rise from the Tabernacle. It preceded 
the people, indicating the way in which they should 
go and guiding them into the desert of Paran, referred to in 
Deut. 1:19 as "a great and terrible wilderness." It must 
have seemed great to the people after traversing it hither 
and thither in the wanderings of their forty years. Amongst 
its terrors were the fiery serpents and the insufficient supply 
of water for so great a host. Remembering that the Israelites 
were only natural men, we cannot wonder at their murmurings 
against Moses and thus against the Lord in respect 
to many of their experiences. From our knowledge of humanity 
today we would be inclined to say that the murmuring 
disposition must be much greater now than it was then, 
for it is our opinion that no such host could be led for such 
a time under such conditions without the interposition of divine 
power. To have avoided murmuring and to have taken 
patiently all the wilderness difficulties would imply on 
the part of that people a faith greater than the natural 
man manifests anywhere today. 

The fact that they were led by the Lord Jehovah— 
that the pillar of glory guided their journeyings by day and 
the pillar of fire marked and enlightened their camp by 
night— would indeed be a continual reminder to them of 
the Lord their God, of his covenant with them and of their 
covenant with him. The daily portions of manna would 
remind them also of his watchful care of their interests. 



The smitten rock and the waters therefrom, refreshing them 
in the journey, would indeed speak of the power of God enlisted 
on their behalf, and afresh mark Moses as the divine 
representative and appointed leader in the right way. All 
this, however, would hardly account to them for the fact that 
the route chosen was far from the most direct one, and that 
the judgments visited upon them for their murmurings, etc., 
were severer by far than were those experienced by other 
nations round about them who worshiped idols and practised 
all manner of sin and contumacy. 

"SET FORTH FOR AN EXAMPLE" 

The only explanation of the whole matter and one 
which the Israelites could not themselves understand, because 
the time for its manifestation had not yet come, is the 
one given in the New Testament;— that the Israelites were 
used of the Lord as a typical people, whose testings for 
good and for evil were made to picture forth in advance the 
corresponding experiences of Spiritual Israel. As the Apostle 
points out, their rock and its water typified Christ and 
the water of life flowing from him. Their manna, our Lord 
indicated, typified the Bread which came down from heaven, 
of which if a man eat he shall live forever. The fiery serpents 
which harassed them and guided the eyes of the suffering to 
the brazen serpent raised upon a pole, symbolized sin and its 
injurious effects, which cause the sin-bitten to look unto 
him who was made a curse for us in that he hanged upon a 
tree. The murmuring of Aaron and Miriam against Moses 
was made the occasion of divine displeasure, typifying God's 
indignation against those who fail to recognize him as the 
leader of Spiritual Israel, and who fail to honor those 
whom he uses as his mouthpieces and servants. 

"The gainsaying of Korah" and his associates, claiming 
that they were just as well qualified as were Moses and 
Aaron to represent the Lord and his people in all religious 
functions, was punished severely, because of representing in 
the antitype those who would fail to recognize divine institutions 
in Spiritual Israel. The perishing of some for 
despising Moses' Law was intended to be a type or picture 
of the everlasting destruction of those who would despise 
the antitypical Moses and the redemptive work accomplished 
through him, and who consequently shall be destroyed in 
the Second Death. Their Mount Sinai represented as a 
type the Kingdom of God. The giving of the Law therefrom 
represented the promulgation of the divine Law at the institution 
of the New Covenant at the hands of the antitypical 
Mediator, the Christ of glory, in the end of this age. The 
quaking earth and lightning flash and trumpet voice connected 
with that inauguration of the Law Covenant typified, 
says the Apostle, the great time of trouble and complete 
shaking of everything with which the new dispensation, the 
Millennium, will be ushered in shortly. 

"MUCH ADVANTAGE EVERYWAY" 



The Apostle, after pointing out that the Law Covenant 
to Israel made nothing perfect for them, brought in no glorious 
kingdom and rewarded with no eternal life, but rather 
condemned them all, shut them up to the hope that should 
afterward come to them through the Gospel, tells us nevertheless 
that the Jews had "much advantage everyway— chiefly 
because to them were committed the oracles of God." 
(Rom. 3:2.) What does he mean? What advantage did 
they have? We reply that all of their difficulties in the 
wilderness and subsequently were profitable to them as a 
nation, and individually profitable also to those who were 
rightly exercised by the tests and thereby drawn near the 
Lord. 

Those experiences brought Israel at the time of our 
Lord's first advent into the first rank amongst the nations 
as respects holiness, godliness, righteousness; and Jews 
scattered all over the world at that time had a large influence 
in shaping whatever was good and noble amongst 
the most civilized, preparing the world in general for the 
Gospel message in its due season. We have the evidence of 
this in the fact that the earlier converts to Christianity were 
nearly all from the Jews and from those Gentiles who had 
previously had contact with the Jewish religion and more or 
less faith in the true God. Not only so, but the trying experiences 
to which those people were subjected developed 
in some of them grand qualities of heart and of mind, as is 
witnessed in King David and all the prophets, as well as in 
many of the less notable ones, the faith of some of whom is 
attested by the Apostle.— Hebrews 11. 

Some may be inclined to say, How could those blessings, 

R4038 : page 235 

coming to a few of the Israelites and to some of these 
centuries after, compensate them for their experiences, as, 
for instance, those who perished by the bite of the fiery serpents, 
and Korah and his band, whom the earth swallowed 
up, and others who died summarily for their violation of 
Moses' Law? Were not these irretrievable injuries, whatever 
the blessings of their trials to others of their people 
at the time, or to us the antitypical Israelites now? We 
answer, No! they were not irretrievable injuries. Like all 
the remainder of Adam's race they were under sentence of 
death because of original sin, and it mattered little whether 
they died in war or from pestilence or from serpent bites or 
by the earth opening beneath them, swallowing them up. 
They still have a share in the great blessing which God has 
provided through Jesus and through Spiritual Israel, whose 
difficulties and trials and testings they were illustrating as 
types. "Jesus Christ by the grace of God tasted death for 
every man," and this redemption included those we have 
enumerated. The time is coming when all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed through the Redeemer, and this 
will include those whose cases we are considering. The 
Master declares that the hour is coming in the which all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice and come forth, 



either with the Ancient Worthies of the Jewish epoch or with 
the overcomers of this Gospel Age to the resurrection of the 
blessed and holy, or otherwise to the general resurrection of 
all those who have thus far failed to please God and to be 
accounted worthy of eternal life. 

The latter class will include the great majority of humanity, 
and their awakening will be with a view to giving 
them a most favorable opportunity to learn of God's grace 
in Christ, to accept of the same, and to gain eternal life in 
the Paradise of God. We see then that no injustice was 
done to the Jews, though the Lord treated them in some respects 
more severely than the heathen nations. Though 
they suffered under divine judgments, no loss or injury 
was done to any of them, as all will yet have 
a full opportunity of coming to a knowledge of the truth 
and to eternal life through the Redeemer and his Spiritual 
Israel. We see also that in an educational way 
the experiences given to that people lifted them out of 
the degradation in which they had been almost slaves 
to a foremost rank in the world. We can agree with 
the Apostle that Israel had much advantage every way, being 
accepted of the Lord and used of him as types and shadows 
in connection with the preparation for his Spiritual Israel, 
the true Seed of Abraham, through which all the families of 
the earth are to be blessed. 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL STILL MORE BLESSED 

If it was blessed to be associated with the Lord as members 
of the house of servants under Moses, how much more 
blessed is it to be now associated with the Lord as members 
of the still higher house of sons under Christ! If the performance 
of the types and shadows was honorable and 
brought blessings, how much greater must be the favors and 
blessings and honors attaching to those who serve the antitypical 
altar, the antitypical temple, as members of the Royal 
Priesthood, the Body of Christ! It is when we begin to see 
something of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the divine plan, and the glory that will surely attach 
to the ministers of divine grace when the reign of sin 
and death shall be ended, when the time of sacrificing shall 
be over and when the time of glory and blessing shall be 
ushered in— that we appreciate the situation, and be, 
Oh, so thankful, for the privileges we have as Spiritual 
Israelites, as members of the Royal Priesthood, in attesting 
our loyalty to the Lord and his Word and his people, 
that we might be accounted worthy of a share with him and 
with our Redeemer in the glory, honor and immortality of 
the Kingdom. 

HOBAB, THE SON OF RAGUEL 

We have previously seen that Moses spent forty years 
near the Sinai wilderness in the family of his father-in-law, 
Jethro Raguel (Jethro is supposed to have been the title and 
Raguel the proper name). This lesson introduces Hobab, 



supposedly Moses' brother-in-law, who belonged to what is 
known as the Kenites, an Arab tribe of Midian, east of Sinai. 
Hobab had been with the people of Israel, but now upon 
their start on the journey for Canaan he contemplated returning 
to his own people, and our lesson sets forth two 
arguments on the part of Moses to influence him to remain. 
He said:— 

(1) "We are journeying into the place of which the 
Lord said, I will give it you. Come thou with us, and we 
will do thee good, for the Lord hath spoken good concerning 
Israel." 

What words of faith, and how humble a statement from 
the leader of 2,000,000 of people. We note the utter absence 
of reference to himself and what he would do, or of his 
authority and power. Only the Lord's power and the Lord's 
blessing were either invoked or mentioned. Very properly 
we may regard this as a suggestion for ourselves in connection 
with our journeying toward the heavenly Canaan. Those 
who are with us, friends or neighbors or kindred, should be 
invited along these lines— lines of faith: "Come thou with 
us and we will do thee good, for the Lord hath spoken good 
concerning Israel." Whoever comes with us receives a 
blessing, and in urging any to come with us we receive a 
blessing because our own faith is encouraged, stimulated, 
and our own obedience also to the Lord; for shall we say 
to others, The Lord will do thee good, and not experience 
good ourselves and not realize the blessings we are receiving 
day by day from the Lord's hand? And if they do come 
with us how the fact that we have suggested the matter and 
promised them a blessing would help to keep us from murmuring 
and complaining, and from manifesting anything else 
than the good we are continually receiving from the Lord. 
We do well, then, as Spiritual Israelites, to follow Moses' example 
in our appeals to those who are under our influence 
—we do well to quote to them the promises of the Lord, 
and to show our faith in the same. 

But these arguments failed to influence Hobab, just as 
similar arguments on our part have failed to influence our 
friends. But, like Moses, we should not be ready to give up 
our endeavors to do good to others. We should bring forth 
other arguments, as he did. He urged Hobab further:— 

(2) "Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou 
knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness and thou 
mayest be to us instead of eyes. And it shall be if thou 
goest with us, yea, it shall be that what good soever the Lord 
shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee." 

R4038 : page 236 

Applying this argument to our friends it would seem to 
imply that we should help to make a place for them in connection 
with the Lord's service, again assuring them of a 
share in the reward. This argument did appeal to Hobab, 
and he went with the Israelites, and we have records 
of the Kenites amongst the Israelites for centuries, down to 
the time of Saul. (Judges 1:16; 4:11; 1 Sam. 15:6.) The 



intimation that he could be of service to the Israelites attracted 
him from his own country and people. Similarly 
some may be attracted to the Lord's people by opportunity 
for rendering service. It should be remembered, however, 
that there are varieties of service, and that the Kenites 
were never invited to minister as priests at the altar. And 
so the Lord's people should not feel it to be appropriate 
that they should elect to places of prominence in the Church 
those who have not fully and completely made a consecration 
to the Lord; neither should they repel them, but 
rather be willing to use each and all to the extent of their 
willingness to serve and cooperate in the Lord's work. 
Hobab, more familiar with this trackless wilderness 
than Moses and the Israelites, could give them many suggestions 
that would be helpful respecting water courses, pasturage, 
wells, etc. And here we see the appropriateness of 
all the Lord's people following a similar course to that of 
Moses. Notwithstanding his appreciation of the Lord as a 
leader of the hosts of Israel and the pillar of fire by night 
and the cloud by day, notwithstanding that he gave all 
honor for blessings past and those expected in the future 
to the Giver of every good, nevertheless he was ready to 
make use of every human instrumentality that would aid 
in the carrying out of the divine program. He did not 
expect of the Lord miracles in respect to matters that 
would properly come under human judgment and foresight. 
And so it is with us in all of the affairs of our 
earthly and spiritual interests: in all our ways we should 
acknowledge the Lord as the author and finisher of our 
course; but we should also, while seeking the wisdom from 
above for ourselves and for the work, do everything within 
our power, use every human agency and means in cooperation 
with the Lord and his mighty power. His proposition 
is that we may do all things through his strength— that he 

R4039 : page 236 

will use and bless our humble efforts for the carrying out 
of his great purposes. Some of the Lord's people seem to 
lack a proper judgment along these lines— some of them are 
even disposed to criticise as lacking in faith those who, like 
Moses, seek to use human instrumentalities in cooperation 
with the divine service and guidance. 

Our lesson informs us that every morning in their services, 
when in obedience to the movement of the cloud they 
started forward in their journey, there was a simple religious 
service, Moses proclaiming in the ears of the leaders and 
through them in the ears of the people,— 

"Rise up, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, 
And let them that hate thee flee before thee." 
In the evening, when the camp settled from the journey 
of the day, again Moses' voice rang out in the words,— 
"Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel."— 
"Abide with us." 
What was thus done every day by the Lord's direction 
in Natural Israel surely takes place with equal regularity in 



Spiritual Israel. All who will be found faithful, all Israelites 
indeed, as they go forth every morning to the journey of 
life, to the battle of life, to the trials and testings by the 
way, must surely learn to look unto the Lord as the Captain 
of their salvation, as the one through whom alone Satan and 
his hosts can be defeated, through whom alone we can 
have the victory. "Rise up, O Lord, and let thine enemies 
be scattered; let them that hate thee flee before thee," and 
let us who love thee and abide in thy love and under thy 
protecting care, be safe-guarded from every experience that 
would do us real harm, and be "kept by the power of God 
through faith." 

Which Spiritual Israelite can afford to retire at the 
close of the day without retrospectively calling to mind the 
goodness of the Lord and desiring his continued favor and 
protection in the shades of night? Which true Israelite 
will long be an Israelite indeed if he fail to acknowledge the 
Lord in all his ways, in his downlyings and his uprisings? 
As the Apostle says, whether we eat or whether we drink or 
whatsoever we do all should be done to his glory, and if in 
all our ways we will acknowledge him let us at the close of 
each day employ language somewhat similar to that of Moses 
and say to the Lord, Abide, O Lord, with all the thousands 
of thy true Israel everywhere. Keep us, guard us, according 
to thy wisdom and thy love in Christ Jesus ! 

The spirit of faith and reverence which runs all 
through the divine Word attests most grandly to the characters 
of those whom the Lord has used prominently in his 
service in the past, and gives even to the babes in Christ a 
confidence and assurance lacking in words from other 
sources not inspired nor infused by the Spirit of the Lord. 
As a grand example of these Biblical benedictions note that 
of the high priest, wherewith he was accustomed to bless 
the people, saying,— 

"The Lord bless thee and keep thee, 

The Lord make his face to shine upon thee, 

And be gracious unto thee! 

The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee 

And give thee peace." 



R4039 : page 236 

THE FAR-WEST CONVENTION TOUR 

THE Editor left Allegheny on June 29th, the friends 
of the neighborhood singing, as the train pulled 
out, "God be with you till we meet again." Our 
last mutual salute was with handkerchiefs, as we stood 
on the rear platform of the train. Truly no other tie 
so binds our hearts in Christian love as does the spirit 
of the Truth. 

Sunday, June 30th: Dear friends awaited our arrival 
at the Chicago depot, and we were soon at Handel 
Hall. A praise and testimony meeting came first. It 



was truly a season of refreshing. At its close the Editor 
gave a brief address. 

None of the sessions was for the public, nor advertised, 
except in the WATCH TOWER. There was a fine 
attendance nevertheless, not only of Chicago friends 
but from nearby places as well. The attendance at the 

R4039 : page 237 

afternoon session was the largest— about 550. Closest 
attention was given to a discourse on "Gather my 
saints together unto me, those that have made a covenant 
with me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) This discourse 
has already been reported in the Dispatch and News. 

The evening meeting was not quite so well attended, 
because some had home duties and our stay for a 
late train was not anticipated. About 300 stayed during 
a hot evening for a Question Meeting, which lasted 
two and a half hours. Then, accompanied by some of 
the dear brethren to the depot, we started for Denver, 
weary from the work but full of joy in our privileges 
of serving so grand a cause. 

Denver, July 1st: Friends from Texas, Arkansas, 
Missouri, Oklahoma, Nebraska and Colorado, to the 
number of about 200, had been in session two days before 
our arrival and seemingly had enjoyed themselves 
greatly. 

As our stay was limited to the one day, a Question 
Meeting was considered one of the most desirable; and 
the questions themselves showed that the dear friends 
had been thinking quite a good deal along very important 
features of the divine plan. We have concluded to 
reproduce many of them for the general interest of all 
in the WATCH TOWER columns. Here also we spoke 
on the text, "Gather my saints together unto me, those 
that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." 

Again we were obliged to say, Good-bye! with the 
thought that we should never all meet again this side 
the vail, but hoping to meet many of the dear ones in 
the Kingdom, for the attainment of which hope we 
urged faithfulness even unto death. 

At Ogden, Utah, some of the dear friends, having 
learned of our time of arrival, met us at the station. 
We had a pleasant interchange of greetings and good 
wishes and promises of prayers for one another, and 
soon were again speeding on our way to Los Angeles, 
via Salt Lake City. A wait of two hours at the latter 
place gave us a chance to see this thriving city, whose 
population now is about one-half Mormon. 

Our train reached Los Angeles too late for the 
evening meeting of July 4th, but we had a most enjoyable 
season of refreshing on the 5th. We greeted the 
dear brethren from various cities and villages for miles 
about. These personal greetings seem to us and to 
many to be one of the chief blessings of these Conventions. 
In speaking we can add but little to what we 



have already published in the DAWNS and TOWERS and 
printed discourses, but as iron sharpeneth iron so doth 
the countenance and word of Christian fellowship and 
the hand-grasp cheer each other on the narrow way 
toward the heavenly Canaan. 

The morning service for two hours was devoted to 
the answering of questions— this being esteemed the 
best way to serve the largest number, considering the 
brevity of our stay. In the afternoon for an hour and a 
half we discoursed to the dear friends along the lines 
of our mutual hopes and prospects and the imminence of 
the gathering of the last members to the Lord— beyond 
the vail. Incidentally we showed that our gathering 
must not be to human sects and parties, nor to human 
leaders, great or small— but to Christ, our Lord and 
Head; that the "harvest" work is his; that he is doing 
the gathering into his "garner," and that human helpers 
at very most are to be esteemed as his servants and 
channels and not otherwise heeded or honored. We 
left the dear friends still in session and took the 5.30 
train for Oakland, Cal., where we arrived safely and on 
time the next morning. 

Oakland, Cal., July 6: We were warmly received 
by Bros. W. and E. Bundy, Sexton and Andrews, and 
after cleaning up went to the Hamilton Auditorium, 
where services were already in progress— Bro. E. Bundy 
having just delivered an address as per the program. 
Bro. Russell spoke to the Colporteurs and Volunteers, 
setting forth how the Lord seems to be specially using 
these two branches of the service in the present "harvest" 
time for gathering his saints. He announced that 
Vol. I of DAWN-STUDIES had already reached the 
2,000,000 mark and was advancing despite the efforts 
of preachers and others to misrepresent its teachings 
and hinder its circulation. Although they have influence 
to hinder its sale in book-stores and to hinder its 
advertisement in religious journals this opposition is 
evidently overruled by the Lord for the good of his 
people, for it opens the way to colporteurs, who are themselves 
being blessed both by the service and the consecration 
it inculcates, regardless of the number who 
are thus led to accept the Truth. The great blessing 
afforded by the Volunteers' distribution of the tracts 
was also pointed out. 

The fact that these volunteer tract distributors include 
people of refinement and education and business 
standing gives weight to this literature which is going 
out this year more freely than ever. The subject matter 
this year is considered excellent, and more of the 
friends of the Truth are realizing that they consecrated 
to service and until death, and that the time is short in 

R4040 : page 237 

which they may labor in the vineyard. The fact that 
these tracts are supplied free and freight paid was also 



noted, and how this leaves no excuse for idleness on 

the part of those who are stewards of time and opportunity. 

To this service of the Lord and the Truth and 

the "Brethren" still in Babylon the speaker attributed 

much of the growth in grace and knowledge so noticeable 

in the gatherings of the past few years. 

Brother Russell spoke again in the afternoon from 
3 to 4.30 on, "Gather my saints together unto me, 
those who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." 
And in the evening he conducted for two hours a Question 
Meeting. 

The Sunday morning session opened with a praise 
and testimony service, following which Bro. R. preached 
from the text, "If ye abide in me and my words abide 
in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be done 
unto you." This discourse many of you have already 
seen in the Dispatch and News. 

The service for the public was held in the First 
M.E. Church— the topic being, "The Overthrow of Satan's 

R4040 : page 238 

Empire." An audience estimated at 1 100 gave 

profound attention, and our hope is that some were 

blessed. Accompanied to the depot by a committee of 

the Church and with happy recollections and prayers 

we started northward for Portland. Delayed, we were 

two days and two nights in reaching Portland; but in 

the Lord's providence and by the forethought of the 

brethren in providing a cab we reached the First Christian 

Church edifice just in time for the appointed services, 

which had been widely advertised. The Church 

was crowded with intelligent hearers (about 600— probably 

one-third of whom were interested friends from 

the city, and some came 400 miles). The service lasted 

two hours, and following it we had an hour of very enjoyable 

greeting and fellowship with the friends. 

At 1 1.45 p.m. we started for Seattle, Wash., where 
we arrived safely Wednesday morning, July 10— two of 
the dear friends of the Portland Church accompanying 
us. The fact that the Christian Endeavor Society 
opened its session the same day in the same city did 
not hinder "the brethren" from having a blessed season 
of refreshing. First, last and all the time we exchanged 
greetings, and wished each other divine guidance to 
the end of the journey and our hoped-for reunion in 
"the General Assembly of the Church of the First-Born, 
whose names are written in heaven." 

Our opening service was a praise and testimony 
meeting led by Brother Acheson. It was good to be 
there. The testimonies as usual were from hearts full 
of praise to God for deliverance from darkness into his 
marvelous light. All of our hearts were surely encouraged. 
Those in attendance were chiefly from the surrounding 
country within a radius of 400 miles, also 
from points in British Columbia, and even Alaska 



had a representative. 

The Seattle Church had provided a splendid dinner 
for the entire company— about 175. We feared at first 
that this meant that some of the dear sisters were deprived 
of the privileges of the meetings and fellowship; 
but were assured that the advice given in the TOWER 
that the spiritual privileges be considered paramount 
had been concurred in, and that six helpers not interested 
in the Truth had been secured for the day. An 
equally substantial supper was provided, and was enjoyed 
by all the dear friends, who thanked the Lord, 
the Giver of all good, and rejoiced in the fellowship of 
kindred minds, so like to that above. 

At the afternoon session there was a discourse for 
the interested, and it was listened to by about 200, and 
following it for an hour we answered a number of interesting 
questions propounded by the audience. After 
the splendid supper already mentioned came the discourse 
to the public on "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 
Brother C. A. Wise, our companion in travel, 
opened the meeting and introduced Brother Russell, 
the speaker. This discourse had been well advertised 
and the attendance was estimated at more than nine 
hundred. Close attention was given to the end, a 
little after 9, when an automobile took us quickly to the 
9.30 train of the N.P.R.R. En route ten dear friends 
met us at the Spokane depot and told us of others of 
their number who were not present owing to some misunderstanding 
respecting our train time. The loving 
greetings refreshed us, and we trust that the Spokane 
friends were also refreshed. We did not fail to send 
greetings to the disappointed ones. 

A journey of three days and nights under divine 
Providence brought us safely to St. Paul on Saturday 
at 2.30 p.m. There Brother John Hoskins and others 
awaited our arrival and took us at once to the 3 p.m. 
meeting, for which the friends had already gathered. 
Our discourse was to the interested and dealt with our 
privileges and responsibilities as the Lord's stewards. 
We answered a number of very intelligent questions 
with profit, we trust, to some. After this service we 
had a delightful season of fellowship with the dear 
friends of St. Paul and Minneapolis as well as with 
about 60 from more or less distant points. We had 
supper with a party of forty as the guests of Brother 
J. Hoskins. 

The evening session was for the public— and notwithstanding 
it was the busiest night of the week (Saturday) 
we had a fine audience numbering between 700 
and 800 very intelligent people, who heard with closest 
attention what we had to tell regarding "The Overthrow 
of Satan's Empire." 

We left St. Paul about 1 1 p.m. for our next appointment, 
and notwithstanding the rain a dozen or 
more of the friends sang us adieu in the words of the 
sweet hymn, 



"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above." 

The night was stormy and our train lost time until 
we missed connections, obliging us to change our 
route and causing us to miss our appointment for a 
Sunday morning service in the First M.E. Church of 
Appleton. However, under divine providence we finally 
reached the Chatauqua grounds just fifteen minutes 
before the time appointed for our discourse on "To Hell 
and Back." A grand audience awaited us, large in 
numbers and very intelligent, estimated at between 
2000 and 3000. For two hours we had profound attention, 
and hope that some blind eyes were anointed with 
the eyesalve of divine Truth, so that henceforth they 
will see more distinctly the Justice and the Love of our 
God, as revealed in his Word— rightly understood. 

After the discourse we were cordially greeted by 
quite a large number, many of them TOWER readers 
from various adjacent localities. In the evening we 
had a most enjoyable season, and addressed the friends 
on "The True Vine and the False Vine." The next 
morning (Monday) about sixteen of the friends gathered 
at the depot and bade us goodbye; and then when 
we went aboard the train they sang, "God be with you 
till we meet again." 

On arrival at Chicago Brother Jones, M.D., met 
us at the depot to urge that between trains we visit two 
dear brethren at the Home for Incurables. We did so 
and were well repaid for our trouble. The dear brethren, 

R4040 : page 239 

unable to walk, had shining faces and told of their 
joy in the Lord and in his glorious Truth. They even 
declared that notwithstanding pains which they endeavored 
to forget in their joy in the Lord, they esteemed 
that their afflictions were blessings in disguise, because 
they thereby got time for study and prayer which 
they never had before. Our visit ended with a prayer 
and we returned to the depot, where others joined our 
company for goodby greetings— there were seven in all. 
Here we parted also with dear Brother Wise, whose 
company for the two weeks had been so helpful. We 
parted with mutual expressions of love and prayers and 
hopes for meeting at the Niagara Convention— and 
above all at "The General Assembly of the Church of 
the First-Borns." 

Without further incidents of note we arrived safely 
at Allegheny on July 16 and had a joyous meeting once 
more with the Bible House family. 

Looking back over our hasty journey of approximately 
7,500 miles, and remembering the hundreds of 
dear friends greeted— many of them for the first time 
—we render fresh thanks to God for the wonderful possibilities 



of our day. How evidently the wider "harvesting" 
of this Gospel Age has made necessary the 
peculiar preparations of this time as compared with 
the "harvesting" of the Jewish Age— seeing that the 
same length of time is allotted to each. 

The lasting impression of this trip as a whole, you 
may be glad to know, is this: that love amongst the 
brethren is broadening and deepening. Contrasting 
recent experiences with those of years ago, we note less 
of a spirit of boastfulness and belligerency as respects 
a knowledge of the Truth, and a greater humility and 
spirit of thankfulness to God for deliverance "out of 
darkness into His marvelous light," and a greater desire 
to render the service of love. Thus the various 
degrees of love are more clearly manifested and we 
trust will continue so to be until the end of the pilgrim 
journey to the heavenly city— meekness, gentleness, 
patience, brotherly kindness, Love. As these graces 
more and more abound and display themselves, they 
give evidence that larger and yet larger numbers are 
being polished and "made meet for the inheritance of 
the saints"; for an abundant entrance shall be ministered 
unto such into the everlasting Kingdom of our 
Lord and Savior. 



R4041 : page 239 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED 

Question.— Please explain Romans 6:7: "For he that 
is dead is freed from sin." 

Answer.— The Apostle is not here speaking of original 
sin— the transgression which brought the death 
penalty upon the race: he is addressing those who had 
passed from death unto life through Christ, and who 
now, at the time of his writing, were New Creatures in 
Christ Jesus. He is representing sin as the great taskmaster 
which previously held them in slavery to wickedness, 
and he exhorts them now to consider themselves 
as though they had gotten free from that slavery 
to the taskmaster in as full and complete a sense as a 
slave would be free from his master if he died. You 
will notice this thought running through the discourse 
of this chapter, as for instance in verses 12,14,16,17,18, 
and this is explained to be figurative language in 
verse 19. 

It will be noticed that this is not a question of sin 
having dominion over the New Creature, but a question 
of sin still having dominion over the flesh, the 
earthen vessel. Carrying on the same argument, the 
Apostle says (8:10), "If Christ be in you the body is 
dead because of sin, but the spirit is alive because of 
righteousness." Then he exhorts that it be not satisfactory 
to us merely to count our bodies dead to sin, 



so that we will not permit them to serve sin, but that 
the new mind in us shall take control and actuate these 
mortal bodies, and make of them servants of the new 
mind, servants of righteousness, servants of Christ. 
He assures us that the Spirit of God which was powerful 
enough to raise our Lord Jesus actually from the 
dead is powerful enough, if we lay hold of it properly, 
to permit such a quickening of our mortal bodies to 
newness of life. 

Man can pay his penalty in death; but when the 
penalty has been inflicted to the full there is nothing of 
man left: hence it means his utter and everlasting destruction. 
To suppose anything left after the penalty 
had been inflicted, would be to suppose some part of 
him that had not been condemned; but we know that the 
language of Genesis is, "Thou shalt surely die," 
and that the law was stated to be, "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die." We see, then, that nothing of the 
man, nothing of the being, is exempted from the penalty, 
and so long as the man lay under the penalty he 
could have no right to life to all eternity. 

There is no provision for a second life except 
through a redemption accomplished by our Lord Jesus 
—the work being finished at Calvary, and subsequently 
accepted of the Father, and his acceptance manifested 
by the outpouring of the holy Spirit at Pentecost. But 
God did not deal with the man to acquit him. God 
merely passes the man as a purchased possession over 
to the care of his Redeemer, Jesus,— Justice giving to 
Jesus a full title to the man, and all the rights, etc., 
which he ever enjoyed. 

You will perceive that this gives the man no rights 
of his own, but commits all things to the Son. We 
must therefore inquire of the Son how he proposes to 
deal with the purchased possession. Briefly we understand 
the testimony of the Word to be that the Son, 
during the Millennial Age, will judge the world by, 
through and in conjunction with his elect Church, and 
that all shall have the opportunity of coming up to human 
perfection under the chastisements and disciplines 
of the Millennial Age, and that failing to improve these 
blessed opportunities they will be cut off in the Second 
Death. Some of the Scriptures bearing upon the subject 
would seem to imply punishment for misdeeds of 
the present life— but we believe only for such misdeeds 
as were committed against some degree of light, or 
against some of the children of light. Those who had 
no knowledge whatever of the divine arrangement in 
Christ could have no responsibility in the sense of 
meriting special punishment, because they were under 
the original condemnation, and their personal responsibility 
under the New Covenant could only begin when 
they came to some degree of knowledge respecting it. 
However, we can readily see that to whatever extent 
any violate the laws of nature, they degrade themselves; 
and that every step downward in the present life, will 



require effort to retrace it during the Millennial Age. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY 