Who Will Lead Mankind to Peace?
DOES the fact that humans cannot bring peace mean that we will never see peace? No. Just as Satan, who is more powerful than we are, is the ultimate obstacle to peace on earth, so there is One even more powerful than Satan who will finally lead mankind to peace. The Bible, which tells about Satan, also tells of this One. It says: “The princely rule will come to be upon his shoulder. And his name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace.” (Isaiah 9:6, 7) Who is this Prince of Peace? None other than Jesus Christ, and he can bring peace because he is far more qualified than we are. In what ways?
More Than Human Qualifications
For one thing, Jesus is not mortal, subject to death. True, he lived as a man and died a sacrificial death. But then he was resurrected to immortal heavenly life, and it is in this condition that he becomes the Prince of Peace. That is why a prophecy says: “There will be no end of his kingdom.” (Luke 1:32, 33) Unlike the Oriental emperor Aśoka, Jesus will live unendingly to ensure that his good work is not ruined by inferior successors.
Moreover, Jesus is untainted by sin. His rulership is based on godly wisdom and right principles. The prophet Isaiah foretold: “Upon him the spirit of Jehovah must settle down, the spirit of wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of counsel and of mightiness, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah . . . He will not judge by any mere appearance to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to the thing heard by his ears. And with righteousness he must judge the lowly ones.” (Isaiah 11:2-4) Unlike Europeans of an earlier age, Jesus will not preserve peace at home only to wage war in foreign lands. Under him, peace will be universal.
Further, Jesus has the power to bring peace. The prophecy says: “The spirit of Jehovah . . . , the spirit of counsel and of mightiness,” is upon him. This spirit was behind the creation of the universe as well as all the powerful works of righteousness reported in the Bible. Even the great opposer, Satan, has no weapons that will successfully counter the force of God’s spirit.
The Steps to Peace
How will Jesus lead mankind to peace? You may be surprised to know that he has already started. In the prophetic book of Revelation, Jesus is seen receiving from God kingship in a heavenly Kingdom. (Revelation 11:15) If we closely examine the Bible’s prophecies and compare them with events in our century, we see that Jesus’ enthronement as King took place in heaven back in 1914. (Matthew 24:3-42) That was a major step in bringing peace to the earth.
If that is the case, though, why did World War I break out in 1914? And why has our century seen worse wars than any other in history? Because the first act of the heavenly King was to banish Satan for all time from the heavens and cast him down to earth’s vicinity. The result? The prophecy says: “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.” (Revelation 12:7-12) The great wars of our century are related to the anger of Satan. But notice: Satan’s anger is for “a short period of time.” The crisis will soon be over!
Before it is, though, the Prince of Peace makes further vital preparations for peace. To begin with, mankind has to know of God’s purpose to bring peace through Christ. Correspondingly, Jesus prophesied that in our time “this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations.” (Matthew 24:14) In fulfillment of this, the good news is being preached today by Jehovah’s Witnesses in every corner of the globe.
Then, righthearted ones have to be educated in the ways of peace. The Bible promises: “All your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant.” (Isaiah 54:13) Millions of righthearted ones are receiving this education even now.
The Next Step
It is now almost time for another decisive step in the peace-making process. What is that? One that many know by name but of which few know the real purpose. The Bible calls it “the war of the great day of God the Almighty,” or Armageddon. (Revelation 16:14, 16) Many think of Armageddon as a nuclear war that will destroy civilization. On the contrary, it is a direct act by Jesus, the Prince of Peace, to accomplish things that are vital to peace.
First, Armageddon will remove all human obstacles to peace. The prophecy at Psalm 37:10 says: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more; and you will certainly give attention to his place, and he will not be.” Yes, Jesus will remove “the wicked one”​—the warmakers, the criminals, the terrorists, as well as all those who refuse to accept the great Prince of Peace—​from the earthly scene. They will have no further right to continue living on this planet.​—Revelation 19:19-21.
Second, at Armageddon this prophecy of Daniel will be fulfilled: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Daniel 2:44) The national divisions that have so often led to war will be dissolved. Finally, there will be a world government under a ruler we can trust!
When will Armageddon come? The Bible does not say. But world events in fulfillment of prophecy indicate that it will be very soon. The Bible clearly foretells an event that will be an immediate precursor. The apostle Paul says: “Whenever it is that they are saying: ‘Peace and security!’ then sudden destruction is to be instantly upon them.” (1 Thessalonians 5:3) Then, immediately after the sudden destruction that climaxes with Armageddon, the greatest obstacle to peace will be removed. Satan’s “short period of time” will be over, and he will be put in a situation where he can no longer cause trouble here on earth. (Revelation 20:1-3) What a relief!
A World at Peace
Picture the situation at that time. The psalmist prophesied: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.” (Psalm 37:11) These meek ones will continue to fulfill the beautiful prophecy of Isaiah: “They will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”​—Isaiah 2:4.
At last, for the first time since Eden, all living humans will enjoy the blessing of Jehovah God, and he will fulfill his promise: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:3, 4.
A Solid Hope
Who, then, will lead mankind to peace? Jesus Christ, the appointed Prince of Peace. Is this a practical hope for us today? Well, if the Bible’s promises were not reliable, there would be no real hope for peace. Men would continue to fight and kill one another with no end in sight. But the Bible is reliable, and God’s Kingdom under Christ will bring peace. We encourage you to listen to the good news of the Kingdom that Jehovah’s Witnesses bring to your home and see this for yourself. Then, when the time comes, may you be among the meek ones who will inherit the earth and delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
The hope for peace discussed in this article is from the Bible. Today, when many no longer believe in the Bible, you may question whether this hope is practical. Jehovah’s Witnesses firmly believe that it is. They accept the Bible as the inspired Word of God, hence as completely trustworthy. In 1989 they published a book entitled The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? presenting many proofs of this fact. Some of the information in that book is discussed in the following two articles, which we invite you to read.
More information about the Bible’s promise of peace will appear in the article “World Peace​—What Will It Really Mean?” that will be published in the April 15, 1990, issue of The Watchtower.
[Blurb on page 8]
Only Jesus has the qualifications to lead mankind to peace
[Blurb on page 9]
Today, the good news of the Kingdom is being preached in every corner of the globe

