Finding Personal Security
NO ONE wants to be insecure. Yet, there are ever so many things that work toward a loss of security. There are sickness, old age, family troubles, crime, violence and loneliness. There is also the insecurity that is brought on when those regarded as friends turn out to be disloyal, untrustworthy, or fail to help in time of need.
The threats to personal security are not diminishing in our time. Indeed, personal security is threatened now as never before. As U.S. News and World Report of September 25, 1967, said:
“Whether it be in areas of large population—like China, India or the Soviet Union—or in the smaller countries of Africa or Latin America or even in the ‘sophisticated’ United States, the quest for national contentment is plagued by friction, disorder and violence.”
Amid all this friction, disorder and violence, as well as the other kinds of difficulties, where can one turn for greater security? How can a person minimize the heartache that insecurity brings?
SOURCE OF GREATEST SECURITY
Whatever a person may undertake in life, he will improve his personal security by turning to the right source for guidance. And since it is God who created man and man’s mind, it is only He who can give true guidance that leads to the greatest personal security. In his Word, the Bible, God says: “My son, my law do not forget, and my commandments may your heart observe, because length of days and years of life and peace will be added to you. Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.”—Prov. 3:1, 2, 5, 6.
Yes, the key to the greatest personal security in these troubled times is this: Learn God’s laws and then live by them. God’s laws were established for man’s benefit. The closer a person comes to guiding his life by them, the greater the benefit and security he will receive. That this is the case can be testified to by hundreds of thousands of persons throughout the world who associate together in an organization based on God’s laws and principles. These are Jehovah’s witnesses. They believe in God, obey his laws, and associate together for their upbuilding in a unified organization made up of over 25,000 congregations in 197 different lands world wide. They enjoy a security the rest of the world does not have.
WHAT OTHERS SAY
It is not presumptuous for those who obey Jehovah’s laws to say that they enjoy greater security. Impartial observers say the same thing. Note what one writer who is not one of Jehovah’s witnesses said about a recent assembly of theirs held in Asheville, North Carolina:
“These days when all we hear or see are news items about rioting, looting and hate propaganda it is time to console ourselves with the balance of good tidings that are entered on the plus side of the ledger.
“I am referring particularly to the recent convocation of Jehovah’s witnesses that came to Asheville for a week early this month.
“The headquarters of the gathering was in the City Auditorium—George Vanderbilt Hotel buildings. I was inadvertently treated to a grandstand seat for observing the activities of these wonderful people on account of our office location directly across the street from the two buildings. . . .
“Never was there a policeman in sight. There were no raucous noises, no disturbances and no altercations.
“People stood patiently in long thick queues at mealtime of each of the three meals served daily.
“The order was perfect and there was no obscene shouting. Remember there were at times as many as seven thousand people around the headquarters—a good many of them colored.
“There was NO litter about. . . . Undoubtedly they were motivated by the Spirit of Good Will towards humanity.”—Asheville Citizen, July 26, 1967.
This man observed a society of people from all walks of life, from all races, being motivated by God’s laws. They were also guided by God’s powerful holy spirit, as his spirit accompanies those obeying his laws. And where the spirit of God operates, this will be the result: “The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control.”—Gal. 5:22, 23.
Throughout the world it is the same. For instance, in Sweden during an assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses, the Stockholm newspaper Expressen commented:
“Nowhere are things so peaceful and decent as at the tent city of Jehovah’s witnesses. The happy and cheerful witnesses don’t get drunk, they don’t smoke.”
Toward the end of that assembly, the chief of police remarked:
“We are sorry that you have to take down your fine installations and that all of these nice, happy people will be disappearing from our vicinity.”
In Jerusalem, a tour director said of Jehovah’s witnesses: “This was the largest group that any tourist agency in Jerusalem ever handled. And it was the only group that I have ever worked with that did not give me even one complaint.”
When tens of thousands of Jehovah’s witnesses gathered in Manila, the Philippines, the editor-in-chief of the Evening News noted all the work necessary for their assembly and said:
“Not one of them thought of asking for pay. If Catholics could show the same unity of spirit, if they could participate in a community effort with the same zeal and dedication that the Witnesses are demonstrating, think of the world of good that they could do!”
Yes, truly Bible-based Christianity is the same the world over. It does not matter if those who practice it live in Europe, Africa, Asia, the Americas or anywhere else. They all worship in exactly the same way. They have the same high principles. They have the same personal security and happiness.
HOW POSSIBLE
How is it possible for so many persons to live in this way while the rest of the world is in turmoil? (Luke 21:25, 26) It is because these all have turned to the only source of security, the Creator of man, Jehovah God. He knows best how man should organize and operate a society. He knows best what will make people secure and happy.
This security is based on the accurate knowledge of God found in his Word, the Bible. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) And today God makes this right knowledge available to searching, sincere persons, enabling them to come into a secure position. The prophet Isaiah foretold just this for our day when he said: “‘Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, . . . and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.’ . . . And he will certainly render judgment among the nations and set matters straight respecting many peoples.”—Isa. 2:3, 4.
Those who turn to the instruction that comes from Jehovah gain great security. They learn to trust God. They listen to him as he speaks from his Word, the Holy Scriptures. They understand clearly what they need to do to gain security, and they do it. They have the same attitude as the first-century Christians who said: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) By obeying God as ruler they come under his guidance, as well as under his protection. He leads them to organize their affairs in the right way. Their thinking and activity are correctly channeled by God’s holy spirit, his invisible active force, much like a radar beam guides an aircraft to its correct destination. And only those who obey God as ruler benefit in this way from his spirit: “The holy spirit . . . God has given to those obeying him as ruler.”—Acts 5:32.
That is why worldly societies, organizations, political parties and religions do not have security and are in agonizing confusion today. They are not really obeying God as ruler, so they do not have God’s guidance and blessing. Their condition, in contrast to that of God’s servants, the Bible foretold in these words: “Look! My own servants will cry out joyfully because of the good condition of the heart, but you yourselves will make outcries because of the pain of heart and you will howl because of sheer breakdown of spirit.”—Isa. 65:14.
IN EVERY ENDEAVOR
By obeying God as ruler in all endeavors of life, true Christians gain great security. For example, God’s law says to “love your neighbor as yourself.” (Matt. 22:39) Thus, God’s servants will not commit acts of violence or destruction. Instead, they learn loving, constructive, security-building ways that can help others. That is why among them is being fulfilled the well-known prophecy of Isaiah that says: “They will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war any more.”—Isa. 2:4.
Obeying God as ruler can also bring better health. How is this so? Because by adhering to God’s laws one avoids heavy drinking, smoking, immoderate eating, immorality, drug addiction and other practices that damage one’s health. And by associating with those who also obey God as ruler, an individual is not in the kind of company that leads to health-damaging practices. So by obeying God’s laws a person is more likely to enjoy better health than those who give way to unrestrained appetites.
True, we are all still subject to sickness and old age. Yet, here too there is greater security among those obeying God as ruler. God’s laws instruct them to provide materially and spiritually for the sick and aged, so those needing assistance and encouragement are not ignored by their families. (1 Tim. 5:4, 8) Such sick and aged ones are also lovingly assisted by their many Christian brothers who provide association and encouragement for them. This is something that they really do.
Then there is the greater security that comes in family life when married couples obey God as ruler. When problems arise they both turn to the same unerring principles in God’s Word for guidance. They appreciate that it is God who originated marriage and that he gives the best counsel for happiness in it. And for those contemplating marriage, God’s Word counsels: “Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers”; marry “only in the Lord.” (2 Cor. 6:14; 1 Cor. 7:39) Marrying only someone who also obeys God as ruler vastly increases the prospects for marital security and happiness. Indeed, it is the way to the greatest happiness in marriage. So because they build their marriages in harmony with God’s Word there is not the same rising tide of family breakups among Jehovah’s witnesses as there is in the world.
Also, there is added security in having friends you can really trust, true friends who come to your aid in time of need, friends who have your best interests at heart. Those who obey God as ruler are such kinds of friends. Since they obey God’s laws regarding honesty, morality and personal integrity, they will not be stealing, committing immorality, getting drunk, or abandoning friends in time of need. They have a genuine love for their fellowman and will not be motivated by selfish interests. And when newly interested ones associate with them, Jehovah’s witnesses assist them to appreciate that ungodly conduct is not permitted among God’s people. These new ones are patiently aided to bring their lives into harmony with Scriptural principles. Thus, God’s high standards of personal behavior are always maintained. What a great feeling of security comes from being among people who obey God as ruler!
EVEN GREATER SECURITY AHEAD
There is even greater security to come in the near future. Soon, the things that interfere with personal security, including this violent system of things that is so filled with wickedness, will be eliminated. God has guaranteed to bring these things to an end within our generation! (Matt. 24:34) Sickness, old-age infirmities, death inherited from Adam and wickedness will become things of the past. Those who obey God as ruler will enjoy life in a new system of things. And in that new system the Bible promises that God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be any more. The former things have passed away.” (Rev. 21:3, 4) Thus, with everything that tends to cause insecurity taken out of the way, those who obey God as ruler will be able to enjoy perfect security in a righteous new order that will endure forever.
Security now, and the even greater security to come in God’s new system, can be yours. It can be realized by learning what God requires and then by doing it. God’s sure promise to those who do is: “As for the one listening to me, he will reside in security and be undisturbed from dread of calamity.”—Prov. 1:33.

