From Our Readers
Response to First Person Account  Thank you so much for the heartrending story of Larry Rubin, “No Longer a Rock or an Island.” (November 22, 1994) Many often fail to make allowance for those who have suffered in the past. My own son once told me that if I truly had faith, I would not be anxious! But not everyone can just leave the past behind. Please continue to feature human experiences of this sort. I pray it will soften some hearts.
M. L., Britain
I struggle for words to express my thanks. So often we encounter ones who have been scarred by past abuses. Helping them to function within the congregation and to develop a relationship with Jehovah is a formidable challenge. The article showed that it is possible for such ones to learn to feel love and trust.
J. D., Canada 
I have been a Christian for 25 years now. I’ve served God faithfully with my brain, but my heart has felt like it was encased in solid concrete. I grew up in an alcoholic family and suffered beatings, sexual abuse, and other traumas. Jehovah has done so much for me, but I cannot feel love for him. Larry Rubin’s story gave me a flicker of hope that maybe, just maybe, I will one day be able to cry about my past and have feelings. Maybe I’ll also get what Larry Rubin now has​—love, trust, and acceptance.
A. F., United States
Some previous life stories have been about people who seemed to be supermen​—fearless, without internal conflicts, without weakness. Larry Rubin’s story was told from a different angle. He was frank and exposed his intimate feelings. Life stories of this kind are real to us because they are about things that happen in our own lives.
F. D. S., Brazil
Rh Factor  It is truly commendable how Awake! treats such controversial subjects. In the article “The Rh Factor and You” (December 8, 1994), the approach taken was not that of a religious fanatic. The subject was handled with scientific accuracy, using up-​to-​date medical terminology, yet in terms that were clear and understandable. It disproves the charge that Jehovah’s Witnesses are blind fanatics who place no value on human life.
I. R., Germany
I am pregnant, and my doctor told me I needed a shot to prevent me from building antibodies against my baby’s blood. I knew nothing about the Rh factor and didn’t object. When I later learned that the shot is made from blood, I was scared that I might have violated God’s law on blood. Your article helped me by explaining that taking the shot is ultimately a conscience matter.
C. W., United States
Talking About Religion  Though I was raised as a Christian, I am very shy about participating fully in the public preaching work, especially around my schoolmates. The advice you gave in the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Talk About God?” (September 22, 1994) reminded me of the importance of that work. I will take to heart your encouragement to become adequately qualified as a teacher of God’s Word.
K. K., Nigeria
I am 12 years of age, and I have really been ashamed to say that I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I hoped that my schoolmates would not see me in field service. The article helped me to see that I am not the only one who has had to deal with this problem, and it helped me overcome these feelings of shame.
M. V. S., Brazil

