From Our Readers
Sex Education  I am writing to thank you sincerely for your articles on “Sex Education​—Who Should Give It?” (February 22, 1992) I have two children and had never spoken to them about this matter. I never received such an education myself, and I did not know what to tell them or how to do it. But after I read those articles, I had a separate conversation with each child. It was an enjoyable experience, one no parent should miss out on.
M. A. P., Spain
This article was not shocking but clearly and respectfully explained how we can educate our children. Thank you for helping me appreciate that I had neglected doing so. I corrected matters, thanks to this wonderful article.
V. B., France
I am a 25-​year-​old woman who has now come to appreciate the Bible’s view on sexual morality. The so-​called pleasure of fornication is not worth the inevitable loss of peace of mind. Even though I am no longer a child or a teenager, I felt as if I learned valuable lessons from the articles.
S. H., United States
I have never read anything like it in all my life. It is extraordinary that you taught how to give sex education to children while, at the same time, helping them to have high moral values.
N. C., Italy
I am the mother of two teenage daughters. I have been able to have wonderful discussions with them about all aspects of sex. But I am also a mother of two young boys, ages 11 and 9. While I have discussed sex in a general way with them, I have not discussed the bodily changes that they will experience. Just this afternoon your wonderful magazine came in the mail. It will help me in dealing with both of my sons.
P. W., Australia
As a young girl, I benefited very much from reading this magazine. My parents did not know how to give us appropriate sex education. With Jehovah’s help, I’ve avoided deviating from God’s moral standards. Still, I hope this article helps parents who have not yet talked to their children about sexual matters.
A. M., Mexico
Your suggestion that sex education be considered a “family secret” could accidentally result in great difficulty for some of your readers. Social workers, teachers, nurses, and other professionals are now trained to watch for signs of child abuse. The word “secret” when used by a child is one such sign, inasmuch as many sex abusers tell children to keep the abuse a secret.
E. R. N., United States
Quite a few readers called this to our attention, and we are sorry if we caused any alarm among readers sensitive to the issue of child abuse. We believe it is a point well taken. To avoid possible misunderstandings, it might be best if parents described sexual matters as being “private” instead of “secret.”​—ED.

