“Wake Up, World!”
WITH this startling opening-​page title, Awake! was born, August 22, 1946. Its circulation then was less than 500,000 each issue in ten languages. Today, over 13 million are published in 67 languages. But why was this magazine published in the first place? How is it designed to help you, the reader, in your daily life?
Awake! was the successor to the Consolation magazine (1937) and its predecessor, The Golden Age (1919). Why was the Golden Age originally thought to be necessary as a companion to the Watch Tower journal 73 years ago?
The first issue of The Golden Age, October 1, 1919, stated: “The nations are in distress politically, financially and socially. Daily problems are arising, the solving of which seems beyond the power of human ingenuity.” Another timely comment was: “Everywhere the cost of living mounts higher and higher and conditions of real want and famine stare many people in the face.” Remarkably, do we not face these same predicaments today?
The publishers of Awake!, while focusing on problems afflicting the world, point to the only true and permanent remedy​—righteous rulership over mankind by means of God’s Kingdom government in the hands of the resurrected Christ Jesus. Both the Hebrew and the Christian Greek Scriptures prophesy of the time when there will be “new heavens and a new earth,” that is, a new spiritual rulership over a new human society here on earth. (Isaiah 65:17; 2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21:1-4) While covering secular events and fields of knowledge, Awake! continues to point discreetly to God’s remedy for mankind’s suffering. On a regular basis, it helps its readers to cope with the stresses of daily life.
Among other things, Awake! brings refreshment to those who are depressed and have been abused by this satanic system in which we live. We can truthfully say, as did that 1946 issue: “Here, then, is a magazine of the highest educational value for all sincere and upright people of all races, creeds and nationalities.” If you would like more information about this magazine, please contact Jehovah’s Witnesses at a Kingdom Hall near you, or write the publishers of this magazine. See page 5 for information.

