
April
Sunday, April 1

You who were once alienated and enemies because your minds were on the works that were wicked, he has now reconciled by means of that one’s fleshly body through his death.​—Col. 1:21, 22.



We have the responsibility to make known to our fellow humans that they can come into a friendly relationship with their Creator. Before humans exercise faith in Jesus’ sacrifice, God considers them to be his enemies. The apostle John wrote: “The one who exercises faith in the Son has everlasting life; the one who disobeys the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God remains upon him.” (John 3:36) Happily, Christ’s sacrifice makes reconciliation with God possible. (2 Cor. 5:18-20) We share in teaching people spiritual truth, helping them to develop a personal relationship with Jehovah. This is an important part of our preaching work. w16.07 4:8-10



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 14)  John 19:1-42


Monday, April 2

Let your name be sanctified.​—Matt. 6:9.



Jesus mentioned the sanctification of God’s name as the first request in his model prayer. Since Jehovah is holy, all principles and laws that originate with him are holy. In spite of this, in the garden of Eden, Satan slyly questioned God’s right to set standards for humans. By lying about Jehovah, Satan slandered God’s sacred name. (Gen. 3:1-5) Jesus, on the other hand, truly loved the name of Jehovah. (John 17:25, 26) Jesus contributed to the sanctification of the divine name. (Ps. 40:8-10) By his perfect life course on earth, Jesus proved that it is reasonable and righteous for Jehovah to set standards for his intelligent creatures. By being loyal to his heavenly Father until death, Jesus proved that a perfect human could maintain perfect obedience to God’s righteous standards. w17.02 2:2-4



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 15)  Matthew 27:62-66  (Events after sunset: Nisan 16)  John 20:1


Tuesday, April 3

To the Lamb be . . . the honor and the glory.​—Rev. 5:13.



The Lamb is Jesus Christ, “the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.” (John 1:29) The Bible tells us that he is far superior to all men who are or have been kings. It explains: “He is the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords, the one alone having immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen or can see.” (1 Tim. 6:14-16) Indeed, what other king has ever voluntarily died as a ransom for our sins? Do you not feel moved to join with myriads of heavenly creatures in proclaiming: “The Lamb who was slaughtered is worthy to receive the power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing.” (Rev. 5:12) Honoring Jehovah and Christ is not optional. Our everlasting life depends on our doing so.​—Ps. 2:11, 12; John 5:23. w17.03 1:3, 4



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 16)  John 20:2-18


Wednesday, April 4

If you bring me back . . . , then I will indeed become your leader!​—Judg. 11:9.



Jephthah’s thorough grasp of Israel’s history gave him a clear picture of what was right and what was wrong in Jehovah’s eyes. (Judg. 11:12-27) Godly principles that were embedded in the Mosaic Law molded Jephthah’s thinking as well as his heart. He knew that Jehovah disapproved of holding grudges; rather, God required that His people love one another. The Law also taught that a person must not ignore the needs of others, even of someone who “hates” him. (Ex. 23:5; Lev. 19:17, 18) Examples of faithful ones like Joseph, who showed mercy to his brothers​—even though “they began to hate him”—​may also have influenced Jephthah’s response. (Gen. 37:4; 45:4, 5) Meditating on such examples would have helped Jephthah to choose a course of action that was pleasing to Jehovah. The conduct of his brothers no doubt hurt him deeply, but he would not hold back from serving Jehovah and His people.​—Judg. 11:1-3. w16.04 1:8, 9




Thursday, April 5

They continued devoting themselves . . . to associating together.​—Acts 2:42.



Jehovah’s people have always treasured occasions to meet together. Immediately after the Christian congregation was formed, followers of Jesus began “devoting themselves . . . to associating together.” You likely share their desire to attend congregation meetings regularly. Nevertheless, all Christians face obstacles. Secular work, a busy schedule, or fatigue because of our daily routine can make it difficult to attend meetings. Appreciating the value of the meetings can motivate us to try to overcome these obstacles and maintain a healthy pattern of meeting attendance. Granted, some of our fellow believers are unable to attend meetings regularly because of circumstances beyond their control, such as serious illness. Elders may assist these infirm ones to benefit from spiritual programs, perhaps by helping them to tie in by telephone hookup or by recording the meetings for them. w16.04 3:3




Friday, April 6

Take courage! I have conquered the world.​—John 16:33.



The examples of faithful servants of Jehovah can give us the wisdom and strength we need to endure. For instance, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refused to worship an image representing the Babylonian State. (Dan. 3:16-18) Reading about their determination has given Witnesses today the courage to refuse to worship the flag of the nation in which they live. Also, Jesus stayed completely separate from the political and social conflicts of the world. Noting the effect that his example would have on others, he urged his disciples to “take courage.” Support also comes from the brothers and sisters in your congregation. Members of the congregation will encourage you if they are aware of the challenges you are facing. Ask them to pray in your behalf. Of course, if we want our brothers to support us and pray for us, we should do the same for them.​—Matt. 7:12. w16.04 4:16, 18




Saturday, April 7

Your people will offer themselves willingly.​—Ps. 110:3.



What is the record of Jehovah’s Witnesses regarding collections? Their work is supported by voluntary donations. (2 Cor. 9:7) No collections are taken at their Kingdom Halls or conventions. Yet, in 2015 alone, Jehovah’s Witnesses spent 1.93 billion hours in preaching the good news and conducting free of charge over nine million Bible studies each month. Amazingly, not only do they go unpaid for their work but they also gladly cover their own expenses. When speaking of the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses, one researcher stated: “The main goal is preaching and teaching. . . . There is no clergy, which cuts costs considerably.” What, then, is our motive for doing this work? Put simply, we do this work of our own volition because we love Jehovah and we love our neighbor. This willing spirit is in fulfillment of the prophecy found in today’s text. w16.05 2:9




Sunday, April 8

The wisdom from above is first of all pure, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits.​—Jas. 3:17.



Being aware of this, we should be moved to reject entertainment that fuels impure thoughts and inclinations. Perceptive Christians do not need to ask whether it is acceptable to be entertained by a certain book, movie, or game that features what Jehovah hates. His mind on such matters is made clear in his Word. Many matters could be decided one way or another, and Jehovah would still be pleased. In the case of weighty decisions, though, it is sometimes advisable to seek counsel from the elders or the advice of other experienced Christians. (Titus 2:3-5; Jas. 5:13-15) Of course, it would be inappropriate to ask others to make a decision for us. Christians must train and exercise their powers of discernment. (Heb. 5:14) All of us should act in accord with Paul’s inspired words: “Each one will carry his own load of responsibility.”​—Gal. 6:5, ftn. w16.05 3:15, 16




Monday, April 9

I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man.​—1 Tim. 1:13.



When Jehovah observes humans, he does not pay attention to outward appearances. Rather, he examines the heart, the inner person. (1 Sam. 16:7b) This fact was amply demonstrated when God formed the Christian congregation. He drew to himself and his Son many individuals who from a human standpoint might have seemed to be undesirable. (John 6:44) One such person was a Pharisee named Saul. “The examiner of hearts,” however, did not see Saul as useless clay. (Prov. 17:3) Instead, God saw that he could be molded into a desirable vessel​—in fact, “a chosen vessel” to bear witness “to the nations as well as to kings and the sons of Israel.” (Acts 9:15) Others whom God saw as potential vessels “for an honorable use” included former drunkards, immoral people, and thieves. (Rom. 9:21; 1 Cor. 6:9-11) As they gained accurate knowledge of God’s Word and expressed faith, they allowed Jehovah to mold them. w16.06 1:4




Tuesday, April 10

Look! As the clay in the hand of the potter, so are you in my hand.​—Jer. 18:6.



God’s provisions to help us remain like soft clay include his Word, the Christian congregation, and the field ministry. As water softens clay, daily Bible reading and meditation can help us be malleable in Jehovah’s hands. Jehovah required that the kings of Israel write for themselves a copy of God’s Law and read it daily. (Deut. 17:18, 19) The apostles realized that reading the Scriptures and meditating on them was essential for their ministry. They quoted from and referred to the Hebrew Scriptures hundreds of times in their writings and encouraged the people to whom they preached to do the same. (Acts 17:11) Today, we too see the importance of reading God’s Word daily and prayerfully meditating on it. (1 Tim. 4:15) Doing so helps us to remain humble before Jehovah and be malleable in his hands. w16.06 2:10




Wednesday, April 11

By this all will know that you are my disciples​—if you have love among yourselves.​—John 13:35.



This proved especially important in recent history when the nations engaged in deadly wars on a shocking scale. For instance, some 55 million people were killed in World War II alone. However, Jehovah’s Witnesses did not participate in that global slaughter. (Mic. 4:1, 3) This has helped them to remain “clean from the blood of all men.” (Acts 20:26) The progress of God’s people is taking place in a very hostile world, which the Bible says is controlled by Satan, “the god of this system of things.” (2 Cor. 4:4) He manipulates the political elements of this world, as he does the world’s mass media. But he cannot stop the preaching of the good news. However, knowing that he has only a short time left, Satan tries to turn people away from true worship, and he uses various means to do so.​—Rev. 12:12. w16.06 4:3, 4




Thursday, April 12

Take a lesson from the lilies of the field.​—Matt. 6:28.



Jesus turns our attention to Jehovah’s handiwork. We can learn a lot from the appearance of “the lilies of the field.” Jesus may have had in mind such lilylike flowers as gladiolus, hyacinths, irises, and tulips​—all beautiful in their own way. These creations do not have to spin thread and sew or weave garments for themselves. Yet, their blooms are gorgeous to behold! Why, “not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these”! Do not miss the point of what Jesus is saying: “If this is how God clothes the vegetation of the field . . . , will he not much rather clothe you, you with little faith?” (Matt. 6:29, 30) Most assuredly he will! Jesus’ disciples, though, were somewhat lacking in faith. (Matt. 8:26; 14:31; 16:8; 17:20) They needed stronger faith and trust in Jehovah. What about us? How strong is our faith in Jehovah’s desire and ability to provide for us? w16.07 1:15, 16




Friday, April 13

To the extent that each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another as fine stewards of God’s undeserved kindness.​—1 Pet. 4:10.



Whatever the nature of the trials we may face in life, Jehovah can enable us to cope with them. (1 Pet. 1:6) There will always be an expression of God’s kindness that will match each trial. The various expressions of Jehovah’s kindness result in our receiving many blessings. One of them is being forgiven of our sins. Because of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, we have our sins forgiven, provided we repent and continue to put up a hard fight against our sinful inclinations. (1 John 1:8, 9) God’s mercy should fill us with gratitude and move us to glorify him. Paul stated: “[Jehovah] rescued us from the authority of the darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of his beloved Son, by means of whom we have our release by ransom, the forgiveness of our sins.” (Col. 1:13, 14) Being forgiven of our sins opens the door to many other wonderful blessings. w16.07 3:7-9




Saturday, April 14

He will crush your head.​—Gen. 3:15.



Despite what Satan did in Eden, Jehovah held out hope for mankind in the first Bible prophecy. God would send one who would “crush” the Devil and provide the means for obedient mankind to enjoy the prospect that the first human pair lost​—that of living forever on the earth in keeping with Jehovah’s original purpose. (John 3:16) The rebellion of Adam and Eve had an impact on their marriage and on all marriages thereafter. For example, Eve and her female descendants would experience much pain during pregnancy and childbirth. Women would have a longing for their husbands, but men would dominate their wives, even abusively, as we see in many marriages today. (Gen. 3:16) The Bible requires that husbands exercise headship in a loving way. In turn, wives are to submit to the headship of their husbands. (Eph. 5:33) Because of cooperation between God-fearing mates, situations that cause friction are kept to a minimum or eliminated entirely. w16.08 1:6, 7




Sunday, April 15

Wife, how do you know whether you will save your husband? Or, husband, how do you know whether you will save your wife?​—1 Cor. 7:16.



In some cases, a Christian is married to one who is not yet a servant of Jehovah. Under those circumstances, the Bible gives good reasons why they should remain together. (1 Cor. 7:12-14) Whether the unbelieving mate realizes it or not, he or she is “sanctified” because of being married to a believer. Any children born to them are considered “holy” and thus have a standing with God. Nearly every congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses has married couples in which the Christian has been instrumental in ‘saving’ his or her mate. The apostle Peter counsels Christian wives to be in subjection to their husbands, “so that if any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives, because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with deep respect.”​—1 Pet. 3:1-4. w16.08 2:14, 15




Monday, April 16

Love one another intensely from the heart.​—1 Pet. 1:22.



Bible accounts highlight the privilege we have of showing “brotherly affection” and serving one another. (Luke 22:24-27) The Son of God gave everything, including his life, in ministering to others. (Matt. 20:28) Dorcas “abounded in good deeds and gifts of mercy.” (Acts 9:36, 39) Mary, a sister in Rome, “worked hard” in behalf of those in the congregation. (Rom. 16:6) How can we help new ones grasp the importance of helping their brothers and sisters? Mature Witnesses can invite new ones to come along when visiting the sick and the elderly. If appropriate, parents can take their children on such visits. Elders can work with others in making sure that our dear older ones have good food and that their homes are maintained. In these ways, younger ones and those newly associated learn to perform acts of kindness for others and to appreciate that all in the congregation should feel loved.​—Rom. 12:10. w16.08 4:13, 14




Tuesday, April 17

This is the one hearing the word and getting the sense of it, who really does bear fruit.​—Matt. 13:23.



A young sister in France said: “Teachers in my school are quite astonished that there are students who still believe in the Bible.” As a young servant of Jehovah or as someone learning about Him, do you feel under pressure to conform to popular beliefs, such as evolution, rather than believe in a Creator? If so, there are steps you can take to strengthen your faith and keep it strong. One step is for you to use your God-given thinking ability, which “will keep watch over you.” It will protect you from secular philosophies that could destroy your faith. (Prov. 2:10-12) Genuine faith is based on accurate knowledge about God. (1 Tim. 2:4) So as you study God’s Word and our Christian publications, do not just skim over the material. Use your thinking ability so that you ‘get the sense’ of what you read. w16.09 4:1-3




Wednesday, April 18

Keep conquering the evil with the good.​—Rom. 12:21.



Even if we had a difficult childhood or if our present circumstances seem hopeless, we need to keep contending and persevering. We can trust that if we do so, Jehovah will bless us. (Gen. 39:21-23) Think of a situation that you are facing and that may be a trial for you. Perhaps it is some type of injustice, prejudice, or ridicule. Or the trial you face may be that someone falsely accuses you, perhaps out of jealousy. Rather than drop your hands in defeat, remember what enabled Jacob, Rachel, and Joseph to continue serving Jehovah with joy. God strengthened and blessed them because they kept on showing deep appreciation for spiritual things. They kept on contending and acting in harmony with their earnest prayers. We are living close to the end of the present wicked system of things; thus, we have strong reason to hold on to the firm hope set before us! Are you willing to exert yourself to gain Jehovah’s favor? w16.09 2:8, 9




Thursday, April 19

The fruitage of the spirit is . . . faith.​—Gal. 5:22.



As parents, your example of faith is very important. Your children will observe what you do, and it certainly will affect them for the good. So as parents, keep building your own faith. Let your children see how real Jehovah is to you. When a couple in Bermuda have anxious moments, they pray with their children that Jehovah guide them, and they encourage their children to pray on their own. “We also tell our older daughter, ‘Have complete trust in Jehovah, keep busy in Kingdom service, and do not worry too much.’ When she sees the outcome, she knows that Jehovah is helping us. This has done wonders for her faith in God and in the Bible.” In the end, of course, children have to develop their own faith. As parents, you can plant and water. Only God can make it grow. (1 Cor. 3:6) So pray for his spirit, and work hard to teach your precious children, for by doing so, you give Jehovah much to bless.​—Eph. 6:4. w16.09 5:16-18




Friday, April 20

You must inculcate [these words] in your sons.​—Deut. 6:7.



After serving in a foreign-language field for over three years, Serge and his wife, Muriel, noticed that their 17-year-old son lacked joy in theocratic activities. “When we realized that this situation had hindered our son from making spiritual advancement,” explains Serge, “we decided to move back to our former congregation.” What factors might influence parents to move back? First, they should determine whether they really have enough time and resources to instill love for Jehovah in their children while at the same time teaching them a foreign tongue. Second, they may notice in their children a lack of interest in spiritual activities or in the foreign-language field in which they are serving. In such circumstances, Christian parents might consider moving back to a congregation that uses the language their children best understand until their children take a firm stand for the truth.​—Deut. 6:5-7. w16.10 2:14, 15




Saturday, April 21

By faith Noah, after receiving divine warning of things not yet seen, showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household.​—Heb. 11:7.



Without doubt, Noah’s neighbors must have asked him why he was building such a colossal structure. Did Noah keep quiet or tell them to mind their own business? By no means! His faith moved him to witness boldly and to warn his contemporaries of God’s coming judgment. Quite likely, Noah repeated to the people the exact words that Jehovah had spoken to him: “I have decided to put an end to all flesh, because the earth is full of violence on account of them . . . I am going to bring floodwaters upon the earth to destroy from under the heavens all flesh that has the breath of life. Everything on the earth will perish.” Also, Noah no doubt explained to the people the only means of escape, repeating God’s command: “You must go into the ark.” Thus, Noah further exercised his faith by being “a preacher of righteousness.”​—Gen. 6:13, 17, 18; 2 Pet. 2:5. w16.10 4:7




Sunday, April 22

It does not belong to man . . . to direct his step.​—Jer. 10:23.



Christian parents display loyalty to Jehovah by training their children according to his Word. Godly parents are not unduly influenced by local cultural views about child-rearing. The spirit of the world is unacceptable in a Christian home. (Eph. 2:2) A baptized Christian father will not think, ‘Well, in our country the women teach the children.’ The Bible is clear on this subject when it says: “Fathers, . . . go on bringing [your children] up in the discipline and admonition [instruction; guidance] of Jehovah.” (Eph. 6:4; ftn.) God-fearing fathers and mothers want their children to be like Samuel, for Jehovah was with him while he was growing up. (1 Sam. 3:19) Would it be wise to make important decisions about our family and our livelihood without first consulting the Bible? Of course not! We need our heavenly Father’s help because we are unable to direct our own steps. w16.11 3:14, 15




Monday, April 23

When I see your heavens, the works of your fingers, the moon and the stars that you have prepared, what is mortal man that you keep him in mind?​—Ps. 8:3, 4.



Creation proves that God is the incomparable Organizer. “Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom,” says the Bible. “He solidly established the heavens in discernment.” (Prov. 3:19) We know only “the fringes of [God’s] ways,” and “only a faint whisper has been heard of him.” (Job 26:14) Yet, the little we know about planets, stars, and galaxies moves us to acknowledge that these celestial bodies are superbly organized. Galaxies consist of millions of stars, all moving in space in an orderly way. Why, planets in our solar system travel in orbits around the sun as though they were humbly obeying traffic laws! Surely the mind-boggling order evident in the universe helps us to see that Jehovah, who “skillfully made the heavens” and the earth, deserves our praise, loyalty, and worship.​—Ps. 136:1, 5-9. w16.11 2:3




Tuesday, April 24

They will certainly become to Jehovah people presenting a gift offering in righteousness.​—Mal. 3:3.



Malachi 3:1-3 describes the time​—from 1914 to early 1919—​when the anointed “sons of Levi” would undergo a period of refinement. During that time, Jehovah God, “the true Lord,” accompanied by Jesus Christ, “the messenger of the covenant,” came to the spiritual temple to inspect those serving there. After receiving needed discipline, Jehovah’s cleansed people were ready to take up a further assignment of service. In 1919, a “faithful and discreet slave” was appointed to provide spiritual food to the household of faith. (Matt. 24:45) God’s people were now free of the influence of Babylon the Great. Since that time, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, his people have constantly been growing in knowledge of God’s will and in love for their heavenly Father. How grateful they are for his blessing! w16.11 5:14




Wednesday, April 25

“Test me out, please, . . .” Jehovah of armies says, “to see whether I will not open to you the floodgates of the heavens and pour out on you a blessing until there is nothing lacking.”​—Mal. 3:10.



We love Jehovah “because he first loved us.” (1 John 4:19) As one expression of his tender love, Jehovah has taken the initiative to bless his loyal servants. The more we love our God, the stronger our faith becomes, not only that he exists, but that he unfailingly rewards those whom he loves. (Heb. 11:6) Being a rewarder is an integral part of who Jehovah is and what he does. Our faith is not complete unless we are firmly convinced that God will reward those who earnestly seek him, for “faith is the assured expectation of what is hoped for.” (Heb. 11:1) Yes, faith involves the certain expectation of God’s promised blessings. As shown in today’s text, Jehovah invites us to reach out for his blessing. We show our deep appreciation and gratitude when we accept Jehovah’s generous offer. w16.12 4:1-3




Thursday, April 26

Setting the mind on the flesh means death.​—Rom. 8:6.



After serving God for years, a Christian could begin to set his or her mind on the things of the flesh. That does not refer to a Christian who occasionally thinks about food, employment, recreation, or even romance. Those are aspects of life for the average servant of God. Jesus enjoyed food, and he fed others. He saw the need for refreshment. And Paul wrote about the proper place for passion or intimacy within marriage. The Greek word that Paul used means “to set one’s mind or heart upon something, to employ one’s faculty for thoughtful planning, w[ith] the emphasis upon the underlying disposition or attitude.” Those who live according to the flesh allow their life course to be determined basically by their sinful human nature. One scholar says about that word at Romans 8:5: “They set their minds on​—are most deeply interested in, constantly talk about, engage and glory in—​the things pertaining to the flesh.” w16.12 2:5, 9, 10




Friday, April 27

Who are you to be judging your neighbor?​—Jas. 4:12.



Anyone can act immodestly if he allows himself temporarily to be overcome by fleshly desires. Selfish ambition, envy, and uncontrolled anger have led many to presumptuous acts. Bible characters like Absalom, Uzziah, and Nebuchadnezzar succumbed to such works of the flesh and were humbled by Jehovah for their presumptuousness. (2 Sam. 15:1-6; 18:9-17; 2 Chron. 26:16-21; Dan. 5:18-21) There are other reasons, though, why someone may act immodestly. Consider, for example, the following Bible accounts: Genesis 20:2-7 and Matthew 26:31-35. Were the seemingly presumptuous actions of Abimelech and Peter motivated by sinful desires? Or were these individuals simply unaware of all the facts, or were they caught off guard? Since we cannot read hearts, it is both wise and loving to avoid jumping to conclusions about other people’s motives. w17.01 3:9, 10




Saturday, April 28

She, out of her want, put in all the means of living she had.​—Luke 21:4.



Like the needy widow, many of our modern-day fellow believers trust that if they seek first the Kingdom, Jehovah will make sure that they have what they need. (Matt. 6:33) Consider a brother named Malcolm. Over the decades that he and his wife served Jehovah, they experienced ups and downs. “Life is unpredictable at times, uncertain, and even hard to deal with,” he said. “But Jehovah blesses those who lean on him.” Malcolm’s advice? “Pray to be as productive and as active in Jehovah’s service as you can be. Focus on what you can do, not on what you cannot do.” As this system of things goes “from bad to worse,” we can expect to face increasingly greater difficulties. (2 Tim. 3:1, 13) So it is more important than ever that we do not allow ourselves to be paralyzed by such challenges. Rather, we need to cultivate strong trust in Jehovah while taking whatever appropriate action we can. w17.01 1:17-19




Sunday, April 29

You are not the one who will build the house.​—1 Chron. 17:4.



Dismayed that there was no “house,” or temple, dedicated to Jehovah, David wanted to build one. However, Jehovah directed otherwise, as noted in today’s text. Although Jehovah lovingly assured David that He would continue to bless him, God directed that David’s son Solomon build the temple. How did David react? (1 Chron. 17:1-4, 8, 11, 12; 29:1) David did not withhold his support, brooding over the prospect that the credit for temple construction would not be his. The building did, in fact, become known as Solomon’s temple, not David’s. While David may have been disappointed that he could not fulfill his heart’s desire, he fully supported the project. He eagerly organized work groups and gathered iron, copper, silver, and gold, as well as cedar timbers. Further, he encouraged Solomon, saying: “Now, my son, may Jehovah be with you, and may you be successful and build the house of Jehovah.”​—1 Chron. 22:11, 14-16. w17.01 5:6, 7




Monday, April 30

Rescue us and forgive our sins for the sake of your name.​—Ps. 79:9.



Even when we are persecuted, we do our best to live according to God’s righteous principles and laws. By performing righteous deeds, we let our light shine and thus bring glory to Jehovah’s name. (Matt. 5:14-16) As holy people, we prove by the way we live our lives that Jehovah’s laws are good and that Satan’s accusations are false. When we make mistakes, as we all do, we genuinely repent and turn away from practices that dishonor Jehovah. On the basis of Christ’s sacrifice, Jehovah forgives the sins of those who exercise faith. He accepts as his worshippers those who dedicate themselves to him. Jehovah declares anointed Christians righteous as his sons and those of the “other sheep” righteous as his friends. (John 10:16; Rom. 5:1, 2; Jas. 2:21-25) So even now, the ransom enables us to have a righteous standing with our Father and to share in the sanctification of his name. w17.02 2:5, 6




