
August
Wednesday, August 1

Let endurance complete its work, so that you may be complete and sound in all respects, not lacking in anything.​—Jas. 1:4.



The battle was grueling. Israelite soldiers led by Judge Gideon had chased their enemies​—the Midianite army and its allies—​all night for a distance of some 20 miles (32 km)! The Israelites knew that this was no time to give up. So to eliminate the enemy, “they kept up the pursuit” and subdued Midian. (Judg. 7:22; 8:4, 10, 28) We too are fighting a relentless battle. Our enemies include Satan, his world, and our own imperfections. Some of us have battled for decades, and with Jehovah’s help, we gained victories. At times, though, we may get tired of battling our enemies and of waiting for the end of this system of things. Indeed, we have not yet won the complete victory. Jesus warned that we who live in the last days would face severe trials and cruel mistreatment, but he also said that gaining the victory would depend on our endurance.​—Luke 21:19. w16.04 2:1, 2




Thursday, August 2

They continued devoting themselves to the teaching of the apostles, to associating together.​—Acts 2:42.



At our meetings, our Grand Instructor directs us through the pages of his Word, the Bible. (Isa. 30:20, 21) Even unbelievers who attend our meetings may conclude: “God is really among you.” (1 Cor. 14:23-25) Jehovah blesses meetings with his holy spirit and actively directs the Scriptural teaching program. At our meetings, then, we are listening to Jehovah’s voice and sensing his loving care. Consequently, we draw close to him. Jesus said: “Where there are two or three gathered together in my name, there I am in their midst.” (Matt. 18:20) As head of the congregation, Christ “walks among” the congregations of God’s people. (Rev. 1:20–2:1) Think of it! Jehovah and Jesus are actively involved in strengthening us at Christian meetings. How do you think Jehovah feels when he observes our eagerness to draw close to him and his Son? w16.04 3:13, 14




Friday, August 3

Do not be quick to take offense.​—Eccl. 7:9.



Two brothers were greeted by a certain sister in a way that one of them considered inappropriate. When the two brothers were alone, the offended brother began to criticize the sister for what she had said. However, the other brother reminded him that she had served Jehovah loyally in difficult circumstances for 40 years; he was sure that she meant no harm. After considering this for a moment, the first brother responded, “You are right.” As a result, the issue went no further. What does this experience show? The way you react to situations that have the potential for causing offense lies in your own hands. A loving person covers over minor transgressions. (Prov. 10:12; 1 Pet. 4:8) Jehovah considers it “beauty” on your part “to overlook an offense.” (Prov. 19:11) So the first thing to ask yourself when somebody treats you in a way that could seem unkind or disrespectful is: ‘Can I overlook this? Do I really need to make an issue of it?’ w16.05 1:8, 9




Saturday, August 4

God is the one who . . . energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.​—Phil. 2:13.



Who really are preaching the good news of the Kingdom today? With full confidence, we can say: “Jehovah’s Witnesses!” Why can we be so confident? Because we are preaching the right message, the good news of the Kingdom. By going to the people, we are also using the correct methods. Our preaching work is being done with the right motive​—love, not financial gain. Our work has the greatest scope, reaching out to people of all nations and languages. And we will continue to do this work without letup, year in and year out, until the end comes. We truly marvel at what is being accomplished by God’s people in these exciting times in which we live. But how is it possible for all of this to happen? The apostle Paul answers in today’s text. May all of us continue to be energized by our loving Father as we do our very best and fully accomplish our ministry.​—2 Tim. 4:5. w16.05 2:17, 18




Sunday, August 5

Abhor what is wicked; cling to what is good.​—Rom. 12:9.



By choosing to do God’s will and by working hard to do so, we show our depth of love for Jehovah and our desire to please him. We also demonstrate our support of his sovereignty. Satan has challenged the rightfulness of Jehovah’s sovereignty, so our voluntary and vigorous efforts to uphold it are undoubtedly of special value to our benevolent and appreciative heavenly Father. (Job 2:3-5; Prov. 27:11) However, if Jehovah completely relieved us of the need to exert ourselves to fight our imperfect tendencies so as to please him, any claim of loyalty and support of his sovereignty would be meaningless. Thus, Jehovah tells us to put forth “earnest effort” in developing godly qualities. (2 Pet. 1:5-7; Col. 3:12) He expects us to work hard to control our thoughts and feelings. (Rom. 8:5) Having made a genuine effort in this regard, we feel all the more satisfied when we realize that the Bible is still changing our life. w16.05 4:12, 13




Monday, August 6

O Jehovah, . . . you are our Potter.​—Isa. 64:8.



Jehovah knows the type and quality of “the clay” that is before him, and he molds it accordingly. (Ps. 103:10-14) Indeed, he deals with us as individuals, taking into account our particular weaknesses, limitations, and level of spiritual growth. His attitude toward imperfect servants was demonstrated by his Son. Consider how Jesus dealt with his apostles’ shortcomings, especially their inclination to argue among themselves over position. If you had witnessed the apostles’ heated disputes, would you have viewed these men as meek and malleable? Yet, Jesus did not adopt a negative view. He knew that his faithful apostles could be molded by kind, patient counsel and by their observing his example of humility. (Mark 9:33-37; 10:37, 41-45; Luke 22:24-27) After Jesus was resurrected and the holy spirit was poured out, the apostles focused, not on position or prominence, but on the work he had given them to do.​—Acts 5:42. w16.06 1:10




Tuesday, August 7

Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.​—Deut. 6:4.



There is no real or true God but Jehovah; no other god is like him. (2 Sam. 7:22) Thus, Moses was reminding the Israelites that their worship of Jehovah must be exclusive. They were not to follow the peoples around them, who worshipped various gods and goddesses. Some of those false gods were viewed as ruling over certain parts of nature. Others were separate forms of a particular deity. For example, the Egyptians worshipped the sun-god Ra, the sky-goddess Nut, the earth-god Geb, the Nile-god Hapi, and numerous sacred animals. Many of these false gods were dealt devastating blows by Jehovah through the Ten Plagues. The prominent Canaanite god was Baal, the god of fertility, who also appeared as the god of the sky, rain, and storm. In many places, Baal was the local patron deity as well. (Num. 25:3) The Israelites were to remember that their God, the “true God,” is “one Jehovah.”​—Deut. 4:35, 39. w16.06 3:4, 5




Wednesday, August 8

[Teach] them to observe all the things I have commanded you. And look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.​—Matt. 28:20.



Jesus’ confidence in Jehovah and his people was well-founded and still is. Indeed, when we consider the things that Jehovah is accomplishing through his servants in these last days, it is simply amazing. No other people are preaching the truth globally, for others do not have Jehovah guiding them as does his united congregation today. Isaiah 65:14 describes the spiritual condition prevailing among God’s people: “Look! My servants will shout joyfully because of the good condition of the heart.” Jehovah’s servants rejoice at the good things they can do because they are being guided by Jehovah. In contrast, the world under Satan’s influence mourns, as it were, as conditions worsen. We need to maintain our loyalty to Jehovah and his arrangements. w16.06 4:10-12




Thursday, August 9

Keep on the watch.​—Matt. 25:13.



We can learn a lesson from ancient times about the importance of being watchful. Back then, many larger cities​—such as Jerusalem—​were surrounded by high walls. The walls provided physical protection from invaders as well as elevated vantage points from which to watch the surrounding landscape. Day and night, watchmen were stationed on the walls and at the gates. They were to alert the city’s inhabitants of any approaching danger. (Isa. 62:6) It was a life-and-death matter that the watchmen remain awake and attentive at their posts. (Ezek. 33:6) Jewish historian Josephus relates that in 70 C.E., the Roman forces were able to take possession of the Tower of Antonia, adjoining the city wall of Jerusalem, because the guards at the gates were asleep! From there, the Romans rushed the temple and set fire to it, resulting in the finale of the greatest tribulation that Jerusalem and the Jewish nation had ever experienced. w16.07 2:2, 7, 8




Friday, August 10

Be on your guard so that you may not be led astray with them by the error of the lawless people and fall from your own steadfastness.​—2 Pet. 3:17.



While undeserved kindness from Jehovah provides us with many blessings, we should not presumptuously think that he condones all conduct. Among the early Christians, there were some who attempted to “turn the undeserved kindness of . . . God into an excuse for brazen conduct.” (Jude 4) These unfaithful Christians apparently thought that they could sin and then count on Jehovah to forgive them. Worse still, they endeavored to entice their brothers to join them in their contemptuous ways. Even today, anyone doing that “has outraged the spirit of undeserved kindness.” (Heb. 10:29) Today, Satan has misled some Christians into thinking that they can presume on God’s mercy and commit sins with impunity. But while Jehovah is willing to forgive repentant sinners, he expects us to put up a strong fight against our sinful tendencies. w16.07 3:16, 17




Saturday, August 11

Whoever divorces his wife, except on the grounds of sexual immorality, and marries another commits adultery.​—Matt. 19:9.



A legal divorce not based on sexual immorality would not free one to remarry. Of course, a person might choose to forgive an adulterous but repentant mate, even as the prophet Hosea apparently forgave his immoral wife, Gomer. Similarly, Jehovah extended mercy to repentant Israel after that nation’s spiritual adultery. (Hos. 3:1-5) It might be added that if a person knows that his or her mate committed adultery and chooses to resume sexual relations with the guilty mate, such an action constitutes forgiveness and removes a Scriptural basis for divorce. After saying the words of today’s text, Jesus spoke of “those who have the gift” of living a single life. He added: “Let the one who can make room for it make room for it.” (Matt. 19:10-12) Many have chosen to remain single in order to serve Jehovah with an undivided mind. For doing so, they are to be commended. w16.08 1:15, 16




Sunday, August 12

Taste and see that Jehovah is good; happy is the man who takes refuge in him. . . . Those who fear him lack nothing.​—Ps. 34:8, 9.



Young people have the strength needed to accomplish much in Jehovah’s service. (Prov. 20:29) Some young brothers in Bethel service have a part in printing and binding Bibles and Bible literature. Many young brothers and sisters share in the work of building and maintaining Kingdom Halls. When natural disasters strike, young people join more experienced Witnesses in carrying through with relief efforts. And many young pioneers help to take the good news to indigenous and foreign-language communities. The psalmist sang: “Those seeking Jehovah will lack nothing good.” (Ps. 34:10) Indeed, Jehovah never disappoints those who zealously serve him. We personally “taste and see that Jehovah is good” as we do all we can in his service. And when we give God whole-souled worship, we experience happiness that has no equal. w16.08 3:5, 8




Monday, August 13

I will save you, and you will become a blessing. Do not be afraid! Let your hands be strong.​—Zech. 8:13.



Jehovah is able and willing to give us strength by means of his holy spirit. (1 Chron. 29:12) It is vital that we draw on that spirit so that we can face any challenge that Satan and his wicked system thrust upon us. (Ps. 18:39; 1 Cor. 10:13) Also, we can be grateful that we have God’s Word, which is a product of holy spirit. Think, too, about the spiritual food based on the Bible that we receive each month. The words of Zechariah 8:9, 13 were spoken while the temple in Jerusalem was being rebuilt, and those words are very fitting for us. We are also made stronger by divine education at our Christian meetings, assemblies, conventions, and in our theocratic schools. That training can help us to have the proper motivation, to set spiritual goals, and to fulfill our many Christian responsibilities. (Ps. 119:32) Do you eagerly seek to gain strength from that type of education? w16.09 1:10, 11




Tuesday, August 14

Prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.​—Rom. 12:2.



God’s Law to the Israelites showed Jehovah’s strong feelings against clothing that does not make clear the distinction between male and female​—what has been described in our day as unisex fashion. (Deut. 22:5) From God’s stated direction about clothing, we clearly see that God is not pleased with styles of dress that feminize men, that make women look like men, or that make it hard to see the difference between men and women. God’s Word contains principles that help Christians make good decisions about how to dress. That is so no matter where they live, what their culture is, or what the climate is. We do not need detailed lists saying which styles of dress are acceptable and which are objectionable. Rather, we are guided by Scriptural principles that allow room for personal preferences. w16.09 3:3, 4




Wednesday, August 15

They all abandoned him and fled.​—Mark 14:50.



Consider the courage and honesty of the men who wrote the Bible. Many ancient writers flattered their leaders and glorified their kingdoms. Jehovah’s prophets, however, always spoke the truth. They were willing to point out the shortcomings of their own people, even their kings. (2 Chron. 16:9, 10; 24:18-22) And they made plain their own failings and those of other servants of God. (2 Sam. 12:1-14) Because of the guiding principles found in the Bible, many are convinced that it was inspired by God. (Ps. 19:7-11) Bible principles protect us from sharing in false worship and from superstitions that enslave many people. (Ps. 115:3-8) Such teachings as evolution tend to make nature into a sort of god, giving it powers that belong only to Jehovah. Those who say that there is no God claim that our future is entirely in our own hands. They, however, offer no sure hope for a better future.​—Ps. 146:3, 4. w16.09 4:10, 11




Thursday, August 16

Let her glean . . . , and do not mistreat her.​—Ruth 2:15.



Boaz was clearly concerned about Ruth and her precarious situation as a foreigner. For one thing, he invited her to stay with his group of young women so that she would not be harassed by the men who were working in the field. He even made sure that she would get enough food and water, just like the hired workers. In addition, Boaz did not speak down to the poor foreign woman but, instead, reassured her. (Ruth 2:8-10, 13, 14) Not only was Boaz moved by Ruth’s unselfish love for her mother-in-law, Naomi, but he was also impressed that she had become a worshipper of Jehovah. Boaz’ kindness was actually an expression of Jehovah’s loyal love toward a woman who had come to ‘seek refuge under the wings of the God of Israel.’ (Ruth 2:12, 20; Prov. 19:17) Similarly today, our kindly demeanor can help “all sorts of people” recognize the truth and sense how much Jehovah loves them.​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4. w16.10 1:10-12




Friday, August 17

I inquired of Jehovah, and he answered me. He rescued me from all my fears.​—Ps. 34:4.



We too can pour out our concerns to Jehovah, knowing that he will hear us and strengthen us to endure with joy. And when our prayers are answered, our faith gets stronger. (1 John 5:14, 15) Since faith is an aspect of the fruitage of the spirit, we need to “keep on asking” for God’s spirit, as Jesus urged us to do. (Luke 11:9, 13) Our prayers, though, should not be limited to asking God for personal help. “Too numerous to recount” are the “wonderful works” we can thank and praise Jehovah for daily! (Ps. 40:5) Also, our prayers should reflect that we “keep in mind those in prison, as though [we] were imprisoned with them.” And we should pray for our worldwide brotherhood, especially “those who are taking the lead among [us].” Our hearts are touched when we see how Jehovah answers our united prayers!​—Heb. 13:3, 7. w16.10 3:8, 9




Saturday, August 18

You have been saved through faith, and this is not of your own doing; rather, it is God’s gift.​—Eph. 2:8.



In our present day, Jehovah’s people have been exercising their faith in God’s established Kingdom. This has resulted in the development of a worldwide spiritual paradise that has over eight million inhabitants. It is a place that abounds with the fruitage of God’s spirit. (Gal. 5:22, 23) What a powerful demonstration of true Christian faith and love! No human can take credit for this. It has been accomplished by our God. This wonderful work is bringing “fame to Jehovah, an everlasting sign that will never perish.” (Isa. 55:13) Our spiritual paradise will continue to grow and to flourish until the whole earth is filled with perfect, righteous, and happy humans to the eternal praise of Jehovah’s name. May we keep on exercising our faith in Jehovah’s promises! w16.10 4:18, 19




Sunday, August 19

Some are walking disorderly among you.​—2 Thess. 3:11.



We need to follow the Bible-based direction we receive from the elders. Recall Paul’s counsel regarding disorderly ones in the congregation. Some individuals were ‘meddling with what did not concern them.’ They were evidently admonished by the elders but persisted in disregarding the counsel. How was the congregation to deal with such a person? Paul directed: “Keep this one marked and stop associating with him.” That counsel was balanced with the caution not to treat such a person as an enemy. (2 Thess. 3:11-15) Today, elders may give a warning talk about someone’s persisting in a course that reflects badly on the congregation, such as dating an unbeliever. (1 Cor. 7:39) How do you react to their counsel? If you are aware of the situation described in the talk, will you take care to avoid socializing with such an individual? Your loving concern and firm stand may move the person to abandon a disorderly course. w16.11 2:13




Monday, August 20

From among you yourselves men will rise and speak twisted things to draw away the disciples after themselves.​—Acts 20:30.



At Pentecost 33 C.E., thousands of Jews and proselytes were anointed with holy spirit. These new Christians became “a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession.” (1 Pet. 2:9, 10) The apostles kept careful watch over the congregations of God’s people as long as they lived. However, especially after the death of the apostles, men arose who spoke “twisted things” in order to “draw away the disciples after themselves.” (2 Thess. 2:6-8) Many of these men had responsible positions in the congregations, serving as overseers and later as “bishops.” A clergy class was taking shape, although Jesus had said to his followers: “All of you are brothers.” (Matt. 23:8) Prominent men who were enamored of the philosophies of Aristotle and Plato introduced false religious ideas, gradually replacing the pure teachings of God’s Word. w16.11 4:8




Tuesday, August 21

Do not let sin continue to rule as king in your mortal bodies.​—Rom. 6:12.



Before we became Christians, we often sinned, perhaps not realizing how wrong or bad our actions were in God’s eyes. We were like “slaves to uncleanness and lawlessness.” It could be said that we “were slaves of sin.” (Rom. 6:19, 20) Then we came to know Bible truth, made changes in our lives, dedicated ourselves to God, and got baptized. We “were set free from sin,” and we “became slaves to righteousness.” (Rom. 6:17, 18) Yet, we could “let sin continue to rule” by doing whatever our imperfect body moves us to do. Because we can “let” sin rule or refuse to let it rule, the question is, What do we really want at heart? Ask yourself: ‘At times, do I let my imperfect body or mind point me in a bad direction and then go there? Or am I dead with reference to sin?’ It really comes down to how much we appreciate the undeserved kindness God has shown by forgiving us. w16.12 1:11, 12




Wednesday, August 22

Setting the mind on the spirit means . . . peace.​—Rom. 8:6.



One aspect of having inner peace is that we strive to be at peace with those in our family and those in the congregation. We have the good sense to realize that both we and our brothers and sisters are imperfect. Because of this, problems may occasionally arise, and if that happens, we have been taught to follow Jesus’ advice: “Make your peace with your brother.” (Matt. 5:24) This is made easier when we recall that the other brother or sister is also serving “the God who gives peace.” (Rom. 15:33; 16:20) And there is another peace that is of incalculable value. By our “setting the mind on the spirit,” we enjoy peace with our Maker. Isaiah recorded words that applied in his day but have an even greater fulfillment now: “You [Jehovah] will safeguard those who fully lean on you; you will give them continuous peace, because it is in you that they trust.”​—Isa. 26:3; Rom. 5:1. w16.12 2:5, 18, 19




Thursday, August 23

Always rejoice in the Lord.​—Phil. 4:4.



Even in these dark last days of Satan’s wicked system of things, Jehovah is blessing his people. He makes sure that true worshippers flourish in their spiritual estate, which is unprecedented in its spiritual abundance. (Isa. 54:13) As Jesus promised, Jehovah rewards us now by letting us be part of a loving family of spiritual brothers and sisters, a family that is international in scope. (Mark 10:29, 30) Furthermore, those who earnestly seek God are rewarded with the incomparable blessings of peace of mind, contentment, and happiness. (Phil. 4:5-7) You can be certain that “after you have done the will of God, you [will] receive the fulfillment of the promise.” (Heb. 10:35, 36) So let us now continue to strengthen our faith and to work whole-souled as to Jehovah. We can do this, knowing that it is from Jehovah that we will receive the due reward.​—Col. 3:23, 24. w16.12 4:17, 20




Friday, August 24

Where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.​—2 Cor. 3:17.



Is having free will with limits real freedom? Yes, it is! Why can we say that? Limitations put on people’s freedom can protect them. For example, we may exercise our freedom of choice to drive to a distant city. However, would we feel safe traveling on highways where there were no traffic laws, where everyone was free to decide how fast or on which side of the road to drive? Obviously not. Limits are necessary in order for all to enjoy the blessings of true freedom. To illustrate further the wisdom of using our free will within the boundaries set by Jehovah, consider the case of Adam. He chose to overstep his God-ordained boundaries by eating the forbidden fruit. This gross misuse of free will resulted in millenniums of suffering and pain for Adam’s descendants. (Rom. 5:12) Knowing the consequences of Adam’s decision should move us to use our freedom responsibly and within the limits set by Jehovah. w17.01 2:6, 8




Saturday, August 25

I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think.​—Rom. 12:3.



When we face a new assignment, a prayerful and realistic analysis will help us to avoid overreaching our current abilities and limitations. Modesty may lead us to say no. However, when we do accept a new assignment, Gideon’s example reminds us that we cannot succeed without Jehovah’s direction and blessing. After all, we have been invited “to walk in modesty with [our] God.” (Mic. 6:8) So any time we take on new responsibilities, we need to reflect prayerfully on whatever Jehovah tells us through his Word and his organization. We have to learn to adjust our unsteady steps to match Jehovah’s steady lead. Let us remember that it is Jehovah’s humility and not our own ability that ‘makes us great.’ (Ps. 18:35) Choosing to walk modestly with God will therefore help us to think neither too much nor too little of ourselves. w17.01 3:17, 18




Sunday, August 26

Your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.​—1 Cor. 15:58.



Jesus knew that his earthly ministry would come to an end and that others would carry on his work. Though his disciples were imperfect, he had confidence in them and told them that they would do works greater than he did. (John 14:12) He trained them thoroughly, and they spread the good news throughout the then-known world. (Col. 1:23) After his sacrificial death, Jesus was resurrected to heaven where he was given more work to do with authority “far above every government and authority and power and lordship.” (Eph. 1:19-21) If we die faithful before Armageddon, we will be resurrected into a righteous new world, where there will be plenty of satisfying work for us to do. Now, though, there is vitally important work that all of us can participate in​—preaching the good news and making disciples. May all of us, young or old, keep on “having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” w17.01 5:17, 18




Monday, August 27

I am Jehovah; I do not change.​—Mal. 3:6.



The ransom has been paid permanently. (Heb. 9:24-26) It completely cancels the condemnation inherited from Adam. Thanks to Christ’s sacrifice, we are free from enslavement to this world under Satan’s control, and we no longer live in fear of death. (Heb. 2:14, 15) God’s promises are absolutely reliable. Just as his laws of creation never fail, Jehovah will never fail us. He does not change. Jehovah gives us far more than just the gift of life. He gives us his love. “We have come to know and believe the love that God has for us. God is love.” (1 John 4:16) The whole earth will be made a paradise of exquisite delight, and everyone on earth will reflect God’s love. May we join our voices with those of God’s faithful heavenly creatures in saying: “Let the praise and the glory and the wisdom and the thanksgiving and the honor and the power and the strength be to our God forever and ever. Amen.”​—Rev. 7:12. w17.02 2:16, 17




Tuesday, August 28

Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.​—2 Cor. 7:1.



The June 1, 1973, issue of The Watchtower asked the question: “Do . . . persons who have not broken their addiction to tobacco qualify for baptism?” The answer was: “The Scriptural evidence points to the conclusion that they do not.” After citing several relevant scriptures, The Watchtower explained why an unrepentant smoker should be disfellowshipped. (1 Cor. 5:7) It said: “This represents no effort to act in an arbitrary, dictatorial manner. The strictness really proceeds from God, who expresses himself through his written Word.” A recent book on religion in the United States notes: “Christian leaders have regularly revised their teachings to match the beliefs and opinions gaining support among their members and in the larger society.” Has any religion other than Jehovah’s Witnesses been willing to rely fully on God’s Word, even when doing so presents a real challenge to some of its members? w17.02 4:15




Wednesday, August 29

Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.​—Matt. 23:12.



As evidence of their humility, elders refuse to let themselves be treated as celebrities. In this they differ from many modern-day religious leaders and from those of the first century about whom Jesus said: “They like the most prominent place at evening meals and the front seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces.” (Matt. 23:6, 7) Genuine Christian shepherds humbly obey Jesus’ words: “Do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your Teacher, and all of you are brothers. Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth, for one is your Father, the heavenly One. Neither be called leaders, for your Leader is one, the Christ. But the greatest one among you must be your minister.” (Matt. 23:8-11) You can thus understand why elders in congregations around the globe earn their fellow Witnesses’ love, respect, and honor. w17.03 1:14, 15




Thursday, August 30

Each one will carry his own load of responsibility.​—Gal. 6:5; ftn.



It is up to each of us to make decisions, and the wise, right choices are based on sound Scriptural knowledge. We should not give someone else the responsibility to make decisions for us. Rather, we should personally learn what is right in God’s eyes and choose to do it. How might we give in to the danger of letting others choose for us? Peer pressure could sway us to make a bad decision. (Prov. 1:10, 15) Still, no matter how others try to pressure us, it is our responsibility to follow our Bible-trained conscience. In many respects, if we let others make our decisions, we are essentially deciding to “follow them.” It is still a choice, but a potentially disastrous one. The apostle Paul clearly alerted the Galatians to the danger of letting others make personal decisions for them. (Gal. 4:17) Some in the congregation wanted to make personal choices for others in order to alienate them from the apostles. w17.03 2:8-10




Friday, August 31

While [Josiah] was still a boy, he started to search for the God of David his forefather; and in the 12th year, he started to cleanse Judah and Jerusalem of the high places and the sacred poles.​—2 Chron. 34:3.



Josiah was zealous in doing what pleased God. Like Josiah, young ones should start to seek Jehovah from an early age. Repentant King Manasseh may have taught Josiah about God’s mercy. Young ones, draw close to faithful older ones in your family and in the congregation and learn how good Jehovah has been to them. Also, remember that the reading of the Scriptures touched Josiah’s heart and moved him to take action. Your reading of the Word of God may move you to take action that will increase your happiness and strengthen your friendship with God as well as spur you on to help others to search for God. (2 Chron. 34:18, 19) A study of the Bible may also help you to notice ways that you can improve in your service to God. If you do, apply yourself, just as Josiah did. w17.03 3:18, 19




