
July
Sunday, July 1

Do to me as you have promised.​—Judg. 11:36.



Jephthah’s daughter sacrificed her natural desires for a husband and children in order to promote true worship. How might we imitate her self-sacrificing attitude? Thousands of young Christian men and women are willingly sacrificing marriage or are not having children​—at least for now—​in order to serve Jehovah to the full. Older ones too may be sacrificing the time they could otherwise spend with their children and grandchildren in order to work on theocratic construction projects or to attend the School for Kingdom Evangelizers and to serve in areas where the need for Kingdom publishers is greater. Others set aside personal matters to share in service campaigns. Such wholehearted service brings deep joy to Jehovah, who will never forget their work and the love shown for him. (Heb. 6:10-12) Would it be possible for you to make additional sacrifices to serve Jehovah more fully? w16.04 1:16, 17




Monday, July 2

They will become one flock, one shepherd.​—John 10:16.



Jesus compared himself to a shepherd, and his followers to a flock of sheep. Consider: If two sheep are on a hill, two other sheep are in a valley, and still another sheep is grazing elsewhere, would we describe those five sheep as a flock? Generally, a flock of sheep stays together under the care of its shepherd. Similarly, we cannot follow our Shepherd if we deliberately isolate ourselves. We need to meet together with other Christians to be part of “one flock” under “one shepherd.” When we attend a meeting, we contribute to the unity of our brotherhood. (Ps. 133:1) Some of our fellow worshippers have been rejected by their parents and siblings. Yet, Jesus promised that he would give them a spiritual family to love them and care for them. (Mark 10:29, 30) When you attend meetings regularly, you may very well prove to be a father, mother, brother, or sister to one of these dear ones! Does that not motivate us to do our utmost to be at all the meetings? w16.04 3:9, 10




Tuesday, July 3

When you stand praying, forgive whatever you have against anyone, so that your Father who is in the heavens may also forgive you your trespasses.​—Mark 11:25.



Our efforts to serve God​—through prayers, meeting attendance, field service, and other aspects of our worship—​are in vain if we refuse to make peace with others. We cannot be friends of God unless we are willing to forgive the shortcomings of others. (Luke 11:4; Eph. 4:32) Every Christian needs to think carefully and honestly about being forgiving and having peaceful relations with others. Do you forgive fellow believers freely? Are you happy to fellowship with them? Jehovah expects his servants to be forgiving. If your conscience tells you that you have improvements to make in this regard, prayerfully seek Jehovah’s help in order to make them! Our heavenly Father will hear such humble prayers and answer them.​—1 John 5:14, 15. w16.05 1:6, 7




Wednesday, July 4

This good news of the Kingdom will be preached.​—Matt. 24:14.



How long would the foretold preaching work continue? Jesus said that this global work would continue right on through the last days, “and then the end [would] come.” What other religious group has continued to preach the good news during these momentous last days? Some of those whom we meet in the ministry may say: “We have the holy spirit, but you people are doing the work.” But is not the fact that we can endure in the work evidence that we have God’s spirit? (Acts 1:8; 1 Pet. 4:14) From time to time, certain religious groups have tried to do what Jehovah’s Witnesses regularly accomplish, but those efforts usually result in failure. Others engage in so-called missionary activities for a limited time and then go back to their normal routine. Still others may even try to go from door to door, but what are they preaching? The answer to that question makes it clear that they are not carrying out the work that Christ began. w16.05 2:13, 16




Thursday, July 5

Brothers, continue to rejoice, to be readjusted, to be comforted, to think in agreement, to live peaceably.​—2 Cor. 13:11.



Continued effort is required in order “to be readjusted” and manifest “the new personality.” Paul reminded fellow believers: “You were taught to put away the old personality that conforms to your former course of conduct and that is being corrupted according to its deceptive desires. And you should continue to be made new in your dominant mental attitude, and should put on the new personality that was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.” (Eph. 4:22-24) The expression “continue to be made new” indicates that putting on the new personality is an ongoing process. This is encouraging, for it assures us that regardless of how long we have been serving Jehovah, we can keep making progress in cultivating and refining the Christian qualities that make up the new personality. Yes, the Bible can continue to change our life. w16.05 4:8, 9




Friday, July 6

Those whom Jehovah loves he reproves.​—Prov. 3:12.



The environment in which Jehovah is now molding us is viewed as a spiritual paradise that is presently taking shape. (Isa. 64:8) We feel safe and secure despite the wicked world around us. We have come to know Jehovah and now experience his fatherly love. (Jas. 4:8) In the new world, we will experience to the full the blessings of the spiritual paradise. Then, our spiritual paradise will have its perfect counterpart​—a literal paradise under the rulership of God’s Kingdom. During that time of global restoration, Jehovah will continue to mold earth’s inhabitants, educating them to a degree that we might now find hard to imagine. (Isa. 11:9) Furthermore, God will make our minds and bodies perfect, so that we will be able to absorb his teaching and do his will flawlessly. So let us be determined to continue submitting to Jehovah, showing him that we view his molding as an expression of his love for us. w16.06 1:8, 9




Saturday, July 7

Listen, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.​—Deut. 6:4.



Those words are part of Moses’ parting speech to the nation of Israel gathered on the plains of Moab in the year 1473 B.C.E. The nation was about to cross the river Jordan to take possession of the Promised Land. (Deut. 6:1) Moses, their leader for the past 40 years, wanted the people to be courageous when facing the challenges ahead. They needed to trust in Jehovah and be faithful to him as their God. Moses’ final words would understandably have a profound effect on the people. After mentioning the Ten Commandments and other regulations that Jehovah had given the nation, Moses made the powerful declaration found at Deuteronomy 6:4, 5. Did the Israelites gathered there with Moses not know that Jehovah their God is “one Jehovah”? Of course, they did. Faithful Israelites knew and worshipped only one God​—the God of their forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. w16.06 3:2, 3




Sunday, July 8

Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.​—Matt. 24:36.



Jesus said those words while he was on earth. But Christ has been empowered in heaven to wage war against Satan’s world. (Rev. 19:11-16) Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that Jesus now knows when Armageddon will occur. We, however, do not know. It is imperative that we stay watchful until the tribulation occurs. Yet, the timing of that event has never been uncertain to Jehovah. He has determined exactly when the end will come. He is counting down the time to the start of the great tribulation, and its start “will not be late!” (Hab. 2:1-3) How can we be sure of this? Jehovah’s prophecies have always been fulfilled right on time! We can be certain that Jehovah’s promise of deliverance through the great tribulation will not fail us either. However, if we want to survive the destruction of this system, we must keep on the watch. w16.07 2:4-6




Monday, July 9

Peter said to him: “Even if all the others are stumbled, I will not be.”​—Mark 14:29.



At a critical moment, the apostles abandoned Jesus. Peter had earlier stated that even if the others did that, he would not. (Mark 14:27-31, 50) Nevertheless, when Jesus was being taken into custody, all the apostles​—including Peter—​abandoned him. Peter repeatedly denied even knowing Jesus. (Mark 14:53, 54, 66-72) However, Peter showed remorse, and Jehovah continued to use him. Had you been a disciple then, would Peter’s actions have affected your loyalty to Jehovah? Today, will you recognize that Jehovah may allow time for repentance on the part of wrongdoers and that he will ultimately correct the wrongs and act in a just way? On the other hand, sometimes those who have been guilty of serious sins reject Jehovah’s mercy and are unrepentant. In such situations, will you have confidence that Jehovah will in time judge such wrongdoers, perhaps removing them from the congregation? w16.06 4:8, 9




Tuesday, July 10

May our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father . . . comfort your hearts and strengthen you.​—2 Thess. 2:16, 17, ftn.



A great blessing that comes to us through Jehovah’s undeserved kindness is comfort for a distressed heart. (Ps. 51:17) To Christians in Thessalonica, who were experiencing persecution, Paul wrote the words found in today’s text. How comforting it is to be aware of the loving care that we receive from Jehovah because of his generous kindness! As sinners, on our own we would have no hope. (Ps. 49:7, 8) But Jehovah provides us with a wonderful hope. Jesus promised his followers: “This is the will of my Father, that everyone who recognizes the Son and exercises faith in him should have everlasting life.” (John 6:40) Yes, the hope of eternal life is a gift, a wonderful expression of God’s undeserved kindness. Paul, who certainly appreciated that fact, said: “The undeserved kindness of God has been manifested, bringing salvation to all sorts of people.”​—Titus 2:11. w16.07 3:14, 15




Wednesday, July 11

Do not deal treacherously with the wife of your youth.​—Mal. 2:15.



Today, marital treachery cannot be tolerated among Jehovah’s people. But suppose a baptized married man or woman ran off with another person’s mate and married that one after obtaining a divorce. If he is unrepentant, the wrongdoer would be disfellowshipped in order to maintain the spiritual purity of the congregation. (1 Cor. 5:11-13) He or she would have to “produce fruits that befit repentance” before being accepted back into the congregation. (Luke 3:8; 2 Cor. 2:5-10) Though no set time must pass before that person’s reinstatement, such treachery, which seldom occurs among those associated with God’s people, cannot be ignored. It might take quite some time​—a year or more—​for the sinner to give proof of true repentance. Even if the person is reinstated, he or she must still render an account “before the judgment seat of God.”​—Rom. 14:10-12. w16.08 1:12, 13




Thursday, July 12

If a man is reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a fine work.​—1 Tim. 3:1.



The Greek verb translated “reaching out” means stretching to grasp something, perhaps something beyond your normal reach. In using that word, the apostle Paul stressed that spiritual progress requires effort. Imagine a brother thinking about his future in the congregation. He may not now be serving as a ministerial servant, but he realizes that he needs to cultivate spiritual qualities. First, he strives to qualify as a ministerial servant. In time, he hopes to be spiritually qualified to serve as an overseer. In each case, he works hard to meet the qualifications needed to care for added responsibility in the congregation. In like manner, brothers and sisters who desire to serve as pioneers, as Bethelites, or as Kingdom Hall construction volunteers do well to stretch forward to attain their goals. w16.08 3:3, 4




Friday, July 13

They are your servants and your people, whom you redeemed by your great power and by your mighty hand.​—Neh. 1:10.



Imagine how Nehemiah must have felt when he went to Jerusalem. The city was almost defenseless, and his fellow Jews were very discouraged. The threats from foreign opposers caused the Jews to slacken their hands, to cease rebuilding Jerusalem’s walls. Did Nehemiah allow that situation to cause him to drop his hands in discouragement too? No! Like Moses, Asa, and other faithful servants of Jehovah, Nehemiah had already developed a pattern of relying on Jehovah in prayer. (Ex. 17:8-13; 2 Chron. 14:8-13) And this time was no different. In the face of what to the Jews might have seemed overwhelming obstacles, Jehovah responded to Nehemiah’s sincere plea for help. God used his “great power” and “mighty hand” to strengthen the Jews’ drooping hands. (Neh. 2:17-20; 6:9) Do you believe that Jehovah uses his “great power” and “mighty hand” to strengthen his servants today? w16.09 1:9




Saturday, July 14

Do all things for God’s glory.​—1 Cor. 10:31.



“You saw a lot of casual clothing, especially when it was hot,” reported a Dutch newspaper regarding a meeting of church leaders. “That is not the case at the convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Indeed, Jehovah’s Witnesses are often commended for adorning “themselves in respectable dress, with modesty and good judgment . . . in the way that is proper for [those] professing devotion to God.” (1 Tim. 2:9, 10, ftn.) The apostle Paul was speaking about women, but the same basic standard applies to Christian men. Appropriate standards of dress are important to us as Jehovah’s people, and they are important to the God we worship. (Gen. 3:21) What the Scriptures say about dress and grooming leaves no doubt that the Sovereign of the universe has wholesome standards of attire for his true worshippers. Therefore, our choice of dress and grooming should take into account what is pleasing to the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. w16.09 3:1, 2




Sunday, July 15

Men spoke from God as they were moved by holy spirit.​—2 Pet. 1:21.



Some have chosen study projects that involved studying Bible prophecy or the Bible’s historical, archaeological, and scientific accuracy. One fascinating prophecy to consider is Genesis 3:15. That verse introduces the Bible’s primary theme, which is the vindication of God’s sovereignty and the sanctification of his name by means of the Kingdom. That one verse, using figurative language, sets out how Jehovah will solve all the suffering that humans have experienced since Eden. How might you study Genesis 3:15? One way would be to prepare a time line. It could list key scriptures that show how God bit by bit shed light on the individuals and arrangement referred to in this verse and that prove that the prophecy will be fulfilled. As you see the scriptures form a harmonious unit, you will surely conclude that the Bible prophets and writers must have been “moved by holy spirit.” w16.09 4:8




Monday, July 16

Who makes you different from another?​—1 Cor. 4:7.



For a while, the apostle Peter harbored prejudice against non-Jews, but he gradually learned to eradicate negative views from his heart. (Acts 10:28, 34, 35; Gal. 2:11-14) Likewise, if we detect any trace of prejudice or racial pride in us, we should make a conscious effort to root it out of our heart. (1 Pet. 1:22) We might reflect on the fact that none of us deserve salvation; we are all imperfect humans, regardless of our nationality. (Rom. 3:9, 10, 21-24) So why should we feel superior to anyone else? We should have a view like that of the apostle Paul, who admonished his fellow anointed Christians that they were “no longer strangers and foreigners, but . . . members of the household of God.” (Eph. 2:19) Earnest effort to overcome prejudiced views regarding those who are of a different background will certainly help us to put on the new personality.​—Col. 3:10, 11. w16.10 1:9




Tuesday, July 17

He reads His law in an undertone day and night.​—Ps. 1:2.



To keep our faith strong, Jehovah has kindly provided us with his complete Word, the Bible. To be “happy” and to “succeed,” we must regularly read God’s Word, daily if possible. (Ps. 1:1-3; Acts 17:11) Then, like pre-Christian worshippers of Jehovah, we need to keep meditating on God’s promises and be obedient to his requirements. Jehovah has also blessed us with an abundant supply of spiritual food provided through “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) Thus, by cherishing what we learn from the spiritual provisions that Jehovah has made available, we will be like the ancient examples of faith who had an “assured expectation” of their Kingdom hope. (Heb. 11:1) Prayer also played a vital part in keeping the faith of pre-Christian witnesses strong. Their faith was strengthened as they experienced God’s answers to their prayers.​—Neh. 1:4, 11; Ps. 34:4, 15, 17; Dan. 9:19-21. w16.10 3:7, 8




Wednesday, July 18

If I have all the faith so as to move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing.​—1 Cor. 13:2.



Jesus emphasized the all-important quality of love for God when he answered the question: “Which is the greatest commandment in the Law?” (Matt. 22:35-40) Because of the importance of both faith and love, Christian Bible writers highlighted these qualities together multiple times, often in the same sentence or phrase. Paul urged his brothers to “put on the breastplate of faith and love.” (1 Thess. 5:8) John wrote: “This is [God’s] commandment: that we have faith in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another.” (1 John 3:23) Although faith is essential, aspects of this quality will pass away when we see the fulfillment of God’s promises and experience the reality of our Christian hope. But the need to grow in love for God and for our neighbor will never cease. Thus, Paul could write: “Now, however, these three remain: faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love.”​—1 Cor. 13:13. w16.10 4:15-17




Thursday, July 19

The congregations continued to be made firm in the faith.​—Acts 16:5.



Brothers traveling on behalf of the governing body shared “the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles and the elders who were in Jerusalem.” (Acts 16:4) As congregations observed those decrees, they “continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number day by day.” What should we do when we receive direction from God’s organization today? Jehovah’s own Book directs all of us to be obedient and submissive. (Deut. 30:16; Heb. 13:7, 17) A critical or rebellious spirit has no place in God’s organization, for such an attitude could disrupt our loving, peaceful, and united congregations. Of course, no loyal Christian would want to display a disrespectful and disloyal spirit like that of Diotrephes. (3 John 9, 10) We might well ask ourselves: ‘Do I contribute to the spirituality of those around me? Am I quick to accept and support the direction given by the brothers taking the lead?’ w16.11 2:10, 11




Friday, July 20

Seek the peace of the city to which I have exiled you.​—Jer. 29:7.



The Jewish exiles who submitted to the will of God lived a relatively normal life in Babylon. Their captors allowed them to administer their own affairs to some extent. The exiles even had freedom to move about the country. Babylon was a center of trade and commerce in the ancient world, and documents that have been unearthed indicate that many Jews learned the art of buying and selling there, while others became skilled craftsmen. Some Jews even became prosperous. Exile in Babylon was nothing like the slavery in Egypt that the Israelites had experienced centuries before. (Ex. 2:23-25) But would the Israelites ever again be able to worship God in a completely acceptable way? At the time, it seemed most unlikely that they would. Babylon never released its captives. Yet, Jehovah had promised that his people would be liberated, and so they were. God’s word of promise never fails.​—Isa. 55:11. w16.11 4:3, 5




Saturday, July 21

We died with reference to sin.​—Rom. 6:2.



Those Christians were still alive on earth, so how could that be said of them? God applied the ransom to Paul and others of his day. Thus Jehovah forgave their sins, anointed them with holy spirit, and called them to be his spiritual sons. Then they had the heavenly hope. If they proved faithful, they would live and rule with Christ in heaven. But Paul could speak of them while they were still alive and serving God on earth as having “died with reference to sin.” He used the example of Jesus, who died as a human and then was raised up as an immortal spirit in heaven. Death was no longer master over Jesus. It was similar with anointed Christians, who could consider themselves “dead with reference to sin but living with reference to God by Christ Jesus.” (Rom. 6:9, 11) Their way of life was not as it once was. They were no longer obeying the dictates or impulses of their sinful desires. They had died to that previous way of life. w16.12 1:9, 10




Sunday, July 22

Setting the mind on the spirit means life and peace.​—Rom. 8:6.



This does not imply that a person needs to think and talk of nothing other than the Bible or his love for God and his hope for the future. Let us recall that Paul and others in the first century who pleased God were living rather normal lives in many respects. They consumed food and drink. Many married and enjoyed family life, working to support themselves. (Mark 6:3; 1 Thess. 2:9) However, those servants of God did not allow such normal aspects of life to become the center of their lives. After showing that Paul worked as a tentmaker, the record reveals what his life was centered on: He regularly gave attention to the Christian preaching and teaching work. (Acts 18:2-4; 20:20, 21, 34, 35) And those were the activities that he recommended to his brothers and sisters in Rome. Yes, Paul’s life centered on spiritual provisions and activities. The Romans needed to imitate him, and so do we.​—Rom. 15:15, 16. w16.12 2:5, 15, 16




Monday, July 23

The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, and He will repay him for what he does.​—Prov. 19:17.



We can be sure that Jehovah appreciates every effort that we make to serve him. He understands any insecurities or self-doubts that we may have. He shows us compassion if financial burdens weigh us down or our health or emotions tend to limit our sacred service. And we can have full confidence in Jehovah’s tender regard for what his servants do to stay faithful to him. (Heb. 6:10, 11) Bear in mind, too, that we can approach the “Hearer of prayer” with the confidence that he will give attention to our concerns. (Ps. 65:2) “The Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort” will unstintingly give us the emotional and spiritual support that we need, perhaps doing so by means of our fellow worshippers. (2 Cor. 1:3) It touches Jehovah’s heart when we show compassion toward others. (Matt. 6:3, 4) And he promises to reward that kindness. w16.12 4:13, 14




Tuesday, July 24

Where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.​—2 Cor. 3:17.



When Jesus was on earth, he exercised his free will to reject the temptations of the great Adversary. (Matt. 4:10) In earnest prayer the night before his death, Jesus reaffirmed his determination to do the will of God. He said: “Father, if you want to, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, let, not my will, but yours take place.” (Luke 22:42) May we imitate Jesus and use our free will to honor Jehovah and to do his will! Is that really possible? Yes, we can imitate the example of Jesus, for we too are made in God’s image and likeness. (Gen. 1:26) However, we have limitations. We do not have the absolute freedom that Jehovah has. God’s Word explains that our freedom has boundaries and that we must observe the limits Jehovah appropriately places on us. What is more, wives are to be in subjection to their husbands and children to their parents.​—Eph. 5:22; 6:1. w17.01 2:4, 5




Wednesday, July 25

I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think.​—Rom. 12:3.



We live in exciting times. The earthly part of Jehovah’s organization is growing in many ways, but growth necessitates change. As changes affect us personally, may we be humble, keeping an eye on Jehovah’s interests and not on our own. Doing so promotes unity. To Christians in Rome, Paul wrote: “Just as we have in one body many members, but the members do not all have the same function, so we, although many, are one body in union with Christ.” (Rom. 12:4, 5) Whatever our circumstances, then, let all of us work to further the interests of Jehovah’s magnificent Kingdom. You older ones, equip younger ones to do what you do. You younger brothers, accept responsibility, be modest, and maintain a respectful attitude toward the older ones. And you wives, imitate Aquila’s wife, Priscilla, who accompanied and supported Aquila faithfully as their circumstances changed.​—Acts 18:2. w17.01 5:15, 16




Thursday, July 26

I am the most insignificant.​—Judg. 6:15.



Gideon readily acknowledged his modest background and credentials. After he accepted Jehovah’s assignment, Gideon made sure that he thoroughly understood what was required, and he looked to Jehovah for guidance. (Judg. 6:36-40) Gideon was bold and courageous. Yet, he acted with caution and shrewdness. (Judg. 6:11, 27) He did not seize upon his assignment to gain prominence. Rather, as soon as he could, he gladly returned to his former place. (Judg. 8:22, 23, 29) Being modest does not mean that we should never reach out for or accept additional privileges of service. The Scriptures encourage all of us to make advancement. (1 Tim. 4:13-15) Does this always require a change of assignment though? Not necessarily. With Jehovah’s blessing, we can make spiritual progress in whatever role we are currently serving. We can continue to cultivate our God-given abilities and expand in doing good works. w17.01 3:15, 16




Friday, July 27

God sent his only-begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him.​—1 John 4:9.



Jehovah provided the ransom at great cost to himself. (1 Pet. 1:19) He values humanity so highly that he was willing to let his only-begotten Son die in our behalf. In a sense, Jesus takes the place of our original human father, Adam. (1 Cor. 15:45) By doing so, Jesus restores more than life; he gives us the opportunity to return eventually to God’s family. Yes, on the basis of Jesus’ sacrifice, Jehovah can accept humans back into his family without compromising his righteousness. Is it not heartwarming to think of a time when all faithful humans will be brought to perfection? There will be complete unity between the heavenly and earthly parts of his family. In the fullest sense, we will all be children of God. (Rom. 8:21) Gratitude for the ransom should motivate us to do all we can to make others aware that they can benefit from that priceless gift. w17.02 1:17, 19




Saturday, July 28

Who really is the faithful and discreet slave?​—Matt. 24:45.



The July 15, 2013, issue of The Watchtower explained that “the faithful and discreet slave” is a small group of anointed brothers who make up the Governing Body. The Governing Body makes important decisions collectively. How so? The members meet weekly, which fosters close communication and unity. (Prov. 20:18) Each year, they rotate chairmanship at those meetings, since no member of the Governing Body is considered to be more important than the other members. (1 Pet. 5:1) Each of the six committees of the Governing Body rotate chairmanship in the same way. And each member of that body views himself, not as the leader of his fellow brothers, but as one of the “domestics,” fed by the faithful slave and subject to its oversight. The Governing Body is neither inspired nor infallible. Therefore, it can err in doctrinal matters or in organizational direction. w17.02 4:10-12




Sunday, July 29

[God] did not even spare his own Son but handed him over for us all.​—Rom. 8:32.



An important way in which we show gratitude for the ransom is by dedicating ourselves to Jehovah on the basis of our faith in the ransom and getting baptized. Our baptism shows that “we belong to Jehovah.” (Rom. 14:8) Since everything Jehovah does is influenced by love, it is his will that all his worshippers display love as their dominant quality. (1 John 4:8-11) We prove that we desire to be “sons of [our] Father who is in the heavens” by loving our neighbor. (Matt. 5:43-48) The command to love our neighbor is second only to the command to love Jehovah. (Matt. 22:37-40) We can show such love for neighbor by obeying the command to preach the good news of God’s Kingdom. As we show love for fellow humans, we reflect God’s glory. In fact, love for God is “made perfect in us” when we obey the command to love others, especially our brothers.​—1 John 4:12, 20. w17.02 2:13, 14




Monday, July 30

If Jehovah is the true God, follow him; but if Baal is, follow him!​—1 Ki. 18:21.



You might think that this was a simple choice because it is always wise and beneficial to serve Jehovah. In fact, no reasonable person should be attracted to or attached to Baal. Still, those Israelites were “limping between two different opinions.” Wisely, Elijah urged them to choose the superior way of worship​—the worship of Jehovah. Why might it have been so difficult for those Israelites to make a wise decision? First, they had basically lost faith in Jehovah and refused to listen to his voice. They had not built a foundation of accurate knowledge or godly wisdom; nor did they trust in Jehovah. Acting in accord with accurate knowledge would have helped them to make wise decisions. (Ps. 25:12) Moreover, the people in the land who were not worshippers of Jehovah influenced the Israelites’ thinking, moving them to follow that pagan crowd. Jehovah had long before warned that such a thing could happen.​—Ex. 23:2. w17.03 2:6, 7




Tuesday, July 31

[Hezekiah] crushed the copper serpent that Moses had made.​—2 Ki. 18:4.



Meditating on the example of Hezekiah, we may see a need to remove something that is hindering our relationship with God or diverting our attention from true worship. Clearly, we do not want to imitate those in the world who, using social media, treat humans as if they were idols. Of course, some Christians may find pleasure in communicating with family or close friends by such means. But many in the world use social media excessively, following men or women whom they do not even know. Or they spend a great deal of time looking at pictures of or reading about such individuals. There is the danger of becoming consumed with what amounts to trivia. A Christian could even become puffed up with pride over how many like his postings, even taking offense if they cease to follow him. We can ask ourselves, ‘Do I avoid idolizing humans or using a great deal of valuable time on inconsequential matters?’​—Eph. 5:15, 16. w17.03 3:14, 17




