
June
Friday, June 1

I will offer that one up as a burnt offering.​—Judg. 11:31.



Jephthah had no other child; his daughter was his only hope for a descendant, someone to carry on his name and his inheritance in Israel. (Judg. 11:34) Nevertheless, Judges 11:35 concludes with Jephthah saying: “I have opened my mouth to Jehovah, and I am unable to turn back.” His faithfulness even at great personal cost brought him God’s approval and blessing. Would you have made the same choice? When we dedicated our lives to Jehovah, we vowed that we would do his will unreservedly. We knew that living up to that promise would require self-sacrifice. However, our willingness is especially put to the test when we are asked to do things that are not initially to our liking. When we make such sacrifices and serve God in a way that takes us out of our comfort zone, we prove ourselves faithful. The resulting blessings are always far greater than any sacrifices we may make, painful as they may be.​—Mal. 3:10. w16.04 1:11, 14, 15




Saturday, June 2

Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.​—Rev. 2:7.



Jesus leads the Christian congregation by means of holy spirit. We need holy spirit to help us resist temptation, to embolden and equip us for the ministry, and to enable us to make sound decisions. Should we not take advantage of every provision​—including congregation meetings—​to receive that spirit? At many of our meetings, we review the fulfillment of Bible prophecy. As a result, we reinforce our conviction that Jehovah’s promises for the future will likewise be fulfilled. Of course, it is not just those who speak from the platform who encourage us. Fellow Christians who offer comments and sing from the heart also build us up. (1 Cor. 14:26) And when we converse with our brothers and sisters before and after the meetings, we feel a sense of belonging and enjoy true refreshment.​—1 Cor. 16:17, 18. w16.04 3:6, 7




Sunday, June 3

Make disciples of people of all the nations.​—Matt. 28:19.



Jesus described the scope of the preaching work by saying that the good news would be preached “in all the inhabited earth.” (Matt. 24:14) Disciples are to be made “of people of all the nations.” That entails a global work. To understand how Jehovah’s Witnesses have fulfilled Jesus’ prophecy with regard to the scope of the preaching work, let us consider some facts. There are approximately 600,000 members of the clergy in the various denominations in the United States, where there are some 1,200,000 Witnesses of Jehovah. Worldwide, the Roman Catholic Church has a little over 400,000 priests. Now consider the number of Witnesses involved in the Bible-based Kingdom-preaching work. Worldwide, some eight million volunteer ministers preach to people in 240 lands. What an amazing work is being accomplished, all to Jehovah’s praise and glory!​—Ps. 34:1; 51:15. w16.05 2:13, 14




Monday, June 4

A man prone to anger stirs up strife; anyone disposed to rage commits many transgressions.​—Prov. 29:22.



The world abounds with people and societies motivated by a spirit of independence that fosters pride, egotism, and rivalry. Anyone who allows himself to be swept along by this spirit is, in effect, accepting Satan’s argument that it is the course of wisdom to pursue one’s own interests regardless of how doing so may affect others. (Gen. 3:1-5) Such a selfish course leads to strife. In contrast, Jesus taught people to seek peace, even if such a course would seem detrimental to their own interests. In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus gave excellent advice about handling disagreements or potential conflicts. For instance, he urged his disciples to be mild-tempered, to be peacemakers, to eliminate causes for anger, to settle matters quickly, and to love their enemies.​—Matt. 5:5, 9, 22, 25, 44. w16.05 1:4, 5




Tuesday, June 5

I have the desire to do what is fine but not the ability to carry it out.​—Rom. 7:18.



Many of us had to make significant changes prior to our baptism in order to bring our life into harmony with the Bible’s basic requirements. After baptism, we discerned the need to continue making changes​—more subtle ones—​so as to imitate God and Christ more closely. (Eph. 5:1, 2; 1 Pet. 2:21) For instance, we may have noted in ourselves a critical spirit, a fear of man, a tendency toward harmful gossip, or some other weakness. Has making progress in this regard proved to be harder than we expected? Remember, we are still imperfect. (Col. 3:9, 10) It is therefore unrealistic to expect that after baptism​—or even after many years in the truth—​we will no longer make mistakes, experience setbacks, or be troubled with wrong motives and inclinations. Certain tendencies might persist for years.​—Jas. 3:2. w16.05 4:3-5




Wednesday, June 6

Those whom Jehovah loves he disciplines, in fact, he scourges everyone whom he receives as a son.​—Heb. 12:6.



You may have heard someone say something like this, ‘I never fully appreciated the discipline that I received from my parents until I had children of my own.’ When we gain more experience in life, we may see discipline in a new light and start to view it as Jehovah does, as a manifestation of love. (Heb. 12:5, 11) Yes, out of love for his children, Jehovah patiently molds us. He wants us to be wise and happy and to love him in return. (Prov. 23:15) He takes no pleasure in our suffering; nor does he want us to die as “children of wrath,” which is the prospect inherited from Adam. (Eph. 2:2, 3) As “children of wrath,” we once displayed many qualities that displease God, perhaps even some beastlike traits! Yet, thanks to Jehovah’s molding, we changed; we became more like lambs.​—Isa. 11:6-8; Col. 3:9, 10. w16.06 1:7, 8




Thursday, June 7

Whoever will humble himself like this young child is the one who is the greatest in the Kingdom of the heavens.​—Matt. 18:4.



Most young children are eager to learn, and they tend to be humble. (Matt. 18:1-3) Accordingly, wise parents can strive to inculcate knowledge of the truth and love for it in the minds and hearts of their little ones. (2 Tim. 3:14, 15) Of course, to succeed, the parents must first impress the truth on their own hearts, making the truth their way of life. When parents do this, their children not only hear the truth but also experience it. Moreover, they learn to view parental discipline as an expression of love that reflects Jehovah’s love. When we humbly submit to Jehovah and make such submission our way of life, he will view us as very precious, just as he did the prophet Daniel. (Dan. 10:11, 19) What is more, Jehovah will continue to mold us by means of his Word, spirit, and organization. w16.06 2:14, 17




Friday, June 8

I have found David the son of Jesse a man agreeable to my heart.​—Acts 13:22.



David was loved by Jehovah, who found him to be a man “agreeable to his heart.” (1 Sam. 13:13, 14) But David later committed adultery with Bath-sheba, and she became pregnant. That occurred while her husband, Uriah, was away serving in the army. When he came home temporarily, David tried to get him to have sexual relations with Bath-sheba so that it might appear that Uriah was the child’s father. Uriah would not do what the king suggested, so David arranged to have him killed in battle. David paid dearly for his crime​—calamities came upon him and his household. (2 Sam. 12:9-12) Yet, God showed mercy to this man who overall walked before Jehovah “with integrity of heart.” (1 Ki. 9:4) If you had lived among God’s people back then, how would you have reacted? Would David’s wrong conduct have stumbled you? w16.06 4:7




Saturday, June 9

Keep looking, keep awake, for you do not know when the appointed time is.​—Mark 13:33.



As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we take seriously Jesus’ warning. We know that we are living deep in “the time of the end” and that there cannot be much time left before the “great tribulation” begins! (Dan. 12:4; Matt. 24:21) We see distressing wars, increasing immorality and lawlessness, religious confusion, food shortages, pestilences, and earthquakes taking place around the world. We know that a phenomenal Kingdom-preaching work is being accomplished by Jehovah’s people everywhere. (Matt. 24:7, 11, 12, 14; Luke 21:11) We eagerly anticipate what the Lord’s coming will mean for us and for the accomplishment of God’s purpose. (Mark 13:26, 27) However, try as hard as we might, we cannot pinpoint the exact year, much less day and hour, when the great tribulation will begin. w16.07 2:2-4




Sunday, June 10

Approach the throne of undeserved kindness with freeness of speech.​—Heb. 4:16.



Jehovah in his undeserved kindness grants us the blessing of approaching his heavenly throne in prayer. He has afforded us this privilege through his Son, “by means of whom we have this freeness of speech and free access with confidence through our faith in him.” (Eph. 3:12) Free access to Jehovah in prayer is indeed a wonderful expression of his undeserved kindness. Paul encouraged us to approach Jehovah freely in prayer, “so that we may receive mercy and find undeserved kindness to help us at the right time.” (Heb. 4:16b) At any time that we are plagued with trials or turmoil in our life, we can cry out to Jehovah for his merciful help. Undeserving as we are, he answers our call, often through fellow Christians, “so that we may be of good courage and say: ‘Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?’”​—Heb. 13:6. w16.07 3:12, 13




Monday, June 11

Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. And you have become her children.​—1 Pet. 3:6.



Although Noah and his three sons each had only one wife, polygamy was practiced in patriarchal times. In many cultures, sexual immorality became a way of life, even being incorporated into religious rites. When Abram (Abraham) and his wife, Sarai (Sarah), obeyed God and moved to Canaan, that land was filled with practices that made a mockery of marriage. Jehovah therefore decreed that Sodom and Gomorrah be destroyed because inhabitants of those cities practiced or condoned gross sexual immorality. Abraham took the proper lead in his family, and Sarah set a fine example by submitting to her husband’s headship. (1 Pet. 3:3-5) Abraham made sure that his son Isaac married a worshipper of Jehovah. Similar concern for true worship guided Isaac’s son Jacob, whose sons became the forefathers of the 12 tribes of Israel. w16.08 1:10




Tuesday, June 12

The little one will become a thousand and the small one a mighty nation.​—Isa. 60:22.



Those prophetic words are undergoing fulfillment in these last days. Why, during the 2015 service year, 8,220,105 Kingdom publishers were active in the world field! The last part of that prophecy should affect all Christians personally, for our heavenly Father says: “I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.” Like passengers in a vehicle gaining speed, we sense the increased momentum in the disciple-making work. How are we personally reacting to that acceleration? Are we doing all we can as zealous Kingdom publishers? Many brothers and sisters are applying to serve as regular or auxiliary pioneers. And do we not rejoice to see so many answer the call to serve where the need is greater or participate in other areas of theocratic activity? Whether we are brothers or sisters, we certainly have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.”​—1 Cor. 15:58. w16.08 3:1, 2




Wednesday, June 13

The hand of Jehovah is not too short to save.​—Isa. 59:1.



Soon after the Israelites were miraculously released from slavery in Egypt, the Amalekites attacked them. Following Moses’ direction, courageous Joshua led the Israelites into battle. In the meantime, Moses took Aaron and Hur to a nearby hillside from which they could see the battlefield. Moses put into action a plan that proved to be the key to their success. Moses kept his hands and the rod of the true God lifted up toward heaven. As long as Moses did that, Jehovah empowered the hands of the Israelites to fight successfully against the Amalekites. However, when Moses’ hands became heavy and began to drop down, the Amalekites started to win. Acting with decisiveness, Aaron and Hur “took a stone and put it under [Moses], and he sat on it. Then Aaron and Hur, one on each side, supported his hands, so that his hands remained steady until the sun set.” Yes, God’s mighty hand enabled the Israelites to win the battle.​—Ex. 17:8-13. w16.09 1:5-7




Thursday, June 14

When I wish to do what is right, what is bad is present with me.​—Rom. 7:21.



Paul had full confidence that he could win his internal battle by prayerfully relying on Jehovah and exercising faith in Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. What about us? As we struggle against giving in to our own fleshly weaknesses, we can succeed. How? By imitating Paul, by fully relying on Jehovah and not on our own strength, and by having faith in the ransom. There are times when God may allow us to demonstrate the depth of our concern about a matter. For instance, what if we (or a family member) were stricken by a serious illness or we were faced with some injustice? We would show our full trust in Jehovah by supplicating him in prayer to give us the strength to keep faithful and not lose our joy and spiritual balance. (Phil. 4:13) The experience of many, both in Paul’s day and in ours, proves that prayer can help us to renew our power and build up confidence to continue enduring. w16.09 2:14, 15




Friday, June 15

The Greek-speaking Jews began complaining against the Hebrew-speaking Jews.​—Acts 6:1.



As the early Christian congregation grew, a situation that apparently involved discrimination arose. Greek-speaking Jews complained that their widows were not being treated fairly. To settle this issue, the apostles appointed seven men to make sure that nobody was neglected. These men all had Greek names, which seems to indicate that the apostles wanted to ease any tensions over background that might have existed among the early Christians. (Acts 6:2-6) Whether we realize it or not, we are all deeply influenced by our culture. (Rom. 12:2) Moreover, we likely hear neighbors, fellow workers, or schoolmates make derogatory remarks about those of another background, tribe, or skin color. How deeply are we affected by such biased views? And how do we react when someone makes fun of our nationality​—maybe by exaggerating some feature of our culture? w16.10 1:7, 8




Saturday, June 16

[God’s] invisible qualities are clearly seen . . . They are perceived by the things made.​—Rom. 1:20.



“To perceive” means to recognize something that may not be immediately visible or obvious. (Heb. 11:3) Perceptive people, therefore, use their mind, not just their eyes and ears. Jehovah’s organization has supplied many well-researched aids to help us. These can enable us ‘to see’ our Creator through our eyes of faith. (Heb. 11:27) These aids include the video The Wonders of Creation Reveal God’s Glory, the brochures Was Life Created? and The Origin of Life​—Five Questions Worth Asking, and the book Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? Awake! has often presented interviews with scientists and others who have explained why they now believe in God. The series of articles called “Was It Designed?” has highlighted examples of the amazing design that we see in nature. Scientists often strive to imitate those wonderful designs. w16.09 4:4, 5




Sunday, June 17

They received a favorable witness because of their faith.​—Heb. 11:39.



Faithful ones mentioned in Hebrews chapter 11 died before the promised “offspring,” Jesus Christ, opened the way to heavenly life. (Gal. 3:16) Nevertheless, they will be resurrected to perfect human life in an earthly paradise. (Ps. 37:11; Isa. 26:19; Hos. 13:14) Hebrews 11:13 says of some who lived in pre-Christian times: “In faith all of these died, although they did not receive the fulfillment of the promises; but they saw them from a distance and welcomed them.” One of these was Abraham. Did he keep clear in mind the happy hope of life under the promised “offspring”? Jesus gave a clear answer to that question when he said to his opposers: “Abraham your father rejoiced greatly at the prospect of seeing my day, and he saw it and rejoiced.” (John 8:56) The same was true of Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, and many others who focused their hope on the future Kingdom, “whose designer and builder is God.”​—Heb. 11:8-11. w16.10 3:4, 5




Monday, June 18

Carry on prayer on every occasion.​—Eph. 6:18.



How grateful we should be that Jehovah used his holy spirit to reveal the truth to us and to enable us to exercise faith in the good news! (Luke 10:21) We should never cease thanking Jehovah for drawing us to himself through his Son, “the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our faith.” (Heb. 12:2) To show our appreciation for such undeserved kindness, we should keep strengthening our faith through prayer and study of God’s Word. (1 Pet. 2:2) We should keep exercising our faith in Jehovah’s promises. We must do this in ways that are clearly evident to others. For example, we keep on preaching about God’s Kingdom and sharing in the work of making disciples. We also keep working “what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) And we work hard to “strip off the old personality with its practices.”​—Col. 3:5, 8-10. w16.10 4:11, 12




Tuesday, June 19

[Jehovah] skillfully made the heavens.​—Ps. 136:5.



The universe truly is a marvel of organization. Surely, then, we should expect that Jehovah wants his worshippers to be well-organized. In fact, to that end God has provided the Bible for our guidance. Living without the help of God’s organization and his standards would result in unhappiness and misery. The people of ancient Israel were a model of organization. Under the Mosaic Law, for example, there were “women who were organized to serve at the entrance of the tent of meeting.” (Ex. 38:8) Later, King David organized the Levites and the priests into effective divisions. (1 Chron. 23:1-6; 24:1-3) The first-century Christian congregation was organized, and it benefited from the direction of the governing body, initially made up of the apostles. (Acts 6:1-6) Counsel and instructions were also provided by means of inspired letters.​—1 Tim. 3:1-13; Titus 1:5-9. w16.11 2:3, 6, 8, 9




Wednesday, June 20

Whoever is for the captivity, to the captivity!​—Jer. 15:2.



In 607 B.C.E., a massive Babylonian army under the command of King Nebuchadnezzar II invaded the city of Jerusalem. Regarding the bloodbath that followed, the Bible says: “[Nebuchadnezzar] killed their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary; he felt no compassion for young man or virgin, old or infirm. . . . He burned down the house of the true God, tore down the wall of Jerusalem, burned all its fortified towers with fire, and destroyed everything of value.” (2 Chron. 36:17, 19) The destruction of Jerusalem should have come as no surprise to its inhabitants. For years, God’s prophets had warned the Jews that if they continued to disregard God’s Law, they would be delivered into the hands of the Babylonians. Many Jews would die by the edge of the sword; any who escaped death would likely have to spend the rest of their lives in exile in Babylon. w16.11 4:1, 2




Thursday, June 21

Through one man sin entered into the world.​—Rom. 5:12.



Adam was the “one man” through whom sin and death “entered into the world.” Thus “by the trespass of the one man death ruled as king.” Paul added that “the abundance of [God’s] undeserved kindness” came about “through the one person, Jesus Christ.” (Rom. 5:12, 15, 17) And that undeserved kindness has resulted in good for all mankind. “Through the obedience of the one person [Jesus] many will be made righteous.” Actually, God’s undeserved kindness can lead to “everlasting life through Jesus Christ.” (Rom. 5:19, 21) Jehovah was not obliged to have his Son come to earth to provide the ransom. Moreover, imperfect, sinful humans did not of themselves merit, or deserve, what God and Jesus did in providing a ransom by which forgiveness was possible. So our being forgiven and offered the prospect of living forever is truly a kindness that is undeserved. We should highly value the gift of God’s undeserved kindness and let it affect our life daily. w16.12 1:1, 6, 7




Friday, June 22

Setting the mind on the flesh means enmity with God, for it is not in subjection to the law of God.​—Rom. 8:7.



Self-examination is important. Why? Paul wrote: “Setting the mind on the flesh means death.” (Rom. 8:6) That is serious​—spiritual death now and physical death in the future. Still, Paul did not mean that if someone began to ‘set the mind on the flesh’ his end unavoidably would be death. Change is possible. Think of the immoral man in Corinth who went after “the flesh” and had to be disfellowshipped. Yet, he could and did change. He ceased to walk after the flesh and returned to a straight path. (2 Cor. 2:6-8) If it was possible for that person to change, it is possible for a Christian today to change, especially one who has not gone after the flesh as far as the man in Corinth had. Certainly, Paul’s warning about the possible final outcome for someone who ‘sets his or her mind on the flesh’ should be a stimulus to Christians to make any needed changes! w16.12 2:5, 12, 13




Saturday, June 23

Throw your burden on Jehovah, and he will sustain you.​—Ps. 55:22.



How comforting it is for us to ‘throw our burden on Jehovah,’ knowing that ‘he will sustain us’! We can have full confidence that God can do “more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive.” (Eph. 3:20) Imagine that​—not just abundantly and not superabundantly but “more than superabundantly”! To receive the reward, we need to exercise full faith in Jehovah and be obedient to his directions. Moses told the nation of Israel: “Jehovah will surely bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance, but only if you strictly obey the voice of Jehovah your God and carefully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today. For Jehovah your God will bless you just as he has promised you.” (Deut. 15:4-6) Do you have full confidence that Jehovah will bless you if you continue to serve him faithfully? You certainly have good reason for such confidence. w16.12 4:8, 9




Sunday, June 24

Jehovah . . . has chosen you to become his people, his special property.​—Deut. 7:6.



This was not an arbitrary choice. Jehovah was being true to a promise that he had made centuries earlier to his friend Abraham. (Gen. 22:15-18) Furthermore, Jehovah always exercises his freedom in harmony with his attributes of love and justice. This is evident in the way he disciplined the Israelites, who repeatedly abandoned true worship. When they expressed heartfelt repentance, Jehovah willingly extended love and mercy, saying: “I will heal their unfaithfulness. I will love them of my own free will.” (Hos. 14:4) What a fine example of using his freedom for the benefit of others! When Jehovah began his creative works, he lovingly chose to bestow free will on his intelligent creatures. The first one to receive this gift was his firstborn Son, “the image of the invisible God.” (Col. 1:15) Even before coming to earth, Jesus chose to remain loyal to his Father and not join Satan in his rebellion. w17.01 2:3, 4




Monday, June 25

God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.​—Heb. 6:10.



Our changing circumstances can expand or limit our sphere of operation. Are you young or up in years? Is your health good or fragile? Jehovah always considers how each of us might best be used in his service. He only expects from us what is reasonable, and he greatly appreciates whatever we do. Jesus found joy in every one of his assignments, and we can find joy in ours. (Prov. 8:30, 31) A modest person does not feel cramped by his current assignments or responsibilities in the congregation. He does not worry about gaining future privileges or about what others are achieving. Instead, he focuses his energies on finding purpose and enjoyment in his present role because he views it as coming from Jehovah. At the same time, he sincerely respects the role or place that Jehovah has given to others. Modesty helps us to enjoy giving others due honor and support.​—Rom. 12:10. w17.01 3:13, 14




Tuesday, June 26

Like a child with a father he slaved with me to advance the good news.​—Phil. 2:22.



Some younger ones may now be coordinating activities that include older brothers. Though such younger ones have a changed role, they would do well to benefit from the wisdom and experience of older ones before making decisions. Timothy, a younger man, worked alongside the apostle Paul for many years. Paul had written to the Corinthians: “I am sending Timothy to you, because he is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord. He will remind you of my methods in connection with Christ Jesus.” (1 Cor. 4:17) This brief statement points to the close cooperation between Paul and Timothy. Paul had taken time to teach Timothy his “methods.” Timothy learned well and had won Paul’s affection, and Paul was confident that Timothy could care for the spiritual needs of those in Corinth. What a fine example for elders to imitate today as they train other men to take the lead in the congregation! w17.01 5:13, 14




Wednesday, June 27

There is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.​—Acts 24:15.



Jehovah wants people to live, not die. As the Source of life, he becomes the Father of everyone who is resurrected. (Ps. 36:9) How appropriate, therefore, that Jesus taught us to pray: “Our Father in the heavens.” (Matt. 6:9) Jehovah has given Jesus an important share in resurrecting the dead. (John 6:40, 44) In Paradise, Jesus will fulfill his role as “the resurrection and the life.” (John 11:25) Jehovah’s generosity is not limited to a few privileged people, for Jesus said: “Whoever does the will of God, this one is my brother and sister and mother.” (Mark 3:35) It is God’s will that a numberless “great crowd” from all nations and tribes and tongues become his worshippers. Those who exercise faith in Christ’s ransom and who do the will of God can be among those who shout: “Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.”​—Rev. 7:9, 10. w17.02 2:10, 11




Thursday, June 28

Remember those who are taking the lead among you.​—Heb. 13:7.



To disseminate Bible truth in various languages, Zion’s Watch Tower Tract Society was legally incorporated in 1884, with Charles Taze Russell as president. He was an outstanding student of the Bible, and he fearlessly exposed as false such doctrines as the Trinity and the immortality of the soul. He discerned that Christ would return invisibly and that “the appointed times of the nations” would end in 1914. (Luke 21:24) Brother Russell devoted his time, energy, and money unsparingly to share these truths with others. Clearly, at that pivotal time, Brother Russell was used by Jehovah and the head of the congregation. Brother Russell did not seek glory from humans. In 1896, he wrote: “We want no homage, no reverence, for ourselves or our writings; nor do we wish to be called Reverend or Rabbi. Nor do we wish that any should be called by our name.” He later stated: “This is not man’s work.” w17.02 4:8, 9




Friday, June 29

By wisdom the shrewd man understands the way he is going.​—Prov. 14:8.



We all have choices and decisions to make. Not every one of our decisions is a life-and-death matter. However, many of our decisions, the choices we make, can have a profound effect on us. Hence, the ability to make good decisions can help us to live a relatively smooth, peaceful life rather than one that is full of chaos, controversy, and disappointment. What will help us to make wise decisions? We certainly need faith in God, not doubting his willingness and ability to help us to be wise. We also need faith in Jehovah’s Word and in his way of doing things, trusting God’s inspired counsel. (Jas. 1:5-8) As we draw close to him and grow in love for his Word, we come to trust his judgment. Accordingly, we develop the habit of consulting God’s Word before making decisions. w17.03 2:2, 3




Saturday, June 30

Our eyes are toward you.​—2 Chron. 20:12.



Like his father, Asa, Jehoshaphat maintained his devotion to God even when threatened by an overwhelming enemy force. (2 Chron. 20:2-4) Jehoshaphat did become afraid! Yet, “he resolved to search for Jehovah.” In prayer, he humbly admitted that his people were “powerless before this large crowd” and that he and his people did not know what to do. He fully relied on Jehovah, saying the words of today’s text. Sometimes we, like Jehoshaphat, may not know what to do, even being afraid. (2 Cor. 4:8, 9) But remember that Jehoshaphat acknowledged in a public prayer how weak he and his people felt. (2 Chron. 20:5) Those who take the spiritual lead in the family can imitate Jehoshaphat by turning to Jehovah for guidance and strength to cope with the problem they face. Do not feel ashamed to let your family hear such supplications. They will sense your trust in Jehovah. God helped Jehoshaphat, and he will also help you. w17.03 3:12, 13




