
March
Thursday, March 1

They drove Jephthah out.​—Judg. 11:2.



Jealousy and hatred moved Jephthah’s half brothers to drive him away, illegally depriving him of his rightful inheritance as firstborn. (Judg. 11:1-3) Yet, he came to their aid when they pleaded for his help. (Judg. 11:4-11) The fight to defend Jehovah’s name was more important to Jephthah than any personal conflicts. He was determined to be faithful to Jehovah, resulting in good for himself and for others. (Heb. 11:32, 33) Will we allow Jephthah’s example to touch our hearts? Perhaps we have experienced disappointment or ill-treatment from certain Christian brothers. If so, we should not allow such challenges to hold us back from attending Christian meetings or serving Jehovah and being with the congregation to the full. In imitation of Jephthah, we too can allow divine standards to help us overcome negative circumstances and continue to be a force for good.​—Rom. 12:20, 21; Col. 3:13. w16.04 1:7, 9, 10




Friday, March 2

We do not give up.​—2 Cor. 4:1.



We must endure, not for a time, but to the end. To illustrate: Imagine a ship that capsizes. To survive, the passengers must swim to shore. The swimmer who gives up only a few yards from shore faces the same fate as the swimmer who gave up much earlier. Similarly, we are determined to endure until we reach the new world. Our life depends on our enduring. We have an attitude like that of the apostle Paul, who twice stated: “We do not give up.” (2 Cor. 4:16) We can be absolutely confident that Jehovah will help us endure to the end. We share Paul’s conviction as expressed at Romans 8:37-39: “We are coming off completely victorious through the one who loved us. For I am convinced that neither death nor life nor angels nor governments nor things now here nor things to come nor powers nor height nor depth nor any other creation will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” w16.04 2:17, 18




Saturday, March 3

If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God, . . . and it will be given him.​—Jas. 1:5.



Ask Jehovah for the wisdom to recognize and deal with situations that could cause you to violate your Christian neutrality. If you are imprisoned or otherwise punished because of your resolute stand for true worship, pray for the strength to defend your faith with boldness and to endure whatever persecution may come. (Acts 4:27-31) Jehovah can strengthen you by means of his Word. Meditate on verses that will help you maintain your neutrality under test. Commit them to memory now, so that they can sustain you if you do not have access to a Bible later. God’s Word can also reinforce your hope in future Kingdom blessings. This hope is essential if we are to endure persecution. (Rom. 8:25) Select passages that describe blessings that you especially hope to enjoy, and visualize yourself experiencing those blessings in Paradise. w16.04 4:14, 15




Sunday, March 4

You received free, give free.​—Matt. 10:8.



The clergy of Christendom are not preaching God’s Kingdom. If they do speak about the Kingdom, many refer to it as a feeling or a condition in the heart of a Christian. (Luke 17:21) They do not help people to understand that God’s Kingdom is a heavenly government with Jesus Christ as Ruler, that it is the solution to all mankind’s problems, and that it will soon remove all wickedness from this earth. (Rev. 19:11-21) Rather, they prefer to remember Jesus at Christmas and Easter. They seem to have no idea of what Jesus will accomplish as earth’s new Ruler. They have also lost sight of what should be the motive for preaching. It should not be to collect money and construct elaborate buildings. The Word of God should not be commercialized. (2 Cor. 2:17, ftn.) Those preaching the Kingdom message should not seek personal gain for the work that they do.​—Acts 20:33-35. w16.05 2:7, 8




Monday, March 5

Let each one keep seeking, not his own advantage, but that of the other person.​—1 Cor. 10:24.



Suppose you are drawn to a certain style of dress that could possibly disturb some in the congregation. Yet, you may know of no specific Bible law that forbids it. What is Jehovah’s mind on the matter? The apostle Paul offered this inspired counsel: “The women should adorn themselves in appropriate dress, with modesty and soundness of mind, not with styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive clothing, but in the way that is proper for women professing devotion to God.” (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) In principle, this counsel applies equally to Christian men. As devoted servants of Jehovah, we are concerned not only with our personal preferences but with the effect that our dress and grooming could have on others. Modesty and love move us to take into account the opinions of fellow believers in order to avoid distracting or even offending them.​—1 Cor. 10:23; Phil. 3:17. w16.05 3:14




Tuesday, March 6

O Jehovah, you are our Father. We are the clay, and you are our Potter; we are all the work of your hand.​—Isa. 64:8.



Adam lost his sonship when he rebelled against his Maker. Nonetheless, throughout the generations “a great cloud” of Adam’s descendants have chosen to uphold God’s sovereignty. (Heb. 12:1) By humbly submitting to their Creator, they have demonstrated that they wanted him, not Satan, to be their Father and Potter. (John 8:44) Their loyalty to God calls to mind the words of our day’s text. Today, all who worship Jehovah in spirit and truth endeavor to reflect the same humble, submissive attitude. They consider it an honor to address Jehovah as Father and to submit to him as their Potter. Do you see yourself as soft clay in God’s hands, willing to be molded into a vessel that is desirable in his eyes? Do you similarly see each of your spiritual brothers and sisters as a work in progress, being molded by God? w16.06 1:2, 3




Wednesday, March 7

Keep testing whether you are in the faith.​—2 Cor. 13:5.



As we approach the new world, our faith is being tested. We would do well to assess the quality of our faith. For example, we might examine our view of Jesus’ words recorded at Matthew 6:33. Ask yourself: ‘Do my priorities and decisions reflect that I truly believe Jesus’ words? Would I decide to miss meetings or field service so as to increase my income? What will I do if secular pressures continue to mount? Will I allow the world to squeeze me into its mold​—and perhaps right out of the truth?’ As another example, think about a servant of Jehovah who is somewhat reluctant to follow Bible standards, perhaps regarding associations, disfellowshipping, or entertainment. Ask yourself, ‘Might it be that this is true in my case?’ If we detect such a hardening attitude developing within us, we urgently need to examine our faith! Honest self-appraisal in the light of God’s Word should be a regular part of our thinking. w16.06 2:8, 9




Thursday, March 8

The little one will become a thousand and the small one a mighty nation.​—Isa. 60:22.



Jehovah’s faithful servants on earth, his Witnesses, make up an organization that is indeed exceptional. True, it is composed of humans who are imperfect and who have their faults. Still, God’s holy spirit has been moving his global congregation to grow and prosper. When the last days of the present system began back in 1914, God’s servants on earth were relatively few in number. But Jehovah blessed their preaching work. During the following decades, millions of new ones learned Bible truths and became Jehovah’s Witnesses. Jehovah actually pointed forward to this outstanding growth, saying the words of today’s text and adding: “I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.” That prophetic statement has certainly come true in these last days. Thus, the number of God’s people on earth is now greater than the entire population of many nations. w16.06 4:1, 2




Friday, March 9

Are you not worth more than [the birds of heaven] are?​—Matt. 6:26.



For Jesus, it was unthinkable that his heavenly Father would provide food for the birds but not take care of the same basic needs of humans. (1 Pet. 5:6, 7) He will not put the food in our mouths, but he may bless our efforts to grow the food we need or to earn the money to buy our daily provisions. In cases of need, he may motivate others to share what they have. Although Jesus did not mention providing shelter for the birds of heaven, Jehovah has provided them with the instincts, skills, and materials needed to make nests for themselves. Jehovah can likewise help us find adequate housing for our families. When saying the words found in today’s text, Jesus no doubt had in mind that he would soon give his life in behalf of mankind. (Compare Luke 12:6, 7.) Jesus did not die for the birds of heaven, but he did die for us so that we might enjoy unending life.​—Matt. 20:28. w16.07 1:11-13




Saturday, March 10

Sin must not be master over you, seeing that you are not under law but under undeserved kindness.​—Rom. 6:14.



How did humans inherit the sinful, dying condition that plagues us all? The Bible explains: “By the trespass of the one man [Adam] death ruled as king” over Adam’s descendants. (Rom. 5:12, 14, 17) Happily, though, we can choose no longer to be ruled, or dominated, by sin. By exercising faith in Christ’s ransom sacrifice, we place ourselves under the rule of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness. (Rom. 5:20, 21) Even though we remain sinners, we need not resign ourselves to having sin dominate our lives. When we do give in to sin, we will ask Jehovah for his forgiveness. Therefore, we come under the rule of undeserved kindness. With what result? Paul explained: “The undeserved kindness of God . . . trains us to reject ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things.”​—Titus 2:11, 12. w16.07 3:5, 6




Sunday, March 11

[God] brought her to the man.​—Gen. 2:22.



The first marriage was struck with calamity because both Adam and Eve chose to misuse their free will by disobeying Jehovah. “The original serpent,” Satan the Devil, deceived Eve by leading her to believe that eating fruit from “the tree of the knowledge of good and bad” imparted special knowledge that would enable her to decide what was good and what was bad. She did not show respect for her husband’s headship by asking him about the matter. And instead of obeying God, Adam accepted the fruit Eve held out to him. (Rev. 12:9; Gen. 2:9, 16, 17; 3:1-6) When brought to account by God, Adam blamed his wife. Eve blamed the serpent for deceiving her. (Gen. 3:12, 13) Lame excuses but no justification! Because the first human pair had disobeyed Jehovah, they stood before him as condemned rebels. What a warning for us! For success in marriage, each mate must accept personal responsibility and obey Jehovah. w16.08 1:1, 4, 5




Monday, March 12

What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.​—Matt. 19:6.



Unrealistic expectations may be at the root of a marital problem. When dreams about a happy marriage do not come true, a person may feel dissatisfied, cheated, even bitter. Differences in emotional nature and upbringing may become issues, or disagreements may arise regarding money, in-laws, and child-rearing. However, it is commendable that the vast majority of Christian married couples find mutually acceptable solutions for all such problems because they let God guide them. Christian marriage mates who have serious problems should seek help from the elders. These experienced brothers can assist married couples to apply the counsel of God’s Word. In resolving marital problems, we should also pray for Jehovah’s spirit and his help in applying Bible principles and displaying the fruitage of his spirit.​—Gal. 5:22, 23. w16.08 2:11-13




Tuesday, March 13

From now on you will be catching men alive.​—Luke 5:10.



Jesus had limited time to carry out his ministry. Nevertheless, he took time to cultivate the interest people showed in the good news. For instance, Jesus taught a crowd, using a boat as a platform. On that occasion, he miraculously gave Peter a huge catch of fish and said the words of today’s text. What result did Jesus’ words and actions produce? Peter and his associates “abandoned everything and followed [Jesus].” (Luke 5:1-11) Nicodemus, a member of the Sanhedrin, became interested in Jesus’ teaching. He wanted to learn more but was afraid of what others would say if he spoke with Jesus in public. Jesus was flexible and generous with his time; he met with Nicodemus at night​—away from the crowds. (John 3:1, 2) God’s Son set aside time to build up the faith of individuals. Should we not be diligent in making return visits and conducting Bible studies with interested ones? w16.08 4:10, 11




Wednesday, March 14

Walk in modesty with your God.​—Mic. 6:8.



Our modesty includes making a humble evaluation of ourselves when compared with Jehovah’s purity and holiness, for we are completely dependent on him for the best guidance. Also, modesty includes showing respect for the feelings and opinions of others. Therefore, we ‘walk in modesty with God’ by conforming our lives to his elevated standards and showing respect for other people’s sensitivities. Our choice of clothing should not make people conclude anything other than that we are worshippers of Jehovah. Our brothers and sisters as well as people in general should be able to see that we fittingly represent our righteous God. He has high standards, and we happily strive to reflect those standards. Commendation is in order for brothers and sisters whose appearance and fine conduct attract honesthearted people to the Bible’s lifesaving message and bring glory and joy to Jehovah. w16.09 3:18-20




Thursday, March 15

You have contended with God and with men and you have at last prevailed.​—Gen. 32:28.



Jacob was a very determined contender, and he proved that he would not turn aside from the challenge! (Gen. 32:24-26) And he was, indeed, rewarded for his perseverance. He received the fitting name Israel, (meaning “Contender [Perseverer] With God” or “God Contends”). Jacob gained the rich reward that we too are seeking​—Jehovah’s approval and blessing. Jacob’s beloved wife, Rachel, was eager to see how Jehovah would fulfill his promise to bless her husband’s offspring. But she had no children. In her day, that situation was viewed as a great affliction. How did Rachel find the emotional and physical strength to continue battling against circumstances that were discouraging but completely beyond her control? She never gave up hope. Rather, she kept contending by praying with more intensity. Jehovah heard Rachel’s heartfelt supplications, and she was eventually blessed with children.​—Gen. 30:8, 20-24. w16.09 2:6, 7




Friday, March 16

The word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword.​—Heb. 4:12.



It is particularly important that you impress on your children the value of Bible principles. (Ps. 1:1-3) There are many ways to do this. For example, you could ask your children to imagine that they are going to live on a remote island and will have to choose a number of people to live there with them. Then ask, “What qualities must each person have if all in the group are to live in peace and get along well?” You could also talk with them about the wise directions found at Galatians 5:19-23. That exercise could teach two important lessons. First, God’s standards promote genuine peace and harmony. Second, by educating us now, Jehovah is preparing us for life in the new world. (Isa. 54:13; John 17:3) You could drive these points home by selecting an experience from our publications. It might be from the series “The Bible Changes Lives,” published in The Watchtower. w16.09 5:13, 14




Saturday, March 17

[Make] the best use of your time.​—Eph. 5:16.



Although we may be very busy, we all need to make time for personal study and family worship. (Eph. 5:15) Our aim, though, should not be simply to cover a certain number of pages or solely to prepare comments to participate at meetings. We want to make sure that we allow God’s Word to reach our heart and strengthen our faith. We should find a balance between keeping in mind the needs of others when studying and reflecting on our own spiritual needs. (Phil. 1:9, 10) We must recognize that when we prepare for the ministry, for the meetings, or for a talk, we may not necessarily apply what we read to ourselves. To illustrate: Although a chef has to taste dishes before serving them, he cannot live merely on the food he samples. If he wants to remain healthy, he has to prepare nutritious meals for himself. Similarly, we should strive to nourish our heart with spiritual food that fills our personal needs. w16.10 2:10, 11




Sunday, March 18

By faith we perceive that the systems of things were put in order by God’s word, so that what is seen has come into existence from things that are not visible.​—Heb. 11:3.



The Bible’s description of faith is found at Hebrews 11:1. Faith focuses on two kinds of things that are not visible to us: (1) “What is hoped for”​—this may include future events that have been promised to happen but that have not yet occurred, such as the end of all wickedness and the coming new world. (2) “Realities that are not seen.” In this context, the Greek word translated “evident demonstration” refers to “convincing evidence” of an invisible reality, such as the existence of Jehovah God, Jesus Christ, the angels, and the activities of the heavenly Kingdom. How do we prove that our hope is alive and that we believe in the unseen things spoken of in God’s Word? By our words and deeds​—without which our faith would be incomplete. w16.10 4:6




Monday, March 19

Keep on encouraging one another.​—Heb. 3:13.



Jehovah and Jesus greatly value what all of us do to support Kingdom interests, even if our efforts and contributions are limited because of our circumstances. (Luke 21:1-4; 2 Cor. 8:12) For instance, some of our dear elderly ones make great effort to attend and share in meetings and the ministry regularly. Should we not commend and encourage them? Yes, seize opportunities to encourage others. If we see something that merits commendation, why hold back? Consider what happened when Paul and Barnabas were at Antioch in Pisidia. The presiding officers of the synagogue there told them: “Men, brothers, if you have any word of encouragement for the people, tell it.” Paul responded by giving a fine talk. (Acts 13:13-16, 42-44) If we can offer a word of encouragement, why not speak up? We will very likely find that if we make it a habit to be encouraging, people will encourage us in return.​—Luke 6:38. w16.11 1:3, 15, 16




Tuesday, March 20

The eyes of Jehovah are everywhere, watching both the bad and the good.​—Prov. 15:3.



What a privilege it is to be part of Jehovah’s organization! With our knowledge of God’s requirements and standards comes the responsibility to do what is right and uphold his sovereignty. As this world sinks deeper and deeper into debauchery, we must “hate what is bad,” as Jehovah does. (Ps. 97:10) We refuse to join the ungodly and say: “Good is bad and bad is good.” (Isa. 5:20) Because we want to please God, we strive to remain clean physically, morally, and spiritually. (1 Cor. 6:9-11) We love Jehovah and put our trust in him; we choose to show our loyalty to him by living up to the standards clearly outlined in his own precious Book. And we make every effort to comply with those standards at home, in the congregation, on the job, at school​—everywhere. w16.11 3:13




Wednesday, March 21

Let every person be in subjection to the superior authorities.​—Rom. 13:1.



The Bible Students were sincere. But during the period between 1914 and 1919, they did not always have a proper view of subjection to the secular governments. Therefore, as a group, they were not always neutral with regard to the war effort. For example, when the president of the United States decreed that May 30, 1918, would be set aside as a day of prayer for peace, The Watch Tower urged the Bible Students to join in the observance. Some brothers purchased bonds to provide financial assistance to the war effort, and a few even went into the trenches with guns and bayonets. However, it would be a mistake to conclude that the Bible Students were first taken into captivity to Babylon the Great because they needed correction and discipline. On the contrary, they understood their obligation to separate themselves from false religion, and during World War I, the break with that world empire was almost complete.​—Luke 12:47, 48. w16.11 5:9




Thursday, March 22

[We] walk, not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.​—Rom. 8:4.



You may wonder why Paul would stress to anointed Christians the danger of living “according to the flesh.” And could a similar danger today threaten Christians, whom God has accepted as his friends and views as righteous? Sadly, any Christian could begin to walk according to the sinful flesh. For example, Paul wrote that some among the brothers in Rome were slaves “of their own appetites,” which could have been sexual appetite or appetite for food, drink, or other things. Some of them were ‘seducing unsuspecting ones.’ (Rom. 16:17, 18; Phil. 3:18, 19; Jude 4, 8, 12) Recall, too, that for a time, a brother in Corinth was “living with his father’s wife.” (1 Cor. 5:1) It is understandable, then, why God used Paul to warn Christians about “setting the mind on the flesh.” (Rom. 8:5, 6) That warning is equally valid now. w16.12 2:5, 8, 9




Friday, March 23

Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down, but a good word cheers it up.​—Prov. 12:25.



Good communication, sharing your feelings with a trusted confidant, can help you cope with anxiety. A marriage mate, a close friend, or a congregation elder may be able to help you to put your anxiety into perspective. Frank and honest communication can do much to help you to understand and deal with your concerns. The Bible tells us: “Plans fail when there is no consultation, but there is accomplishment through many advisers.” (Prov. 15:22) Jehovah also helps Christians to deal with anxieties by means of weekly congregation meetings. There you can associate with fellow believers who are concerned about you and who want to encourage one another. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Such “an interchange of encouragement” will help to replenish your spiritual resources and make it easier for you to deal with any anxiety.​—Rom. 1:12. w16.12 3:17, 18




Saturday, March 24

Hannah . . . began to pray to Jehovah.​—1 Sam. 1:10.



When we deal with health problems or other challenges beyond our control, we should throw our anxiety on Jehovah, trusting that he cares for us. (1 Pet. 5:6, 7) Also, we should do what is within our power to benefit from Christian meetings and other spiritual provisions. (Heb. 10:24, 25) What about faithful parents whose children have gone astray? Elderly Samuel could not force his adult sons to remain loyal to the righteous standards he taught them. (1 Sam. 8:1-3) He had to leave the matter in Jehovah’s hands. Even so, Samuel could maintain his own integrity and please his heavenly Father, Jehovah. (Prov. 27:11) Today, a number of Christian parents find themselves in a similar situation. They trust that Jehovah is ever on the lookout to welcome back sinners who repent. (Luke 15:20) At the same time, such parents work hard to remain loyal to Jehovah, hoping that their example will move their children to return to the fold. w17.01 1:15, 16




Sunday, March 25

With humility consider others superior to you.​—Phil. 2:3.



A humble person is generally also a modest person, able to estimate accurately his own abilities and achievements, to acknowledge his mistakes, and to accept suggestions and new ideas. Humility greatly pleases Jehovah. In the Bible, modesty similarly refers to having a proper estimate of ourselves and an awareness of our limitations. In the original language of the text, the emphasis seems to be on how that awareness should affect our behavior toward others. When might we start to think or act immodestly? Consider a few of the warning signs. We might be taking ourselves or our privileges too seriously. (Rom. 12:16) We might be drawing attention to ourselves in inappropriate ways. (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) Or we might be advocating strong opinions solely on the basis of our position, connections, or personal thinking​—not even being aware that we have crossed the line from modesty to presumptuousness.​—1 Cor. 4:6. w17.01 3:6-8




Monday, March 26

The glory of young men is their strength, and the splendor of old men is their gray hair.​—Prov. 20:29.



In recent times, the work of Jehovah’s people has grown in scope and complexity. As we tackle new projects, new ways of doing things are adopted​—often ways that involve the use of rapidly changing technology. Some older ones may find it hard to keep pace with these advances. (Luke 5:39) Even when that is not the case, younger ones may have greater strength and energy than older ones have. Thus, it is both loving and practical for older ones to prepare younger ones to take on greater responsibility. (Ps. 71:18) Those in positions of authority may not find it easy to delegate to younger ones. Some fear losing a position they cherish or are convinced that younger ones cannot do things as well. Some may reason that they do not have time to train someone else. On the other hand, those who are younger must guard against becoming impatient when they are not given more to do. w17.01 5:3, 4




Tuesday, March 27

Through one act of justification the result to men of all sorts is their being declared righteous for life.​—Rom. 5:18.



Jesus became a perfect human, just as Adam had been. (John 1:14) But unlike Adam, Jesus lived up to the standard Jehovah expected from a perfect man. Even under the most extreme tests, Jesus never sinned nor broke any of God’s laws. As a perfect man, Jesus could save humankind from sin and death by dying in their behalf. He corresponded exactly to all that Adam should have been​—a perfect man, absolutely loyal and obedient to God. (1 Tim. 2:6) Jesus became the ransom sacrifice that opened the way to endless life “for many”​—men, women, and children. (Matt. 20:28) Indeed, the ransom is the key that unlocks the door to the fulfillment of God’s original purpose. (2 Cor. 1:19, 20) The ransom gives all faithful humans the prospect of everlasting life. w17.02 1:15, 16



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 9)  John 12:12-19; Mark 11:1-11


Wednesday, March 28

For the joy that was set before him he endured.​—Heb. 12:2.



Suppose that you are in the middle of a long, dark tunnel. You may wonder if you will again see light. Similarly, you may at times feel overwhelmed by the problems you face. Even Jesus could have felt that way. He was the target of “hostile speech from sinners,” humiliation, and even painful execution on “a torture stake”​—surely the darkest period of his life on earth! (Heb. 12:3) Yet, Jesus endured it all. He focused on the rewards of his endurance, particularly his contribution to the sanctification of God’s name and the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty. The darkness of Jesus’ trials was temporary, but the brilliance of his heavenly reward would be everlasting. Today, the trials you face may be painful and even crushing. But remember that your tribulations on the road to eternal life are temporary. w16.04 2:10



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 10)  John 12:20-50


Thursday, March 29

By means of him [Jesus] we have the release by ransom through the blood of that one, yes, the forgiveness of our trespasses.​—Eph. 1:7.



In this permissive world, sin has all but lost its stigma, so that many are unaware of the need for redemption. They do not understand what sin is, how it affects us, and what we need to do to be delivered from slavery to sin. Honesthearted ones are relieved to learn that Jehovah, out of his great love and undeserved kindness, sent his Son to earth to ransom us from sin and its consequence, death. (1 John 4:9, 10) The ransom sacrifice of Christ is the greatest proof of God’s love for us and illustrates the richness of His undeserved kindness. What a relief it is to learn that if we exercise faith in the shed blood of Jesus, our sins will be forgiven and our conscience will be cleansed! (Heb. 9:14) Good news indeed to share with others! w16.07 4:6, 7



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 11)  Luke 21:1-36


Friday, March 30

[Christ] obtained an everlasting deliverance for us.​—Heb. 9:12.



The door to complete forgiveness opens to us when we exercise faith in the ransom. God’s Word assures us that our sins can be “blotted out.” (Acts 3:19-21) On the basis of the ransom, Jehovah adopts his spirit-anointed servants as his children. (Rom. 8:15-17) As to those of us who are of the “other sheep,” it is as though Jehovah has drawn up an adoption certificate with our name on it. After we have reached perfection and have passed the final test, Jehovah will be delighted to sign the certificate, as it were, and adopt us as his beloved earthly children. (Rom. 8:20, 21; Rev. 20:7-9) Jehovah’s love for his precious children is everlasting. The benefits of the ransom last forever. This gift will never lose its value. No person or power can take it away from us. w17.02 2:15, 16



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 12)  Matthew 26:1-5, 14-16; Luke 22:1-6


Memorial DateAfter SundownSaturday, March 31

If anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father, Jesus Christ.​—1 John 2:1.



When Jehovah drew us into a relationship with him, he was aware of what sort of imperfect tendencies would be particularly troublesome for us. And he knew that we would occasionally transgress. Yet, this did not prevent Jehovah from wanting us as his friends. Love moved God to offer us a precious gift​—the ransom sacrifice of his beloved Son. (John 3:16) If on the basis of this priceless provision we repentantly seek Jehovah’s forgiveness when we err, we can have the confidence that our friendship with him is still intact even though we are in an imperfect state.​—1 Tim. 1:15. w16.05 4:6, 7



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 13)  Matthew 26:17-19; Mark 14:12-16; Luke 22:7-13  (Events after sunset: Nisan 14)  John 13:1-5; 14:1-3


