
May
Tuesday, May 1

The Ammonites were subdued.​—Judg. 11:33.



Jephthah realized that he would need God’s help to free Israel from the Ammonites. He promised Jehovah that if He gave him the victory, he would offer to Jehovah, as “a burnt offering,” the first one who came out of his house when he returned home from the battle. (Judg. 11:30, 31) What did that offering involve? The sacrificing of humans is something detestable to Jehovah. Thus, it is clear that Jephthah did not intend to sacrifice anyone literally. (Deut. 18:9, 10) Under the Mosaic Law, a burnt offering was given entirely to Jehovah, so Jephthah evidently meant that he would devote the person to the exclusive service of God. This promise implied permanent service at the tabernacle. Jehovah accepted Jephthah’s terms and blessed him with a resounding victory. (Judg. 11:32) When Jephthah returned from battle, who went out to meet him but his beloved daughter, his only child! Then came the test. Would he keep his word? w16.04 1:11-13




Wednesday, May 2

They helped the people to understand what was being read.​—Neh. 8:8.



A few years ago, most congregations considered the book Draw Close to Jehovah at the Congregation Bible Study. Did not that study of God’s qualities, along with the heartfelt comments of your brothers and sisters, strengthen your love for your heavenly Father? We also increase our knowledge of God’s Word by paying careful attention to talks, demonstrations, and Bible readings. Meetings teach us to apply Bible principles in all aspects of our life. (1 Thess. 4:9, 10) The Watchtower Study, for example, is tailored to the needs of God’s people. Has a Watchtower Study motivated you to reevaluate your goals, to forgive a fellow Christian, or to improve the quality of your prayers? The midweek meeting educates us for the ministry. We learn how to preach the good news and how to teach Scriptural principles effectively.​—Matt. 28:19, 20. w16.04 3:4, 5




Thursday, May 3

All the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction.​—Rom. 15:4.



Have you ever thought about the personal conflicts recorded in the Bible? Consider just the first few chapters of Genesis. Cain kills Abel (Gen. 4:3-8); Lamech kills a young man for striking him (Gen. 4:23); the shepherds of Abraham (Abram) and Lot quarrel (Gen. 13:5-7); Hagar despises Sarah (Sarai), who becomes upset with Abraham (Gen. 16:3-6); Ishmael is against everyone and everyone’s hand is against him. (Gen. 16:12) Why does the Bible mention such conflicts? Well, one reason is that it helps imperfect humans learn why they need to keep peace. It also shows us the way we can do this. We benefit from reading Bible accounts about real people struggling with real problems. We learn about the results of their efforts and may thus be able to apply such points to some situations we encounter in life. Indeed, all of this helps us to consider how we should or should not deal with similar issues. w16.05 1:1, 2




Friday, May 4

In all the nations, the good news has to be preached first.​—Mark 13:10.



What methods did Jesus and his disciples use to preach the good news? They went to the people wherever they could be found​—in public areas and in private homes. The preaching work included searching for deserving ones from house to house. (Matt. 10:11; Luke 8:1; Acts 5:42; 20:20) This systematic method showed impartiality. What has been the record of Jehovah’s Witnesses? They are the only ones who preach that Jesus has been ruling as King since 1914. As Jesus instructed, they place a high priority on the preaching work. The book Pillars of Faith​—American Congregations and Their Partners notes: “Jehovah’s Witnesses . . . never forget that their primary task is delivering a spiritual message about the coming end of the world and the necessity for salvation.” Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to deliver that message, using methods that Jesus and his disciples used. w16.05 2:10, 12




Saturday, May 5

You will find the knowledge of God.​—Prov. 2:5.



When we base our decisions on Jehovah’s thinking, we draw closer to him. (Jas. 4:8) We enjoy his approval and blessing. This, in turn, strengthens our faith in our heavenly Father. Therefore, let us be guided by Bible laws and principles, for they reveal God’s mind on matters. Of course, we will always have something new to learn about Jehovah. (Job 26:14) With diligent effort, however, we can even now acquire the wisdom, knowledge, and discernment needed to make wise decisions. (Prov. 2:1-5) The ideas and plans of imperfect humans come and go, but the psalmist fittingly reminds us: “The decisions of Jehovah will stand forever; the thoughts of his heart are from generation to generation.” (Ps. 33:11) Clearly, we can make the best personal decisions when our thoughts and actions are in harmony with the thinking of our all-wise God, Jehovah. w16.05 3:17




Sunday, May 6

Jehovah sees into the heart.​—1 Sam. 16:7.



Our faith in Jehovah’s ability to read hearts and to draw to himself those whom he chooses should prevent us from judging others, both in our territory and in our congregation. (John 6:44) Accepting Jehovah as our Potter can affect our attitude toward fellow believers. (Isa. 64:8) Do you see your brothers and sisters as God does​—not as a finished product, but as a work in progress? He can see the inner person as well as the kind of person one can become in his capable hands. Hence, Jehovah takes a positive view of people and does not focus on temporary imperfections. (Ps. 130:3) We can imitate him by seeing his servants in a positive light. In fact, we can work along with our Potter by supporting our brothers and sisters as they strive to make spiritual advancement. (1 Thess. 5:14, 15) As “gifts in men,” the elders ought to take the lead in this regard.​—Eph. 4:8, 11-13. w16.06 1:4-6




Monday, May 7

Let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.​—1 Cor. 10:12.



Sharing the good news with others can help us to cultivate humility and various aspects of the fruitage of God’s spirit. (Gal. 5:22, 23) What is more, as we display the Christlike personality, we adorn our message, which may affect the attitude of some householders. For example, two Witnesses in Australia listened respectfully to a householder who spoke very unkindly to them. Later, however, she regretted her manner and wrote to the branch office. In part, she said: “To those two very patient and humble individuals, I would like to convey my apology for my most self-righteous and condescending behaviour. I am a fool to stand before two people spreading God’s Word and attempt to steer them away like that.” Would the householder have written that if the publishers had shown even a hint of anger? Probably not. Yes, how beneficial our ministry is​—both for ourselves and for our neighbors! w16.06 2:12, 13




Tuesday, May 8

You must love your neighbor as yourself.​—Matt. 22:39.



We are all born imperfect. (Rom. 5:12, 19) So at times some in the congregation may hurt us by what they say or do. This can test our love for Jehovah and for his people. What will we do on such occasions? For example, High Priest Eli had two sons who did not uphold Jehovah’s laws. We read: “The sons of Eli were wicked men; they had no regard for Jehovah.” (1 Sam. 2:12) Though their father played a key role in promoting true worship, his two sons committed very serious sins. Eli knew about this and should have disciplined them, but he was lax in that regard. As a result, God adversely judged the household of Eli. (1 Sam. 3:10-14) In time, his descendants would not be allowed to serve as high priests. Had you lived in Eli’s day, how would you have reacted to Eli’s toleration of the sins committed by his sons? Would you have let it stumble you to the point that you would no longer serve God? w16.06 4:5, 6




Wednesday, May 9

All these other things will be added to you.​—Matt. 6:33.



Why could Jesus say the above? He explained in the preceding verse: “Your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things,” meaning the necessities of life. Jehovah can easily anticipate our individual needs regarding food, clothing, and shelter, even before we become aware of them. (Phil. 4:19) He knows which piece of our clothing will wear out next. He knows what our dietary requirements are and what would be adequate shelter for us, given the size of our family. Jehovah will see to it that we have what we really need. Yes, we can be ever confident that if we do what we are supposed to do​—give spiritual interests priority in our life—​Jehovah will not hold back what is good from us. Our “godly devotion” should prompt us to be content with “food and clothing,” or “sustenance and shelter.”​—1 Tim. 6:6-8; ftn. w16.07 1:17, 18




Thursday, May 10

When we were enemies we became reconciled to God through the death of his Son.​—Rom. 5:10.



This reconciliation enables us to be at peace with Jehovah. Paul links this privilege to Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, stating: “Now that we [Christ’s anointed brothers] have been declared righteous as a result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we also have obtained access by faith into this undeserved kindness in which we now stand.” (Rom. 5:1, 2) What a blessing this is! All of us are unrighteous by nature. But the prophet Daniel foretold that during the time of the end, “those having insight,” the anointed remnant, would be “bringing the many to righteousness.” (Dan. 12:3) By their preaching and teaching work, they have brought millions of “other sheep” into a righteous standing before Jehovah. (John 10:16) However, this has been possible only through Jehovah’s undeserved kindness.​—Rom. 3:23, 24. w16.07 3:10, 11




Friday, May 11

They began taking as wives all whom they chose.​—Gen. 6:2.



This unnatural union of materialized angels and women produced violent hybrids known as Nephilim. Moreover, “man’s wickedness was great on the earth.” (Gen. 6:1-5) Jehovah brought about the Flood of Noah’s day in order to destroy the wicked. At that time, people were so occupied with the daily affairs of life, including marriage, that they did not take seriously what “Noah, a preacher of righteousness,” said about the impending destruction. (2 Pet. 2:5) Jesus compared conditions then with what we would see in our day. (Matt. 24:37-39) Today, most people refuse to listen to the good news of God’s Kingdom that is being preached throughout the earth for a witness to all the nations before this wicked system is brought to its end. Let us take to heart the lesson that even family-matters, such as marriage and the raising of children, should not be allowed to crowd out our sense of urgency as to Jehovah’s day. w16.08 1:8, 9




Saturday, May 12

The time left is reduced. From now on, let those who have wives be as though they had none, . . . and those making use of the world as those not using it to the full.​—1 Cor. 7:29-31.



Because we are living deep in “the last days,” we are experiencing “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Tim. 3:1-5) Yet, keeping spiritually strong will do much to offset this world’s negative influences. In today’s text, Paul was not telling married couples to neglect their marital duties. In view of the reduced time, however, they needed to give priority to spiritual matters. (Matt. 6:33) Although we are living in very trying times and marital relationships are failing all around us, it is possible for us to make marriage happy and successful. Indeed, married Christians who stick with Jehovah’s people, apply Scriptural counsel, and accept the guidance of Jehovah’s holy spirit can preserve “what God has yoked together.”​—Mark 10:9. w16.08 2:17, 18




Sunday, May 13

Shepherd the flock of God.​—1 Pet. 5:2.



The need for shepherds in the Christian congregation is great, and those who will do such work in the future need ongoing training. Paul told Timothy: “The things you heard from me that were supported by many witnesses, these things entrust to faithful men, who, in turn, will be adequately qualified to teach others.” (2 Tim. 2:1, 2) Timothy learned by serving alongside the apostle, an older man. Then Timothy applied Paul’s methods in his own ministry and other aspects of sacred service. (2 Tim. 3:10-12) Paul did not leave Timothy’s training to chance. He had the young man accompany him. (Acts 16:1-5) Elders can imitate Paul’s example by taking qualified ministerial servants along on shepherding calls when appropriate. Elders thus give such brothers an opportunity to observe firsthand the teaching, faith, patience, and love required of Christian overseers. This procedure contributes to the training of future shepherds of “the flock of God.” w16.08 4:16, 17




Monday, May 14

Do not let your hands drop down.​—Zeph. 3:16.



To let the figurative hands drop down has at times been used to describe someone who is discouraged, disheartened, or without hope. (2 Chron. 15:7, ftn.; Heb. 12:12) It is common for a person in that situation to give up. Sadly, life in Satan’s wicked world creates a tremendous amount of pressure, which can cause anxiety and thus make a person feel weighed down. That can be like an anchor attached to a boat, not allowing the boat to move forward. (Prov. 12:25) What could cause you to feel that way? Well, maybe you are trying to cope with the death of a loved one, deal with a serious illness, provide for your family in these hard economic times, or you may be facing opposition. The resulting emotional stress might in time drain your strength. It could even cause you to lose your joy. But you can be assured that God is ready to give you a helping hand.​—Isa. 41:10, 13. w16.09 1:2, 4




Tuesday, May 15

I will eagerly pursue the way of your commandments.​—Ps. 119:32.



One circumstance that many have faced is the struggle to overcome a fleshly weakness. Others have had to put forth determined effort to maintain a positive view of the ministry. Or in your case, it may be the need to keep enduring, even though you have poor health or are lonely. We should also not overlook the struggle some have to forgive someone who has offended them or has sinned against them. No matter how long we have been serving Jehovah, all of us must fight against things that might hinder our service to God, who rewards the faithful. If you realize that you have to some extent been affected in a negative way, by all means pray for holy spirit. Prayer and holy spirit can give you energy to pursue the course that you know to be right and that Jehovah can bless. Act on your prayers. Try to read a portion of the Bible each day, and make time for personal study as well as regular Family Worship sessions.​—Ps. 119:32. w16.09 2:10, 11




Wednesday, May 16

Faith is . . . the evident demonstration of realities that are not seen.​—Heb. 11:1.



Have people said to you that they believe in evolution because it is based on science whereas belief in God is based on faith? Many hold this view. But it is good for us to keep this in mind: No matter what someone believes about God or about evolution, some type of faith is involved. How so? None of us have seen God or observed something being created. (John 1:18) And no human​—whether he is a scientist or not—​has observed one kind of life evolve into another kind. No one has watched a reptile evolve into a mammal, for example. (Job 38:1, 4) Hence, all of us must examine the evidence and use our thinking ability to reach sound conclusions. Regarding creation, the apostle Paul wrote: “[God’s] invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.”​—Rom. 1:20. w16.09 4:4




Thursday, May 17

Do not forget kindness to strangers.​—Heb. 13:2, ftn.



Jehovah lovingly made provisions for the foreigners living in Israel, such as the right to glean food. (Lev. 19:9, 10) Rather than order the Israelites to respect foreigners, Jehovah appealed to their empathy. (Ex. 23:9) They knew ‘how it felt to be a foreigner.’ Even before they were reduced to slavery, the Hebrews were likely shunned by the Egyptians because of racial pride or religious prejudice. (Gen. 43:32; 46:34; Ex. 1:11-14) The Israelites had experienced a bitter life as foreign residents, but Jehovah expected them to treat the foreigner “like a native” among them. (Lev. 19:33, 34) No doubt, Jehovah is equally concerned about people from a foreign background who attend meetings in our congregations. (Deut. 10:17-19; Mal. 3:5, 6) If we reflect on the challenges that they are facing, such as discrimination or the language barrier, we will look for ways to show them kindness and fellow feeling.​—1 Pet. 3:8. w16.10 1:3-5




Friday, May 18

Just as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.​—Jas. 2:26.



The letter of James explains that true Christian faith is not just a matter of believing; action is involved. “Show me your faith without the works,” wrote James, “and I will show you my faith by my works.” (Jas. 2:18) James goes on to show the clear difference between mere belief and the exercising of one’s faith. The demons believe that God exists, but they have no true faith. Rather, they faithlessly work against the fulfillment of God’s purposes. (Jas. 2:19, 20) By contrast, referring to another ancient man of faith, James asks: “Was not Abraham our father declared righteous by works after he offered up Isaac his son on the altar? You see that his faith was active along with his works and his faith was perfected by his works.” (Jas. 2:21-23) Then to drive home the point that faith must be shown by works, James adds the words of today’s text. w16.10 4:8




Saturday, May 19

He has . . . put eternity in their heart.​—Eccl. 3:11.



Science has revealed much about the universe and our earthly home, and it has brought us advantages in various aspects of life. But there are many questions science has not been able to answer. For instance, astronomers cannot tell us exactly how the universe came into existence or why we are on planet Earth with its abundance of life. Also, people in general cannot explain why mankind has a strong desire to live forever. Why are there so many important but unanswered questions? Partly because numerous scientists and others tend to promote godless thinking and endorse the theory of evolution. But in his own Book, Jehovah answers questions weighing on the hearts of people everywhere. We are dependent on the consistent and reliable laws of nature established by Jehovah. Electricians, plumbers, engineers, pilots, surgeons​—all of them depend on these laws in order to do their work. w16.11 2:4, 5




Sunday, May 20

By [God] we have life and move and exist.​—Acts 17:28.



There are many reasons why we should be thankful to Jehovah! We owe him our very life, for without him we would not even move or exist. He has given us a very precious gift​—his own book, the Bible. We gratefully accept it as God’s message, even as the Christians in Thessalonica received God’s word and accepted it. (1 Thess. 2:13) With the written Word of God in hand, we have drawn close to Jehovah and he has drawn close to us. (Jas. 4:8) Our heavenly Father has granted us the wonderful privilege of being part of his organization. How we appreciate such blessings! The psalmist put matters beautifully when he sang: “Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; his loyal love endures forever.” (Ps. 136:1) Twenty-six times in Psalm 136, we find the refrain “his loyal love endures forever.” By proving loyal to Jehovah and his organization, we will experience the truthfulness of those heartening words because we will live forever! w16.11 3:18, 19




Monday, May 21

Just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned.​—Rom. 5:12.



That verse is repeatedly used in the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? As you study this book with your children or others, you will likely read Romans 5:12 when you discuss God’s purpose for the earth, the ransom, and the condition of the dead​—chapters 3, 5, and 6. But how often do you think of Romans 5:12 with regard to your own standing before Jehovah, your actions, and your future prospects? All of us, of course, must face the reality that we are sinners. We make mistakes every day. Yet, we are assured that God remembers that we are made of dust, and he is willing to show us mercy. (Ps. 103:13, 14) Jesus included in the model prayer the request to God: “Forgive us our sins.” (Luke 11:2-4) Hence, we have no reason to dwell on mistakes that God has forgiven. Still, we can benefit from thinking about how he could​—and did—​forgive us. w16.12 1:1-3




Tuesday, May 22

Those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh.​—Rom. 8:5.



It was fitting for Christians in Rome to analyze what their focus in life really was. Could it be that their lives were dominated by or centered on “things of the flesh”? And it is fitting for us to consider the same about our lives. What is of greatest interest to us, and to what does our speech gravitate? What do we really pursue day in and day out? Some may find that they are focusing on trying different types of wine, decorating the home, finding new clothing styles, making investments, planning vacation trips, and the like. Such matters are not bad in themselves; they can be normal aspects of life. For example, Jesus once made wine, and Paul told Timothy to take “a little wine.” (1 Tim. 5:23; John 2:3-11) But did Jesus and Paul make wine a prominent aspect of their lives? Was it their passion, what they constantly talked about? No. What about us? What is our key interest in life? w16.12 2:5, 10, 11




Wednesday, May 23

I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.​—Heb. 13:5.



We can link that inspired statement with what Jesus said about seeking first the Kingdom and God’s righteousness. (Matt. 6:33) The apostle Peter once asked Jesus: “We have left all things and followed you; what, then, will there be for us?” (Matt. 19:27) Instead of rebuking Peter for asking that question, Jesus told his disciples that they would be rewarded for their sacrifices. The faithful apostles and others will rule with him in heaven. But even now there are rewards. Jesus said: “Everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for the sake of my name will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit everlasting life.” (Matt. 19:29) His disciples would gain blessings far in excess of any personal sacrifices they might make. Are not spiritual fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, and children much more valuable than anything we have renounced or given up for the sake of the Kingdom? w16.12 4:4, 5




Thursday, May 24

Faith is the assured expectation of what is hoped for.​—Heb. 11:1.



What a wonderful hope true Christians share! All of us, whether of the anointed or of the “other sheep,” hope to see the fulfillment of God’s original purpose and the sanctification of Jehovah’s name. (John 10:16; Matt. 6:9, 10) Such expectations are the most noble any human can cherish. We also long for the promised reward of everlasting life, either as part of God’s “new heavens” or as part of his “new earth.” (2 Pet. 3:13) In the meantime, we hope for the continued increase of the spiritual prosperity of God’s people. Those who are part of Satan’s world also have some sort of hope, but they may doubt whether theirs will ever be realized. For example, millions of gamblers may hope to win a lottery, but they could hardly feel sure about that. Real faith, on the other hand, is “the assured expectation” of our Christian hope. w16.10 3:1, 2




Friday, May 25

To the extent that each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another.​—1 Pet. 4:10.



In his undeserved kindness, Jehovah has given each of us certain gifts, assets, abilities, or talents. We can use them to glorify him and to benefit others. (Rom. 12:4-8) Jehovah has entrusted us with a stewardship that comes with honor, trust, and responsibility. Our place in God’s arrangement is not fixed, however. It can change over time. Consider Jesus’ example. Initially, he was alone with Jehovah. (Prov. 8:22) Then he helped make other spirit creatures, the material universe, and finally, humans. (Col. 1:16) Still later, Jesus took on a new role on earth, first as a helpless baby and then as an adult. (Phil. 2:7) After his sacrificial death, Jesus returned to heavenly spirit life to become the King of God’s Kingdom in 1914. (Heb. 2:9) And after his Thousand Year Reign, Jesus will hand over his Kingdom to Jehovah so that “God may be all things to everyone.”​—1 Cor. 15:28. w17.01 3:11, 12




Saturday, May 26

Choose for yourselves today whom you will serve.​—Josh. 24:15.



When faced with making a personal choice, one woman told a friend: “Do not make me think; just tell me what to do. That is easier.” The woman preferred being told what to do instead of using a precious gift from her Creator, the gift of free will. What about you? Do you like making your own decisions, or do you prefer that others decide for you? How do you view the matter of free will? People have debated this subject for centuries. Some claim that there is no such thing as free will​—that all our actions are predetermined by God. Others argue that true free will is only possible if we have absolute freedom. However, to understand this matter properly, we must turn to God’s Word, the Bible. Why? It reveals that Jehovah created us with free will; that is, the capacity and freedom to make our own intelligent choices. w17.01 2:1, 2




Sunday, May 27

My son Solomon is young and inexperienced . . . Therefore, I will make preparation for him.​—1 Chron. 22:5.



David might have concluded that Solomon was not qualified to oversee such an important project as building a house for God. After all, the temple was to be “exceedingly magnificent,” and Solomon was at the time “young and inexperienced.” Yet, David knew that Jehovah would equip Solomon to handle the work given to him. So David focused on what he could do to assist, preparing materials in great quantity. Likewise, older brothers today should not be disheartened when it becomes necessary to hand their assignments over to younger men. Rather, it is in the best interests of the work when younger ones are trained to handle responsibilities. Appointed men should have great satisfaction when the younger ones whom they have trained become qualified to take on the work. w17.01 5:8, 9




Monday, May 28

I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will crush your head.​—Gen. 3:15.



As King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus will crush the serpent’s head and erase from the universe all traces of Satan’s rebellion. While on earth, Jesus helped his disciples to see the importance of God’s Kingdom. Immediately after his baptism, Jesus proclaimed “the good news of the Kingdom of God” far and wide. (Luke 4:43) In his last words to his disciples before he returned to heaven, Jesus instructed them to be witnesses of him “to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:6-8) By means of the Kingdom-preaching work, people throughout the earth would have an opportunity to learn about the ransom and become subjects of God’s Kingdom. Today, we show our support for the Kingdom by assisting Christ’s brothers on earth in carrying out the commission to preach the good news of the Kingdom worldwide.​—Matt. 24:14; 25:40. w17.02 2:7, 8




Tuesday, May 29

[Christ] gave some as apostles.​—Eph. 4:11.



Although the governing body had authority in the early congregation, they acknowledged that their Leader was Jesus. “Let us by love grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ,” wrote the apostle Paul. (Eph. 4:15) Instead of naming themselves after a prominent apostle, “the disciples were by divine providence called Christians.” (Acts 11:26) True, Paul acknowledged the importance of “holding fast the traditions,” or Scripturally based practices, given by the apostles and other men who took the lead. Nevertheless, he added: “But I want you to know that the head of every man [including every member of the governing body] is the Christ; . . . in turn, the head of the Christ is God.” (1 Cor. 11:2, 3) Yes, under his Head, Jehovah God, the invisible and glorified Christ Jesus was leading the congregation. w17.02 4:7




Wednesday, May 30

Let the elders who preside in a fine way be considered worthy of double honor.​—1 Tim. 5:17.



Showing honor to those to whom it is due keeps us from becoming self-centered. It helps us to avoid having an inflated opinion of ourselves if some honor comes our way. It also keeps us in line with Jehovah’s organization, which refrains from giving humans​—whether believers or unbelievers—​excessive or undue honor. Moreover, it is the course of wisdom, helping us to avoid being stumbled if some human to whom we showed honor disappoints us. The most important benefit of giving proper honor to those to whom it is due is that we thereby please God. We act as he wants us to and thus maintain integrity to him. That contributes to making a reply to any who would try to taunt him. (Prov. 27:11) The world is full of people whose sense of how to bestow honor is distorted. We are truly grateful to know how to give honor Jehovah’s way. w17.03 1:13, 20, 21




Thursday, May 31

[Jehoshaphat] did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes.​—2 Chron. 20:32.



Like his father, Asa, Jehoshaphat encouraged the people to search for Jehovah. He did so by organizing a teaching campaign that used “the book of Jehovah’s Law.” (2 Chron. 17:7-10) He even went to the territory of the northern kingdom of Israel, to the mountainous region of Ephraim, “to bring them back to Jehovah.” (2 Chron. 19:4) We can all have a share in the great teaching campaign that Jehovah is having done today. Is it your goal each month to teach the Word of God to others, trying to move their heart to serve God? By your extending yourself and with God’s blessing, you may be able to start a Bible study. Is that a goal that you pray about? Are you willing to accept this challenge, even giving up some of what is commonly viewed as free time? And just as Jehoshaphat went to the territory of Ephraim to help people return to true worship, we can reach out to those who have become inactive. w17.03 3:10, 11




