
November
Thursday, November 1

Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, so that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.​—Prov. 27:11.



According to Satan, no one serves Jehovah out of unselfish love. (Job 2:4, 5) Has Satan changed since he made that claim? Not at all! When he was ousted from heaven, Satan was still called “the accuser of our brothers . . . , who accuses them day and night before our God!” (Rev. 12:10) Satan has not forgotten the issue of integrity. He is eager to see us surrender to our trial and withdraw our support of God’s sovereignty. When you struggle with adversity, therefore, imagine this invisible scene. Satan and his demons are on one side, pointing to your struggles and alleging that you will buckle under the pressure and give up. On the other side are Jehovah, his reigning Son, the resurrected anointed ones, and myriads of angels. They are cheering you on, delighted by your endurance and support of Jehovah’s sovereignty. You can take personally Jehovah’s inspired request, mentioned in today’s text. w16.04 2:8, 9




Friday, November 2

Take along with you one or two more.​—Matt. 18:16.



If you succeed in resolving the issue with their help, you will have “gained your brother.” A matter should be referred to the elders only when repeated efforts to help the wrongdoer have failed. Cases requiring that brothers go through all three steps outlined at Matthew 18:15-17 are rare. That is encouraging, for it means that a solution is usually found before the situation reaches the point where an unrepentant sinner must be removed from the congregation. Often, the wrongdoer sees his error and corrects matters. The offended person may see that he no longer has a real reason to find fault and may prefer to forgive. Whatever the case, Jesus’ words indicate that the congregation should not get involved in disagreements prematurely. The elders may intervene only if the preceding two steps have been taken and if solid evidence can be produced to show clearly what has happened. w16.05 1:15, 16




Saturday, November 3

They are no part of the world.​—John 17:16.



We must remain neutral in order to be loyal subjects of God’s Kingdom. Otherwise, how could we have a clean conscience when we preach the good news that only God’s Kingdom can solve mankind’s problems? Additionally, unlike false religions that divide their members by meddling in politics, true worship preserves our international brotherhood by helping us to remain neutral. (1 Pet. 2:17) As Satan’s system nears its end, we can expect the issue of neutrality to become more prominent. The world is filled with people who are “not open to any agreement” and “headstrong,” so it will only become more divided and polarized. (2 Tim. 3:3, 4) In some countries, our brothers have already faced unexpected challenges to their neutrality because of a rapidly changing political environment. Do you see why we need to strengthen our resolve now to remain neutral? If we wait until we face a challenging situation, we might compromise and violate our neutral stand. w16.04 4:3, 4




Sunday, November 4

Whatever a person is sowing, this he will also reap.​—Gal. 6:7.



Some may feel that it does not matter what we choose to do. To make wise decisions that please Jehovah, however, we must consider the laws and principles found in his written Word and comply with them. For instance, to have God’s approval, we must act in harmony with his law on blood. (Gen. 9:4; Acts 15:28, 29) Prayer will help us to make decisions that relate to Scriptural principles and laws. Weighty personal decisions can have quite a bearing on our spiritual health and welfare. Every choice we make will likely affect our relationship with Jehovah​—either for good or for bad. A good decision will strengthen our relationship with God, whereas a bad one may damage it. Moreover, a poor decision could injure others spiritually by disturbing, or even stumbling, them or by disrupting the unity of the congregation. Indeed, our personal decisions do matter.​—Rom. 14:19. w16.05 3:4, 5




Monday, November 5

I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself.​—Isa. 48:17.



Jehovah appreciates our efforts to make “the best use of [our] time” by engaging in regular Bible reading and personal study. (Eph. 5:15, 16) Realistically, we may not always be able to give equal attention to all the spiritual food available to us. However, we need to be aware of a subtle danger. What is it? There is a danger that we could miss out on some benefits because we assume that certain spiritual provisions do not apply to us. For example, what if a portion of the Bible does not seem relevant to our situation? Or what if we are not part of the primary audience for a certain publication? Do we tend to give such information superficial consideration or even skip it altogether? If so, we could be depriving ourselves of information that would be of great benefit to us. Each one of us should bear in mind that God is the Source of all our spiritual provisions. w16.05 5:5, 6




Tuesday, November 6

If a man takes a false step before he is aware of it, you who have spiritual qualifications try to readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness.​—Gal. 6:1.



Jehovah uses the Christian congregation and its overseers to mold us on a personal level. For example, if the elders discern that we are having spiritual problems, they try to help us​—but not on the basis of human wisdom. Rather, they humbly look to God, asking for insight and wisdom. With our situation in mind, they act on their prayers by doing research in God’s Word and in our Christian publications. This can equip them to render help tailored to our needs. Understanding how God may be molding us can help us in our relationships with fellow believers and in our attitude toward people in our territory, including our Bible students. God does not force individuals to make changes, but he reveals his righteous standards so that they can clean up their lives or make adjustments voluntarily. w16.06 1:13, 14




Wednesday, November 7

You are seeking great things for yourself. Stop seeking such things.​—Jer. 45:5.



The apostle John warned that if anyone loves the things in the world​—“the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life”—​then “the love of the Father is not in him.” (1 John 2:15, 16) This means that we need to examine our heart constantly to see if it is being enticed by worldly entertainment, associations, and styles of dress and grooming. Or the love of the world might involve efforts to attain “great things,” such as through the pursuit of higher education. We stand at the threshold of the promised new world. Thus, how important it is that we keep well in mind Moses’ powerful words at Deuteronomy 6:4! If we clearly understand and firmly believe that “Jehovah our God is one Jehovah,” we will do all we can to give him exclusive devotion, serving him as he approves.​—Heb. 12:28, 29. w16.06 3:14




Thursday, November 8

Keep seeking [God’s] Kingdom, and these things will be added to you.​—Luke 12:31.



It has been said that man’s necessities are few, but his wants are infinite. It seems that many cannot see the difference between material needs and wants. What is the difference? A “need” is something you must have because your life depends on it. Food, clothing, and shelter​—these are legitimate necessities. A “want” is something you would like to have, but it is not essential for everyday living. What people want may vary considerably, depending on where they live. In developing countries, many may simply want to have enough money to buy a cell phone, a motorbike, or a small plot of land. In wealthier lands, the urge may be to acquire a lavish wardrobe, a bigger house, or a more expensive automobile. In any case, herein lies a real danger​—becoming ensnared by materialism, wanting more and more things, whether we need them or not and whether we can afford them or not.​—Heb. 13:5. w16.07 1:1-3




Friday, November 9

Do not be planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.​—Rom. 13:14.



Many are so wrapped up in their mundane affairs of life that they are not “conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matt. 5:3) They are engrossed in the material attractions of the world that foster “the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes.” (1 John 2:16) Instead of the world’s spirit, we welcome in our life the influence of God’s spirit by which Jehovah has given us a clear understanding of the events that lie ahead of us. (1 Cor. 2:12) Yet, we realize that it does not take anything extraordinary to make a person spiritually drowsy​—the ordinary things of life will do that if allowed to crowd out our spiritual activities. (Luke 21:34, 35) Others may ridicule us for keeping on the watch, but that is no reason for us to lose our sense of urgency. (2 Pet. 3:3-7) Instead, we must regularly associate with fellow Christians at our congregation meetings, where God’s spirit is present. w16.07 2:13, 14




Saturday, November 10

O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts will come. . . . You cover over our transgressions.​—Ps. 65:2, 3.



Many people pray because it makes them feel good, but they do not really believe that God hears their prayers. They need to know that Jehovah is the “Hearer of prayer.” Jesus told his disciples: “If you ask anything in my name, I will do it.” (John 14:14) Obviously, “anything” means anything that is in harmony with Jehovah’s will. John assures us: “This is the confidence that we have toward him, that no matter what we ask according to his will, he hears us.” (1 John 5:14) How good it is to teach others that far from being a mere psychological crutch, prayer is a wonderful means of approaching Jehovah’s “throne of undeserved kindness”! (Heb. 4:16) By teaching them to pray in the right way, to the right Person, and for the right things, we can help them draw close to Jehovah and find comfort during times of distress.​—Ps. 4:1; 145:18. w16.07 4:11, 12




Sunday, November 11

Your loyal ones will praise you. They will proclaim the glory of your kingship and speak about your mightiness, to make known to men . . . the glorious splendor of your kingship.​—Ps. 145:10-12.



Those words surely express the sentiments of all loyal Witnesses of Jehovah. But what if illness or advanced age somewhat limits your ministry? Always remember that as you share the good news with caregivers and others, your sacred service glorifies our wonderful God. If you are imprisoned because of your faith, you likely speak about the truth as circumstances permit, and that makes Jehovah’s heart rejoice. (Prov. 27:11) The same is true if you are in a religiously divided household but stick to your spiritual routine. (1 Pet. 3:1-4) Even under adverse circumstances, you can praise Jehovah and make spiritual progress. Jehovah will certainly bless you as you share God’s precious truth with those who are in need of hope. w16.08 3:19, 20




Monday, November 12

Let wives be in subjection to their husbands as to the Lord, because a husband is head of his wife just as the Christ is head of the congregation.​—Eph. 5:22, 23.



This arrangement does not make a wife inferior to her husband. It actually helps her to fulfill the role God had in mind for a wife when he said: “It is not good for the man [Adam] to continue to be alone. I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.” (Gen. 2:18) Just as Christ, the “head of the congregation,” displays love, a Christian husband is to exercise loving headship. When he does so, his wife feels secure and finds satisfaction in being respectful, supportive, and submissive. Imitating Jesus’ example requires that his followers love one another just as he loved them. (John 13:34, 35; 15:12, 13; Eph. 5:25) Marital love shown by Christians should therefore be so strong that either mate would be willing, if necessary, to die for the other. w16.08 2:3, 4




Tuesday, November 13

A word spoken at the right time​—how good it is!​—Prov. 15:23.



Your positive words can deeply affect others. You can thus help them to serve Jehovah more fully. And at the meetings, never overlook the powerful effect you can have on others by raising your hand and offering upbuilding comments. With Jehovah’s backing, Nehemiah and those with him strengthened their hands for the work. They then completed Jerusalem’s walls in just 52 days! (Neh. 2:18, ftn.; 6:15, 16) Nehemiah did not simply oversee the work. He was personally involved in rebuilding Jerusalem’s walls. (Neh. 5:16) Similarly, many loving elders have been able to imitate Nehemiah by assisting on theocratic construction projects or by cleaning and maintaining their local Kingdom Hall. By working along with fellow publishers in the ministry and by making shepherding visits, they also strengthen the weak hands of those who are anxious at heart.​—Isa. 35:3, 4. w16.09 1:15, 16




Wednesday, November 14

Love . . . does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests.​—1 Cor. 13:4, 5.



God’s people work hard to apply the Bible’s admonition: “Deaden, therefore, your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion.” (Col. 3:2, 5) We would not want to make it difficult for fellow believers to heed that counsel. Brothers and sisters who have given up a sexually loose lifestyle may still be fighting sinful leanings. (1 Cor. 6:9, 10) We would not want to make their fight harder, would we? When we are around our spiritual brothers and sisters, our manner of dress should help to make the congregation a haven of moral chastity. We have the freedom to choose what to wear. Still, all of us have a responsibility to wear clothes that make it easier for others to remain chaste and to maintain God’s standards of holiness in thought, word, and conduct.​—1 Pet. 1:15, 16. w16.09 3:9, 10




Thursday, November 15

Young men and young women . . . Let them praise the name of Jehovah.​—Ps. 148:12, 13.



“We believe in Jehovah, but that does not necessarily mean that our children will believe,” said a married couple in France. They commented: “Faith is not something you inherit. Our children acquire it little by little.” An Australian brother wrote: “Helping to build faith in your child’s heart is probably the greatest challenge you will ever face. . . . You may feel that you have dealt with a question to your child’s satisfaction. Then you find that he raises the same question again later! The answers that satisfy your child’s curious mind today may not be enough for him tomorrow. You may need to revisit some subjects regularly.” If you are a parent, do you at times feel unequal to the responsibility of teaching and molding your children to become men and women who have faith? Really, in our own wisdom, none of us are up to the task! (Jer. 10:23) But we can succeed when we look to God for guidance. w16.09 5:1, 2




Friday, November 16

Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it.​—Prov. 3:27.



Immigrants face the challenge of adjusting to the culture of the new country. Ruth set a fine example in this regard. First, she showed respect for the customs of her new country by asking permission to glean. (Ruth 2:7) She did not take this right for granted as if others owed her something. Second, she readily expressed gratitude for the kindnesses shown to her. (Ruth 2:13) When immigrants display such a fine attitude, they are more likely to gain the respect of local residents and fellow believers. We rejoice that Jehovah in his undeserved kindness has allowed people from all backgrounds to hear the good news. In their home country, they may not have been able to take advantage of a Bible study or to associate freely with Jehovah’s people. But now that they have the opportunity to associate with us, should we not help them so that they no longer feel like strangers in our midst? w16.10 1:17-19




Saturday, November 17

For the joy that was set before him he endured a torture stake.​—Heb. 12:2.



Millions of modern-day worshippers of God are following the example of Jesus by keeping their hope in clear focus and not allowing trials to weaken their faith. Consider the example of Rudolf Graichen, who was born in Germany in 1925. He recalled pictures of Bible scenes that hung on the walls of his home. “One picture,” he wrote, “showed the wolf and the lamb, the kid and the leopard, the calf and the lion​—all in peace, being led by a little boy. . . . Such pictures made a lasting impression on me.” (Isa. 11:6-9) Despite many years of cruel persecution, first by the Nazi Gestapo and later by the Communist Stasi of East Germany, Rudolf maintained his strong faith in an earthly paradise. Other severe trials faced by Rudolf were the loss of his beloved mother, who died of typhus in the Ravensbrück concentration camp, and seeing his father weaken in faith and renounce being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. w16.10 3:12-14




Sunday, November 18

When you received God’s word, . . . you accepted it . . . just as it truthfully is, as the word of God.​—1 Thess. 2:13.



Jehovah’s servants highly esteem God’s own holy book, the Bible. Being imperfect, we all receive Scriptural counsel at times. How will we respond to it? Consider the first-century Christians Euodia and Syntyche. Serious problems arose between these anointed women. The problems that existed between Euodia and Syntyche could have disrupted the peace of the whole congregation. The Bible does not tell us the outcome, but these sisters may have responded well to the apostle Paul’s loving counsel. (Phil. 4:2, 3) Similar situations sometimes cause difficulties in congregations of Jehovah’s people today. However, such problems can be solved or even avoided if we apply the counsel found in God’s Word, the Bible. And if we highly esteem Jehovah’s own Book, we will live by its instructions.​—Ps. 27:11. w16.11 3:1-3




Monday, November 19

If you become discouraged in the day of distress, your strength will be meager.​—Prov. 24:10.



All of us need encouragement. That is especially true when we are growing up. “Children . . . need encouragement like plants need water,” explains educator Timothy Evans. “With encouragement, a child feels worthwhile and appreciated.” But we live in critical times. People are selfish, there is little natural affection, and encouragement is scarce. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) Satan the Devil wants to discourage us because he knows that discouragement can make us weak spiritually and in other ways. Satan used a combination of calamities and accusations in an effort to discourage righteous Job, but that cruel scheme failed. (Job 2:3; 22:3; 27:5) We can fight the works of the Devil by encouraging members of our family and of the congregation. This will help to make our home and the Kingdom Hall places where we feel happy and secure. w16.11 1:4, 6




Tuesday, November 20

[God] called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.​—1 Pet. 2:9.



A few courageous men at the dawn of the 16th century began to translate God’s Word into the languages spoken by the common people. And as the Bible became available, people did read it. As they read, they asked questions: ‘Where in God’s Word is there mention of purgatory? of paid masses for the dead? of popes and cardinals?’ From the point of view of the church, this was an outrage. How dare the multitudes question church leaders! The church fought back. Men and women were condemned for heresy because they rejected teachings of the church. The church handed down the death sentence; the State carried it out. The goal was to discourage people from reading the Bible and questioning the church. For the most part, the scheme worked. Nevertheless, a few brave souls refused to be cowed by Babylon the Great. They had now had a taste of God’s Word​—and they wanted more! w16.11 4:13




Wednesday, November 21

A faithful witness will not lie.​—Prov. 14:5.



Honesty is basic to Christianity. (Eph. 4:25) Satan is “the father of the lie.” And Ananias and his wife lost their lives because of lying. We do not want to imitate such ones​—we avoid lying. (John 8:44; Acts 5:1-11) Is that, though, as far as our honesty goes? Actually, our honesty should reflect our deep appreciation for God’s undeserved kindness. To lie is to say something untruthful. However, Jehovah wants his people to go beyond not telling outright lies. He urged the ancient Israelites: “You should be holy, because I, Jehovah your God, am holy.” Then he gave examples of being holy. In part, God said: “You must not steal, you must not deceive, and you must not deal falsely with one another.” (Lev. 19:2, 11) Sadly, a person who makes it a point never to tell outright lies might still resort to deceiving others, dealing falsely with them. w16.12 1:17, 18




Thursday, November 22

The peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.​—Phil. 4:7.



In God’s Word, we find Jesus’ soothing sayings. His words and teachings were a source of refreshment to his listeners. Multitudes were drawn to him because he calmed troubled hearts, strengthened the weak, and consoled the depressed. (Matt. 11:28-30) He showed loving consideration for others’ spiritual, emotional, and physical needs. (Mark 6:30-32) Jesus’ promise of support still applies. It can prove to be as true for you as it was for the apostles traveling with Jesus. You do not have to be in Jesus’ physical presence to benefit. As heavenly King, Jesus continues to have and show empathy. Thus, when you are anxious, he can mercifully ‘come to your aid’ and ‘help you at the right time.’ Yes, Jesus can help you to cope with distress, and he can fill your heart with hope and courage.​—Heb. 2:17, 18; 4:16. w16.12 3:4, 6




Friday, November 23

I have decided to put an end to all flesh.​—Gen. 6:13.



Noah lived in a world that was “filled with violence” and immorality. (Gen. 6:4, 9-12) Although Noah faithfully preached Jehovah’s warning message, he could not force wicked people around him to accept that message, nor could he make the Flood come any sooner. Noah had to trust that Jehovah would keep His promise to end wickedness, believing that God would do so at just the right time. (Gen. 6:17) We too live in a world filled with wickedness, which we know Jehovah has promised to destroy. (1 John 2:17) In the meantime, we cannot force people to accept the “good news of the Kingdom.” And we cannot do anything to speed up the start of the “great tribulation.” (Matt. 24:14, 21) Like Noah, we need strong faith, trusting that God will soon intervene. (Ps. 37:10, 11) We are convinced that Jehovah will not allow this wicked world to continue for even one day longer than his purpose requires.​—Hab. 2:3. w17.01 1:5-7




Saturday, November 24

I, Jehovah, am . . . the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One guiding you in the way you should walk.​—Isa. 48:17.



Today, many people misuse their freedom to make choices in life even to the harm of others. Indeed, just as the Bible foretold, during “the last days” men would be “unthankful.” (2 Tim. 3:1, 2) May we never misuse this precious gift from Jehovah or take it for granted. How, though, can we avoid misusing our gift of free will? All of us have freedom of choice regarding associations, styles of dress and grooming, and entertainment. However, our freedom could become “a cover for doing wrong” if we chose to become slaves of our own fleshly desires or if we adopted the disgraceful fads and trends of the world. (1 Pet. 2:16) Instead of using our freedom “as an opportunity to pursue fleshly desires,” we want to be determined to make choices that help us to heed the admonition: “Do all things for God’s glory.”​—Gal. 5:13; 1 Cor. 10:31. w17.01 2:12-14




Sunday, November 25

As soon as I heard these words, . . . I kept fasting and praying before the God of the heavens.​—Neh. 1:4.



Nehemiah’s example demonstrates how modesty can help us to keep from becoming self-reliant when we receive a change of assignment or additional responsibility. Relying just on his own experience, an elder could begin to care for congregation matters without first approaching Jehovah in prayer. Others might make a decision first and then pray for Jehovah to bless their decision. Is that being modest, however? A modest person will always remember his place before God and his role in God’s arrangement. Our abilities are not the important thing. Especially when we are faced with a familiar situation or problem, we have to be careful not to rely on ourselves. (Prov. 3:5, 6) As members of God’s household, we learn to think in terms of fulfilling roles in a family or as part of a congregation rather than achieving a rank or climbing a corporate ladder.​—1 Tim. 3:15. w17.01 4:7, 8




Monday, November 26

The earth he has given to the sons of men.​—Ps. 115:16.



Jehovah’s original purpose was for mankind to live forever here on earth. (Gen. 1:28; Ps. 37:29) He generously gave Adam and Eve a variety of precious gifts that enabled them to enjoy life. (Jas. 1:17) Jehovah gave them free will, the ability to reason, and the capacity to love and to enjoy friendship. The Creator spoke to Adam and instructed him on how to show his obedience. Adam also learned how to take care of his needs and how to care for the animals and the land. (Gen. 2:15-17, 19, 20) Jehovah also created Adam and Eve with the senses of taste, touch, sight, sound, and smell. Thus they could enjoy to the full the beauty and bounty of their Paradise home. For the first human pair, the possibilities for satisfying work, accomplishment, and discovery were endless. Jehovah created Adam and Eve with the ability to have perfect children. Earth, with all its resources, was to become their permanent home. w17.02 1:6, 7




Tuesday, November 27

He must write for himself in a book a copy of this Law . . . and observe all the words of this Law.​—Deut. 17:18, 19.



What effect did God’s Word have on the men who took the lead? Consider the example of King Josiah. After a document containing the Mosaic Law was found, Josiah’s secretary began to read it to him. Guided by God’s Word, Josiah began a vigorous campaign against idolatry and arranged an unprecedented celebration of the Passover. (2 Ki. 22:11; 23:1-23) Because Josiah and other faithful leaders were guided by God’s Word, they were willing to adjust and clarify the direction they gave to God’s people. Those changes brought God’s ancient people into harmony with his will. However, not all the kings who ruled God’s ancient people followed God’s instructions. In some cases, Jehovah disciplined or replaced those leaders. (1 Sam. 13:13, 14) In his own due time, he appointed someone who would be superior to any of the men he had used thus far. w17.02 3:11, 12, 14




Wednesday, November 28

You made [man] a little lower than godlike ones, and you crowned him with glory and splendor.​—Ps. 8:5.



Humans were created “in God’s image.” (Gen. 1:27) Thus, most of them exhibit some godly qualities, though to differing degrees. Humans are capable of showing one another love, kindness, and compassion. Having been created with a conscience, people normally have an inborn sense​—albeit at times inaccurate or distorted—​that alerts them to what is right or wrong, honest or dishonest, appropriate or inappropriate. (Rom. 2:14, 15) Most people are drawn to things that are clean and beautiful. Generally, they want to live with others in peace. Whether they realize it or not, they reflect to some extent Jehovah’s glory, and for this reason, they deserve a measure of honor and respect. However, balance is needed in determining what kind of honor should be rendered to other humans and to what extent. w17.03 1:5, 6




Thursday, November 29

[God] reconsidered the calamity that he said he would bring on them, and he did not bring it.​—Jonah 3:10.



God does not determine his course of action based on a momentary flare-up of anger, the type of emotional outburst that many humans display. Yet, after observing the Ninevites’ repentant, changed attitude, Jehovah adjusted his decision. In doing so, he manifested reasonableness, humility, and compassion. Similarly, there may be occasions when it would be good for us to reconsider a choice or decision. It could be when the prevailing circumstances change. Jehovah altered his decision at times when circumstances changed. (1 Ki. 21:20, 21, 27-29; 2 Ki. 20:1-5) Or new information may provide us with a valid reason to adjust a decision. King David was given faulty information about Saul’s grandson Mephibosheth. When David later received accurate information, he amended his decision.​—2 Sam. 16:3, 4; 19:24-29. w17.03 2:14, 15




Friday, November 30

Let your reasonableness become known to all men.​—Phil. 4:5.



If a problem arises, we ought to consider what Bible principles are involved and apply them in a balanced way. For example, a sister knows that she has the responsibility to preach the good news. (Acts 4:20) However, suppose she plans to go out in the field service on a certain day, but her unbelieving husband wants her to stay home. He says that they have not had much time together lately, and he would like them to do something as a couple. She might consider relevant Bible texts, such as obeying God and the command to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Acts 5:29) But she also needs to think about wifely subjection and being reasonable. (Eph. 5:22-24) Is her husband completely opposed to her going out in service, or is he asking her to do something else just that one day? We need balance as we seek to do God’s will and strive to have a good conscience. w17.03 4:17




