
October
Monday, October 1

He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; he hears their cry for help, and he rescues them.​—Ps. 145:19.



Jehovah is “the God who supplies endurance and comfort.” (Rom. 15:5) He alone fully understands not only the problems we face but also the way our environment, emotions, and even our genetic makeup affect us. He is thus the best one to equip us to endure. How will God answer our prayers for strength to endure? When we ask Jehovah to help us cope with trials, he will “make the way out.” (1 Cor. 10:13) Does Jehovah maneuver matters to remove the trial? Perhaps. Often, however, he makes the way out “so that [we] may be able to endure it.” Yes, Jehovah strengthens us so that we “may endure fully with patience and joy.” (Col. 1:11) And since he knows our physical, mental, and emotional limits so intimately, Jehovah will never allow a situation to develop to a point that we cannot remain faithful. w16.04 2:5, 6




Tuesday, October 2

Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.​—Matt. 22:21.



God’s Word tells us to be obedient to human governments, yet it also teaches that we must obey God rather than men. (Acts 5:29; Titus 3:1) Is this a contradiction? Not at all! The principle of relative subjection helps us to understand and obey these commands. Jesus summarized this principle when he said the words of today’s text. We submit to the authority of the government under which we live by obeying its laws, respecting its officials, and paying the taxes it levies. (Rom. 13:7) However, if government authorities tell us to disobey God, we respectfully refuse to comply. We remain neutral in the world’s political affairs. (Isa. 2:4) Thus, we do not oppose human governments that Jehovah allows to function; nor do we promote patriotic or nationalistic activity. (Rom. 13:1, 2) We do not lobby, vote in political elections, run for government office, or try to change governments. w16.04 4:1, 2




Wednesday, October 3

Let him be to you just as a man of the nations.​—Matt. 18:17.



Most differences between Christians can and should be resolved privately by the individuals concerned. However, Jesus noted that some situations might require congregation involvement. (Matt. 18:15-17) What would be the outcome if an offender refused to listen to his brother, to witnesses, and to the congregation? He should be treated “just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector.” Today, we would say that he should be disfellowshipped. The seriousness of this step indicates that the “sin” was not a small disagreement. Rather, it was (1) a sin that could be settled between the individuals concerned but it was also (2) a sin serious enough to merit disfellowshipping if not settled. Such sins might involve a measure of fraud or might include damaging a person’s reputation through slander. The three steps Jesus outlined, as recorded at Matthew 18:15-17, are applicable only where these conditions exist. w16.05 1:14




Thursday, October 4

Keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.​—Eph. 5:17.



There are numerous situations for which the Bible provides no specific command. For example, the Scriptures do not contain detailed rules regarding what kind of clothing is appropriate attire for Christians. How does this reflect Jehovah’s wisdom? Styles and customs vary not only in different parts of the world but also from one decade to the next. If the Bible had provided a list of acceptable styles of dress and grooming, it would now be out-of-date in that regard. For similar reasons, God’s inspired Word does not provide a lot of rules designed to govern a Christian’s choice of employment, health care, and entertainment. What should we do in situations that do not involve a direct Bible command? Under such circumstances, it is our personal responsibility to examine the details and make a choice that is guided, not by mere personal preference, but by what Jehovah will approve of and bless.​—Ps. 37:5. w16.05 3:2, 6




Friday, October 5

You accepted it not as the word of men but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God.​—1 Thess. 2:13.



No doubt all of us have our favorite portions of the Bible. Some especially enjoy the Gospels, which paint a beautiful picture of Jehovah’s personality as reflected in his Son. (John 14:9) Others are fond of parts of the Bible containing prophecy​—perhaps Revelation, with its preview of “the things that must shortly take place.” (Rev. 1:1) And who among us has not found comfort in the Psalms or drawn practical lessons from the book of Proverbs? The Bible truly is a book for everyone. Because we love the Bible, we also love our Bible-based publications. For instance, we appreciate the spiritual food we receive in the form of books, brochures, magazines, and other literature. We know that these provisions from Jehovah help us to stay spiritually alert, well-fed, and “healthy in faith.”​—Titus 2:2. w16.05 5:1-3




Saturday, October 6

The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.



Holy spirit is able to mold us in a number of ways. For instance, it can help us to develop a Christlike personality, which is characterized by the fruitage of God’s spirit. An aspect of that fruitage is love. We love God and want to obey him and be molded by him, recognizing that his commandments are not burdensome. Holy spirit can also give us the strength to resist the molding influence of the world and its bad spirit. (Eph. 2:2) The apostle Paul, who as a young man was deeply influenced by the proud spirit of Jewish religious leaders, could later write: “For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.” (Phil. 4:13) So let us, like Paul, keep on asking for holy spirit. Jehovah will not ignore the sincere petitions of the meek.​—Ps. 10:17. w16.06 1:12




Sunday, October 7

You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor.​—Rev. 4:11.



To have Jehovah as our one and only God, we should give him our exclusive devotion. Our worship of him cannot be divided or shared with any other gods nor tinged with ideas or practices from other forms of worship. We must bear in mind that Jehovah is not just one among many gods; nor is he even the highest and most powerful among them. Only Jehovah is to be worshipped. To give Jehovah exclusive devotion, we must be careful not to allow anything to take, or even to share, the place in our life that Jehovah alone should occupy. What might such things be? In the Ten Commandments, Jehovah made clear that his people must have no other gods besides him and that they must not practice any form of idolatry. (Deut. 5:6-10) Today, idolatry can take many forms, some of which might be hard to recognize. But Jehovah’s requirements have not changed​—he is still “one Jehovah.”​—Mark 12:29. w16.06 3:10, 12




Monday, October 8

If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.​—Matt. 6:14.



When Peter asked whether we should forgive “up to seven times,” Jesus replied: “I say to you, not up to seven times, but up to 77 times.” Clearly, Jesus meant that we should always be willing to forgive; this should be our first and predominant leaning. (Matt. 6:15; 18:21, 22) It is wise to remember that since we all have faults, we may be offending others. If we discern that we have done so, the Bible’s direction is to go to the one whom we have offended and try to reconcile matters. (Matt. 5:23, 24) We appreciate it when others do not hold our faults against us, so we should act the same way toward them. (1 Cor. 13:5; Col. 3:13) If we practice forgiving others, Jehovah will forgive us. Yes, when it comes to handling the faults of others, the Christian course is to imitate our merciful Father’s dealings with us when we make mistakes.​—Ps. 103:12-14. w16.06 4:15, 17




Tuesday, October 9

I am not ashamed of the good news; it is, in fact, God’s power for salvation to everyone having faith.​—Rom. 1:16.



In this time of the end, Jehovah’s people have been commissioned to preach “this good news of the Kingdom . . . in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations.” (Matt. 24:14) The message we spread is also “the good news of the undeserved kindness of God” because all the blessings we hope to receive under Kingdom rule come to us through Jehovah’s kindness expressed by means of Christ. (Acts 20:24; Eph. 1:3) Do we individually imitate Paul in showing gratitude for Jehovah’s undeserved kindness by zealously sharing in the ministry? (Rom. 1:14, 15) As sinners, we benefit from Jehovah’s undeserved kindness in many ways. We therefore owe it to all people to do our utmost to make known to them how Jehovah is expressing his love and how they can benefit from it personally. w16.07 4:4, 5




Wednesday, October 10

Keep ready, because at an hour that you do not think likely, the Son of man is coming.​—Luke 12:40.



Shortly before his death, Jesus three times warned his disciples about “the ruler of this world.” (John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11) Jesus knew that the Devil would keep people in darkness mentally in order to undermine the sense of urgency that permeates God’s prophecies about the future. (Zeph. 1:14) Satan blinds people’s minds through the world empire of false religion. What have you detected in your conversations with others? Has the Devil not already “blinded the minds of the unbelievers” about the coming end of this system of things and the fact that Christ is now ruling God’s Kingdom? (2 Cor. 4:3-6) For the most part, people are apathetic when we try to tell them where this world is headed. Do not let the apathy of others discourage or dissuade you from keeping on the watch. You know better. w16.07 2:11, 12




Thursday, October 11

Each one of you must love his wife as he does himself; . . . the wife should have deep respect for her husband.​—Eph. 5:33.



When a lovely bride appears before her handsome bridegroom on their wedding day, words can hardly describe their joy. God’s Word provides wise advice for all who choose to get married, for the loving Originator of marriage wants each couple to have a good measure of success and happiness in their married life. (Prov. 18:22) Yet, the Scriptures clearly tell us that imperfect humans who get married “will have tribulation in their flesh.” (1 Cor. 7:28) How can such tribulation be kept to a minimum? And what will make Christian marriage a success? The Bible emphasizes the importance of love. Tender affection (Greek, phi·liʹa) is needed in a marriage. Romantic love (eʹros) brings delight, and love for family (stor·geʹ) is vital when children enter the picture. However, it is love based on principle (a·gaʹpe) that ensures the success of a marriage. w16.08 2:1, 2




Friday, October 12

Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.​—1 Tim. 4:16.



Timothy was already an experienced Kingdom proclaimer. Yet, his ministry would be effective only if he would “pay constant attention” to his teaching. He could not take for granted that people would respond to his usual approach. To continue reaching their hearts, he had to adapt his teaching methods to their needs. As Kingdom proclaimers, we need to do the same. We often find that people are not at home when we preach from door to door. In some areas, we cannot enter certain apartment buildings and gated communities. If that is true in your territory, why not consider different ways to preach the good news? Public witnessing is one excellent method of spreading the good news. Many Witnesses are having a very effective and rewarding share in such work. They set aside time to approach people at train and bus stations, in marketplaces and parks, and in other public areas. w16.08 3:14-16




Saturday, October 13

Strengthen the hands that hang down and the feeble knees.​—Heb. 12:12.



Jehovah gives us a worldwide brotherhood of caring worshippers who can offer us encouragement. (Heb. 12:12, 13) Many in the first century received that sort of spiritual strengthening. It is similar today. What can we do? Think of how Aaron and Hur literally supported Moses’ hands during a battle. (Ex. 17:8-13) We can look for ways to support and to give practical aid to others. To whom? To those battling the effects of old age, health limitations, opposition from their family, loneliness, or the loss of a loved one. We can also strengthen young ones who are facing pressure to share in wrongdoing or to seek “success” in this system of things, whether academically, financially, or professionally. (1 Thess. 3:1-3; 5:11, 14) Look for ways to show genuine interest in others at the Kingdom Hall, in the ministry, while enjoying a meal together, or as you converse on the telephone. w16.09 1:13, 14




Sunday, October 14

Do all things for God’s glory.​—1 Cor. 10:31.



We owe it to our holy God, to our spiritual brothers and sisters, as well as to the people in our territory to wear clothing that dignifies the message we bear and that brings glory to Jehovah. (Rom. 13:8-10) This is especially so when we are engaging in Christian activities, such as when we attend meetings or when we share in the preaching work. We should dress “in the way that is proper for [people] professing devotion to God.” (1 Tim. 2:10) Of course, some clothing that is appropriate in one place may not be appropriate in another. Hence, Jehovah’s people throughout the world take local customs into account so as not to cause offense. When we attend assemblies and conventions, our dress needs to be appropriate and modest rather than reflect the extreme styles that may be common in the world. Thus we will be proud to identify ourselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses. Yes, and we will feel free to give a witness as we have an opportunity. w16.09 3:7, 8




Monday, October 15

Every house is constructed by someone, but the one who constructed all things is God.​—Heb. 3:4.



Paul’s logic is very reasonable and effective! Yes, complex designs are the product of an intelligent mind. You can use the same basic reasoning when you talk with someone who has doubts about the Bible. Find out what he actually believes and what topics may interest him. (Prov. 18:13) If he is interested in scientific things, he might respond when you mention points that show the Bible’s scientific accuracy. Other people might be moved by examples showing that the Bible contains accurate prophecies and accurate history. Or you might point out the Bible’s guiding principles, such as those found in the Sermon on the Mount. Remember, your goal should be to win hearts, not arguments. So be a good listener. Ask sincere questions, and express yourself with mildness and respect, especially when you talk with older ones. They will likely be more inclined to respect your views. w16.09 4:14-16




Tuesday, October 16

Welcome one another.​—Rom. 15:7.



To help others from a foreign background feel at home in the congregation, honestly ask yourself, ‘If I were in a foreign country, how would I want to be treated?’ (Matt. 7:12) Be patient with those who are adjusting to a new country. At first, we may not fully understand their way of thinking or reacting. But rather than expect them to embrace our culture, why not accept them just the way they are? If we learn about their homeland and culture, we may find it easier to interact with them. We might include time in our family worship to do research on peoples we are not acquainted with in our congregation or territory. Another way to draw closer to those from another background is to invite them for a meal in our home. Since Jehovah has “opened to the nations the door to faith,” could we not open our own door to strangers who are “related to us in the faith”?​—Acts 14:27; Gal. 6:10; Job 31:32. w16.10 1:15, 16




Wednesday, October 17

Consider closely the one who has endured such hostile speech from sinners.​—Heb. 12:3.



After describing various men and women of faith, Paul highlighted the most outstanding example of all​—our Lord Jesus Christ. “For the joy that was set before him,” states Hebrews 12:2, “he endured a torture stake, despising shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.” Indeed, we should “consider closely” Jesus’ example of faith in the face of the severest of trials. Like Jesus, early Christian martyrs, such as the disciple Antipas, refused to compromise their integrity. (Rev. 2:13) They would have the reward of a resurrection to heavenly life​—surpassing the “better resurrection” that ancient men of faith looked forward to. (Heb. 11:35) Sometime after the Kingdom’s birth in 1914, all such faithful anointed ones, who were sleeping in death, were raised to spirit life in heaven to share with Jesus in his rulership over mankind.​—Rev. 20:4. w16.10 3:12




Thursday, October 18

Keep on encouraging one another each day.​—Heb. 3:13.



Some parents do not commend their children because their own parents never gave them any encouragement. Many employees are not being commended, so they complain that there is a chronic shortage of encouragement in the workplace. Encouragement often involves commending a person for something he or she did well. We can also be encouraging by reassuring others that they have good qualities or by speaking “consolingly to those who are discouraged.” (1 Thess. 5:14, ftn.) The Greek word usually translated “encouragement” literally means “a calling to one’s side.” As we serve alongside our brothers and sisters, we likely have opportunities to say something encouraging. (Eccl. 4:9, 10) Do we use suitable occasions to let others know why we love and appreciate them? Before answering that question, we would do well to think about this proverb: “A word spoken at the right time​—how good it is!”​—Prov. 15:23. w16.11 1:3-5




Friday, October 19

Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!​—Ps. 133:1.



Foretelling the future condition of his people, God declared: “In unity I will place them, like sheep in the pen.” (Mic. 2:12) Moreover, Jehovah foretold through the prophet Zephaniah: “I will change the language of the peoples to a pure language [of Scriptural truth], so that all of them may call on the name of Jehovah, to serve him shoulder to shoulder [or, “worship him in unity,” ftn.].” (Zeph. 3:9) How grateful we are to have the privilege of worshipping Jehovah in unity! It is clear that the inspired counsel in God’s own Book helped first-century Christians in Corinth and elsewhere to maintain cleanness, peace, and unity in their congregations. (1 Cor. 1:10; Eph. 4:11-13, ftn.; 1 Pet. 3:8) Today, knowledge of God’s wonderful purposes is being spread throughout the earth as a result of the efforts of those who are part of one united preaching organization. w16.11 2:16, 18




Saturday, October 20

You are . . . “a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies” of the One who called you out of darkness.​—1 Pet. 2:9.



For the first few centuries of our Common Era, many people could read the Bible in either Greek or Latin. They were thus in a position to compare the teachings of God’s Word with the dogmas of the church. On the basis of what they read in the Bible, some among them rejected the unscriptural creeds of the church, but it was dangerous​—even fatal—​to express such opinions openly. In time, Bible languages fell into disuse by the masses, and the church opposed efforts to translate God’s Word into the common tongues. Any dissent from what the church taught was severely punished. Faithful anointed servants of God had to meet together in discreet groups​—if they could meet at all. The anointed “royal priesthood” could not function in an organized way. Babylon the Great held the people in a viselike grip! w16.11 4:8, 10, 11




Sunday, October 21

Unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom.​—1 Cor. 6:9.



We must certainly avoid choosing to practice the serious sins that some in Corinth had been guilty of. That is vital if we are to say that we have accepted God’s undeserved kindness and that ‘sin is not master over us.’ However, are we also determined to be “obedient from the heart” by doing our best to avoid sins that some would view as less serious? (Rom. 6:14, 17) Think of the apostle Paul. We can be sure that he was not sharing in the gross wrongs mentioned at 1 Corinthians 6:9-11. Nonetheless, he confessed that he was still guilty of sin. He wrote: “I am fleshly, sold under sin. For I do not understand what I am doing. For I do not practice what I wish, but I do what I hate.” (Rom. 7:14, 15) This shows that there were other things that Paul viewed as sins, and he was fighting against those wrongs too. (Rom. 7:21-23) May that also be true of us as we strive to be “obedient from the heart.” w16.12 1:15, 16




Monday, October 22

Throw your burden on Jehovah, and he will sustain you.​—Ps. 55:22.



When you are confronted by situations that cause uneasiness, apprehension, or anxiety, pour out your heart to your loving heavenly Father. After you have done all you can to solve a problem, heartfelt prayer will certainly accomplish more than worry. (Ps. 94:18, 19) As shown at Philippians 4:6, 7, Jehovah can respond to our earnest, heartfelt, and persistent supplications. How? By giving us inner calm that can free our mind and heart of disturbing emotions. Many can testify to this, based on their own experience. In place of anxiety, a distressing sense of foreboding, God helped them to gain a profound sense of peace and tranquillity that actually surpassed human understanding. That can be your experience too. Thus “the peace of God” can triumph over any challenge you may face. You can fully trust Jehovah’s compassionate promise: “Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you.”​—Isa. 41:10. w16.12 3:3, 4




Tuesday, October 23

By faith Moses, when grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter.​—Heb. 11:24.



Moses turned his back on the treasures of Egypt, “choosing to be mistreated with the people of God rather than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin.” (Heb. 11:25, 26) May we imitate the faith of loyal ancient ones, such as Moses, by treasuring our gift of free will and using it to do God’s will. While it might seem easier to have someone else make decisions for us, doing so would rob us of one of the great blessings of free will. That blessing is revealed at Deuteronomy 30:19, 20. Verse 19 describes the choice that God gave to the Israelites. In verse 20 we learn that Jehovah gave them the precious opportunity to show him what was in their hearts. We too can choose to worship Jehovah. We could have no greater motive than to use God’s gift of free will to express our love for him and to bring him honor and glory! w17.01 2:10, 11




Wednesday, October 24

Trust in Jehovah and do what is good . . . and act with faithfulness.​—Ps. 37:3.



Jehovah expects us to put to good use the abilities with which he has endowed us. Why? Because he loves us, and he knows that it brings us satisfaction when we employ these gifts. At the same time, Jehovah knows that humans have limitations. On our own, we can never eliminate imperfection, sin, and death; neither can we control other people, for all have free will. (1 Ki. 8:46) And no matter how much knowledge or experience we gain, we will always be like children in comparison with Jehovah. (Isa. 55:9) In all circumstances, we need to lean on Jehovah for guidance, trusting in him to support us and do for us what we cannot do for ourselves. At the same time, we should do what we can, taking appropriate action to solve problems and help others. In short, we need both ‘to trust in Jehovah and to do what is good’; we need ‘to act with faithfulness.’ w17.01 1:2-4




Thursday, October 25

Cross over with me, and I will supply you with food in Jerusalem.​—2 Sam. 19:33.



Barzillai declined the offer. Why? Because of his advanced age, he told David that he did not want to become a burden to the king. So Barzillai recommended that Chimham, presumably one of his sons, take his place. (2 Sam. 19:31-37) Modesty helped Barzillai to make a reasonable decision. He did not turn down David’s invitation because he felt inadequate to shoulder responsibility or because he wanted to enjoy a quiet life in retirement. He simply recognized and accepted his changing circumstances and his limitations. He did not want to take on more than he reasonably could. (Gal. 6:4, 5) If we focus on position, prominence, or recognition, it only provides a breeding ground for egotism, competition, and eventual disappointment. (Gal. 5:26) Modesty, however, helps all to focus their collective abilities and efforts on bringing glory to God and doing what is best to help others.​—1 Cor. 10:31. w17.01 4:5, 6




Friday, October 26

God saw everything he had made, and look! it was very good.​—Gen. 1:31.



Jehovah is an awe-inspiring Creator. Everything he creates meets the highest standards. (Jer. 10:12) As is evident in creation, Jehovah lovingly set boundaries. He made both natural laws and moral laws to ensure that everything functions harmoniously. (Ps. 19:7-9) Hence, all things in the universe have an assigned place and function according to their role in God’s purpose. Jehovah sets the standard for how his creation should work together. Thus, the law of gravity holds the atmosphere close to the earth, regulates tides and oceans, and contributes to the physical order essential to life on earth. All creation, including humans, moves and functions within these boundaries. Clearly, the order in creation testifies that God has a purpose for earth and mankind. In our ministry, can we draw attention to the Cause of this impressive order?​—Rev. 4:11. w17.02 1:4, 5




Saturday, October 27

Moses . . . is the very one God sent as both ruler and deliverer by means of the angel.​—Acts 7:35.



After Moses’ time, his successor, Joshua, was strengthened by “the prince of Jehovah’s army” to lead God’s people into battle against the Canaanites. (Josh. 5:13-15; 6:2, 21) Later, King Hezekiah faced an overwhelming force of Assyrian soldiers who threatened to invade Jerusalem. In one night, “the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down 185,000 men.” (2 Ki. 19:35) Of course, while the angels are perfect, the men whom they assisted were not. Moses once failed to sanctify Jehovah. (Num. 20:12) Joshua neglected to seek God’s guidance before concluding a covenant with the Gibeonites. (Josh. 9:14, 15) For a brief period, Hezekiah’s “heart became haughty.” (2 Chron. 32:25, 26) Nevertheless, despite the imperfections of these men, the Israelites were expected to follow their lead. Jehovah was supporting those men with his superhuman agents. Yes, Jehovah was leading his people. w17.02 3:7-9




Sunday, October 28

To the One sitting on the throne and to the Lamb be the blessing and the honor and the glory and the might forever.​—Rev. 5:13.



To honor someone means to show him special attention as well as respect. Reasonably, we would expect that a person who is worthy of such attention and respect has done something to merit honor or that he serves in a special position. So we might well ask, Whom should we honor, and why is such honor merited? As Revelation 5:13 indicates, “the One sitting on the throne and . . . the Lamb” surely deserve to be honored. We note in chapter 4 of the same Bible book one reason why Jehovah deserves to be honored. Exalted creatures in the heavenly realm lift their voices in praise to Jehovah, “the One who lives forever and ever.” They declare: “You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”​—Rev. 4:9-11. w17.03 1:1, 2




Monday, October 29

Whoever trusts in his own heart is stupid.​—Prov. 28:26.



A popular philosophy or common adage is: Follow your heart. But doing that can be dangerous. And in a sense, doing so is unscriptural. The Bible warns us not to let our imperfect heart or mere sentiment rule when we are making decisions. And Bible accounts show the sad consequences of following one’s heart. The core problem is that in imperfect humans, “the heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate.” (Jer. 3:17; 13:10; 17:9; 1 Ki. 11:9) So, what could it mean for us if we simply follow our heart and let our emotions dictate our thinking and actions? For example, what might happen if we make decisions when we are angry? The answer may be obvious if we have done this in times past. (Prov. 14:17; 29:22) Or is it likely that we will make sound decisions when we are discouraged? (Num. 32:6-12; Prov. 24:10) Clearly, we could easily be deceived by our emotions if we allow them to prevail when we are making important decisions. w17.03 2:12, 13




Tuesday, October 30

I have walked before you faithfully and with a complete heart.​—2 Ki. 20:3.



Being imperfect, we are prone to make mistakes. Thankfully, though, Jehovah does not deal with us “according to our sins,” provided that we are repentant and in faith approach him humbly on the basis of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. (Ps. 103:10) Yet, as David told Solomon, for our daily worship to be acceptable to Jehovah, we have to “serve him with a complete heart.” (1 Chron. 28:9) Serving God with “a complete heart” involves full devotion that does not end. In the Bible, the word “heart” usually refers to a man’s inner self. It encompasses his desires, thinking, disposition, attitudes, abilities, motivations, and goals. So a person who serves Jehovah with his whole heart does not just go through the motions of worshipping Jehovah. What about us? Well, if we, though being imperfect humans, continue to be fully devoted to God without hypocrisy, we will be serving God with a complete heart.​—2 Chron. 19:9. w17.03 3:1, 3




Wednesday, October 31

[Jehovah] takes note of the humble, but the haughty he knows only from a distance.​—Ps. 138:6.



If we have accomplished something worthwhile, could it be that Jehovah is ‘leaving us alone to put us to the test,’ allowing what is in our heart to surface? For example, a brother may have worked hard to prepare a talk and give it before a large audience. Many praise him for what he has done. How will he react to the praise? When praised, we do well to apply Jesus’ words: “When you have done all the things assigned to you, say: ‘We are good-for-nothing slaves. What we have done is what we ought to have done.’” (Luke 17:10) We can learn from Hezekiah’s experience. A haughty attitude surfaced in that he “did not respond appreciatively to the good done to him.” (2 Chron. 32:24-27, 31) Our meditating on how much God has done for us will help us to avoid an attitude that Jehovah hates. We can speak appreciatively of Jehovah who loyally supports his people. w17.03 4:12-14




