
September
Saturday, September 1

Let endurance complete its work.​—Jas. 1:4.



In the Bible, enduring means more than simply putting up with trials or adversity. Endurance involves our mind and heart, or the way we react to hardships. A person who endures manifests courage, steadfastness, and patience. Endurance is “the spirit which can bear things, not simply with resignation, but with blazing hope,” says one reference work. “It is the quality which keeps a man on his feet with his face to the wind. It is the virtue which can transmute the hardest trial into glory because beyond the pain it sees the goal.” Christian endurance is motivated by love. (1 Cor. 13:4, 7) Love for Jehovah motivates us to endure anything that is in harmony with his will. (Luke 22:41, 42) Love for our brothers helps us to endure their imperfections. (1 Pet. 4:8) Love for our marriage mate enables us to endure “tribulation” that even happily married couples experience and to strengthen the marital bond.​—1 Cor. 7:28. w16.04 2:3, 4




Sunday, September 2

They continued devoting themselves . . . to associating together.​—Acts 2:42.



The Greek word translated “devoting themselves” implies enduring or persevering in a course with intense effort. Under Roman rule and faced with opposition by the Jewish religious leaders, those early Christians did not find it easy to attend meetings. Nevertheless, they persevered. Many modern-day servants of Jehovah have shown deep appreciation for Christian meetings. George Gangas, who served on the Governing Body for over 22 years, stated: “To me, meeting with the brothers is one of life’s greatest pleasures and a source of encouragement.” He added: “My innermost thought and desire is to attend the meetings.” Do you feel the same way about gathering together to worship Jehovah? Then be determined to endure and persevere in your earnest efforts to attend meetings regularly. You will thus show that you agree with King David, who said: “Jehovah, I love the house where you dwell.”​—Ps. 26:8. w16.04 3:16-18




Monday, September 3

First make your peace with your brother.​—Matt. 5:24.



Suppose you learn that a brother was offended by something you said or did. What should you do? Talk with your brother. Note what your objective should be. It is not to cast part of the blame on your brother but to admit your fault and make peace. Being at peace with our fellow worshippers is of utmost importance. Consider Abraham and his nephew Lot. Both men possessed livestock, and their shepherds apparently quarreled about grazing land. Eager to eliminate tensions, Abraham offered Lot first choice of the areas where their respective households would settle. (Gen. 13:1, 2, 5-9) What a good example! Abraham sought peace, not his own interests. Did he lose out because of his generosity? Not at all. Immediately after this incident with Lot, Jehovah promised Abraham great blessings. (Gen. 13:14-17) God will never allow his servants to suffer lasting loss for acting in harmony with divine principles and settling differences in a spirit of love. w16.05 1:11, 12




Tuesday, September 4

Keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.​—Eph. 5:17.



Through his written Word, Jehovah has given us a number of specific commands. For example, he forbids sexual immorality, idolatry, stealing, and drunkenness. (1 Cor. 6:9, 10) Additionally, God’s Son, Jesus Christ, gave his followers this challenging, though thrilling, command: “Go, . . . and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you. And look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) What a protection divine laws and commandments have proved to be! Obeying them has increased our self-respect, contributed to good health, and enhanced family happiness. More important, our loyal adherence to Jehovah’s commands, including the command to share in the preaching work, has brought us his approval and blessing. w16.05 3:1




Wednesday, September 5

Be transformed by making your mind over.​—Rom. 12:2.



As we yield to the guidance of God’s holy spirit and align our thinking with Jehovah’s viewpoint as revealed in his Word, we will become more godly in our thoughts, words, and actions. (Luke 11:13; Gal. 5:22, 23) Even then, we will need to remain on guard against succumbing to our particular weaknesses. (Prov. 4:23) If your spiritual progress seems slow, remember that such growth takes time. The cultivating of spiritual qualities is an ongoing process. We must be patient as we endeavor to let the Bible continue to produce positive changes in our life. At first, we may need to discipline ourselves to do what is Scripturally right. In time, though, thinking and acting in a godly way will likely become easier and more natural for us as our thoughts and actions progressively line up with those of Jehovah God.​—Ps. 37:31; Prov. 23:12; Gal. 5:16, 17. w16.05 4:14, 16




Thursday, September 6

His delight is in the law of Jehovah, and he reads His law in an undertone day and night.​—Ps. 1:2.



Jehovah molds his servants today primarily by means of his Word, his holy spirit, and the Christian congregation. God’s Word can mold us as we read it purposefully, meditate on it, and ask Jehovah to help us apply it. “I remember you while upon my bed,” wrote David. “I meditate on you during the watches of the night.” (Ps. 63:6) He also wrote: “I will praise Jehovah, who has given me advice. Even during the night, my innermost thoughts correct me.” (Ps. 16:7) Yes, David allowed divine counsel to settle into the deepest parts of his being, to mold his innermost thoughts and feelings, even when the counsel was strong. (2 Sam. 12:1-13) What a fine example of humility and submissiveness David set for us! Do you too meditate on God’s Word, allowing it to settle into your innermost parts? Should you do so even more?​—Ps. 1:3. w16.06 1:11




Friday, September 7

Do not be quick to take offense.​—Eccl. 7:9.



We must consider that all of us are some 6,000 years removed from the human perfection that existed in Eden. Imperfect people are prone to make mistakes. Therefore, it would not be good to expect too much of fellow believers and to let their faults rob us of the joy that comes from being part of God’s people in these last days. An even greater mistake would be to allow the faults of others to stumble us and cause us to leave Jehovah’s organization. Were that to happen, we would lose not only the privilege of doing God’s will but also the hope of life in God’s new world. To maintain our deep joy and firm hope, we want to keep clearly in mind the comforting promise of Jehovah: “Look! I am creating new heavens and a new earth; and the former things will not be called to mind, nor will they come up into the heart.” (Isa. 65:17; 2 Pet. 3:13) Do not let the faults of others prevent you from obtaining such blessings. w16.06 4:13, 14




Saturday, September 8

Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.​—Deut. 6:4.



The word “one” suggests unity and oneness of purpose and activity. Jehovah God is not divided or unpredictable. Rather, he is always faithful, consistent, loyal, and true. He promised Abraham that his descendants would inherit the Promised Land, and Jehovah performed mighty deeds to fulfill that promise. The passing of 430 years did not diminish Jehovah’s determination to do so. (Gen. 12:1, 2, 7; Ex. 12:40, 41) Centuries later, when identifying the Israelites as his witnesses, Jehovah told them: “I am the same One. Before me no God was formed, and after me there has been none.” Emphasizing his unchanging purpose, Jehovah added: “I am always the same One.” (Isa. 43:10, 13; 44:6; 48:12) What an extraordinary privilege for the Israelites​—and for us—​to be servants of Jehovah, the God who is consistent and loyal in all his ways!​—Mal. 3:6; Jas. 1:17. w16.06 3:6, 7




Sunday, September 9

Keep looking, keep awake, for you do not know when the appointed time is.​—Mark 13:33.



Most nations today have “watchmen” in the form of border patrols and high-tech surveillance systems. They watch for intrusions into their territory and for enemies who pose a threat to national security. However, such “watchmen” can perceive only those threats that come from man-made governments or humans. They are unaware of the existence and activities of God’s heavenly Kingdom government in the hands of Christ and the role it will play in the impending judgment on all the nations. (Isa. 9:6, 7, ftn.; 56:10; Dan. 2:44) On the other hand, by being alert and watchful spiritually, we will be ready whenever that day of judgment arrives. (Ps. 130:6) The closer we get to the end of this system of things, the greater the challenge for us to stay awake. How tragic it would be if we were to fail to keep on the watch! w16.07 2:2, 9, 10




Monday, September 10

[God’s] undeserved kindness to me was not in vain.​—1 Cor. 15:10.



Paul was very much aware that he had neither earned nor deserved God’s great mercy, having been a former persecutor of Christians. Toward the end of his life, Paul wrote to his fellow worker Timothy: “I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord, who imparted power to me, because he considered me faithful by assigning me to a ministry.” (1 Tim. 1:12-14) What was that ministry? Paul told the elders of the congregation in Ephesus what it included, stating: “I do not consider my own life of any importance to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.” (Acts 20:24) In his zeal to perform his ministry, Paul set an excellent example for modern-day Christians and demonstrated that God’s undeserved kindness had not been shown to him “in vain.” w16.07 4:1-3




Tuesday, September 11

I will show a waiting attitude.​—Mic. 7:7.



Jehovah always supports his faithful servants, even though he may allow them to wait for privileges or a favorable change of circumstances. He promised Abraham a son, but the patriarch had to exercise faith and patience. (Heb. 6:12-15) Although he waited years for Isaac’s birth, Abraham did not lose heart, and Jehovah did not disappoint him. (Gen. 15:3, 4; 21:5) Waiting is not easy. (Prov. 13:12) If we were to brood over disappointments, we could become very discouraged. Instead, it is wise to use our time to improve our spiritual qualifications. By reading God’s Word and meditating on it, we can develop wisdom, insight, good judgment, knowledge, thinking ability, and soundness of mind. Daily, we face issues involving entertainment, dress and grooming, managing money, and getting along with others. By applying what we learn from the Bible, we can make decisions that please Jehovah. w16.08 3:9-11




Wednesday, September 12

God is the one who . . . energizes you.​—Phil. 2:13.



Jehovah helped the Israelites to defeat the Amalekites and the Ethiopians, and he gave Nehemiah and his associates the power to complete the rebuilding work. God will similarly give us strength to stand firm against opposition, apathy, and anxiety so that we can carry out our preaching work. (1 Pet. 5:10) We do not expect Jehovah to perform miracles for us. Rather, we should do our part. That includes our reading God’s Word daily, preparing for and attending the meetings weekly, feeding our mind and heart through personal study and family worship, and always relying on Jehovah in prayer. Let us never allow other pursuits and activities to interfere with the means that Jehovah uses to strengthen and encourage us. If you sense that your hands have dropped down in any of these areas, ask for God’s help. Then see how his spirit “energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.” w16.09 1:12




Thursday, September 13

Because of the prevalence of sexual immorality, let each man have his own wife and each woman have her own husband.​—1 Cor. 7:2.



The apostle Paul recommended singleness; yet, he said the words above. Paul added: “If they do not have self-control, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to be inflamed with passion.” Getting married can help a person to avoid letting passion lead him to such a practice as masturbation or to sexual immorality. In addition, age is a factor to consider, for the apostle stated: “If anyone thinks he is behaving improperly by remaining unmarried, and if he is past the bloom of youth, then this is what should take place: Let him do what he wants; he does not sin. Let them marry.” (1 Cor. 7:9, 36; 1 Tim. 4:1-3) Nevertheless, a person should not be prompted to marry because of surges of passion that may come in youth. He may not be mature enough to take on the responsibilities of married life. w16.08 1:17




Friday, September 14

In every way we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers.​—2 Cor. 6:4.



Many people form impressions and opinions of us by “what appears to the eyes.” (1 Sam. 16:7) As God’s ministers, therefore, we understand that our getting dressed is not just a matter of putting on something comfortable that we like. The principles that we glean from God’s Word should move us to avoid wearing clothing that is tight-fitting, revealing, or sexually provocative. That would rule out wearing clothing that exposes or accentuates private parts of our anatomy. Nobody should feel uncomfortable or forced to look the other way when seeing how we are dressed. When we are neat, clean, modestly dressed, and well-groomed, people are more likely to respect us and to be attracted to the God we worship. Furthermore, our appropriate attire will reflect well on the organization we represent. As a result, others may be more likely to pay attention to our lifesaving message. w16.09 3:5, 6




Saturday, September 15

Be reasonable, displaying all mildness toward all men.​—Titus 3:2.



Do not be quick to assume you know what others believe. Some people say that they believe in evolution, but they also feel that God exists. They think that God used evolution to create different forms of life. Others say that they believe in evolution because they feel that it would not be taught at school were it not a fact. And some stop believing in God because they are disappointed with religion. So when you discuss the origin of life with someone, it is usually wise to ask questions first. Find out what that person believes. If you are reasonable and willing to listen, he may be inclined to listen to you. If someone seems to be attacking your belief in creation, you might ask him to explain how life could have begun without a Creator. For the first life-form to continue, it had to be able to reproduce, to make copies of itself. One professor of chemistry said: “One is struck by the complexity of even the simplest form of life.” w16.09 4:12, 13




Sunday, September 16

They would not accept release by some ransom, in order that they might attain a better resurrection.​—Heb. 11:35.



Though we cannot be sure whom Paul had in mind, some, like Naboth and Zechariah, were stoned to death for obeying God and doing his will. (1 Ki. 21:3, 15; 2 Chron. 24:20, 21) Daniel and his companions clearly had the opportunity to “accept release” by compromising their integrity. Instead, their faith in God’s power enabled them, so to speak, to ‘stop the mouths of lions’ and ‘quench the force of fire.’ (Heb. 11:33, 34; Dan. 3:16-18, 20, 28; 6:13, 16, 21-23) Because of their faith, such prophets as Micaiah and Jeremiah “received their trial by mockings . . . and prisons.” Others, like Elijah, “wandered about in deserts and mountains and caves and dens of the earth.” All of them endured because they had an “assured expectation of what is hoped for.”​—Heb. 11:1, 36-38; 1 Ki. 18:13; 22:24-27; Jer. 20:1, 2; 28:10, 11; 32:2. w16.10 3:10, 11




Monday, September 17

With humility consider others superior to you.​—Phil. 2:3.



We can show kindness to newcomers from a foreign background by warmly greeting them at the Kingdom Hall. We may have noticed that new immigrants are sometimes shy and stay by themselves. Because of their upbringing or social status, they may feel inferior to those of another race or nationality. So we should take the initiative to show a warm and sincere interest in them. If available in your language, the JW Language app can help you learn how to greet newcomers in their mother tongue. (Phil. 2:4) You may feel awkward about approaching those from another culture. To overcome such feelings, you might tell them something about yourself. You may soon realize that you have more things in common than you have differences​—real or imagined—​and that each culture has its own strengths and weaknesses. w16.10 1:13, 14




Tuesday, September 18

Sexual immorality is reported among you, and such immorality as is not even found among the nations.​—1 Cor. 5:1.



We can contribute to the spiritual cleanness of the congregation by following the direction found in God’s Word. Consider the situation in ancient Corinth. Paul had poured himself out preaching in that city, and he loved his fellow “holy ones” there. (1 Cor. 1:1, 2) But how troubling it must have been for him to have to address the problem of sexual immorality that was being tolerated in that congregation! Paul directed the elders to hand the immoral man over to Satan​—in other words, to disfellowship him. To preserve the congregation’s purity, the elders needed to clear out the “leaven.” (1 Cor. 5:5-7, 12) When we support the elders’ decision to disfellowship an unrepentant wrongdoer, we help to maintain the cleanness of the congregation and perhaps move the person to repent and seek Jehovah’s forgiveness. w16.11 2:14




Wednesday, September 19

If you have any word of encouragement for the people, tell it.​—Acts 13:15.



Encouragement is a power for good. “I have fought feelings of worthlessness for many years,” says Rubén. “But one time, I was preaching with an elder who realized that I was having a bad day. He listened with sympathy as I expressed my feelings. Then he reminded me of the good I was accomplishing. He also reminded me of Jesus’ words​—that each of us is worth more than many sparrows. I often recall that scripture, and it still touches my heart. The elder’s words made a huge difference.” (Matt. 10:31) It should not surprise us that the Bible emphasizes the need for regular encouragement. The apostle Paul wrote to the Hebrew Christians: “Keep on encouraging one another each day, . . . so that none of you should become hardened by the deceptive power of sin.” (Heb. 3:13) You know how important the counsel to encourage one another is if you recall a time when words of encouragement lifted your spirits. w16.11 1:2, 3




Thursday, September 20

Men will rise and speak twisted things to draw away the disciples after themselves.​—Acts 20:30.



In 313 C.E., “Christianity” was granted legal recognition by the pagan Roman Emperor Constantine. After the Council of Nicaea, Constantine, who was present at the council, ordered Arius, a dissenting priest, into exile because Arius refused to acknowledge Jesus as God. Later, under Emperor Theodosius I (379-395 C.E.), the Catholic Church, as the contaminated form of Christianity came to be known, became the official religion of the Roman Empire. Historians refer to pagan Rome as having been “Christianized” in the fourth century. The truth is that by that time an apostate form of Christianity had joined the pagan religious organizations of the Roman Empire as members of Babylon the Great. Even so, a small number of anointed wheatlike Christians were doing their best to worship God.​—Matt. 13:24, 25, 37-39. w16.11 4:8, 9




Friday, September 21

Throw all your anxiety on [Jehovah], because he cares for you.​—1 Pet. 5:7.



We live in very stressful times. Satan the Devil is bitterly angry and “walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.” (1 Pet. 5:8; Rev. 12:17) Therefore, it is not surprising that at times even we, God’s servants, experience some feelings of anxiety. After all, on occasion, God-fearing servants of Jehovah in the past, such as King David, had “anxious concern.” (Ps. 13:2) Recall, too, that the apostle Paul experienced “anxiety for all the congregations.” (2 Cor. 11:28) But what can we do when we are overwhelmed by feelings of anxiety? Our loving heavenly Father came to the aid of his servants in the past, and today he makes it possible for us to gain considerable relief from distress or anxiety. How? By means of heartfelt prayer, by reading God’s Word and meditating on it, by tapping into Jehovah’s holy spirit, and by sharing our feelings with a trusted confidant. w16.12 3:1, 2




Saturday, September 22

The end of those things is death.​—Rom. 6:21.



Jehovah’s people have turned their back on “the fruit that [they] used to produce” before they came to know, love, and serve God. Their past way of life may have included “things of which [they] are now ashamed” and that would have merited death. (Rom. 6:21) Then they changed. That was true of many in Corinth to whom Paul wrote. Some had been idolaters, adulterers, homosexuals, thieves, drunkards, and the like. Yet, they were “washed clean” and “sanctified.” (1 Cor. 6:9-11) That was likely also true of some in the Roman congregation. Paul was inspired to write to them: “Neither go on presenting your bodies to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those alive from the dead, also your bodies to God as weapons of righteousness.” (Rom. 6:13) Paul was sure that they could remain spiritually clean and thus continue to benefit from God’s undeserved kindness. w16.12 1:13




Sunday, September 23

Trust in Jehovah.​—Ps. 37:3.



Jehovah created humans with remarkable abilities. He gave us thinking ability to solve problems and plan for the future. (Prov. 2:11) He gave us power to carry out our plans, enabling us to work toward proper goals. (Phil. 2:13) He also created us with a conscience​—an inborn sense of right and wrong—​that can help us avoid wrongdoing and correct our mistakes when we fall short. (Rom. 2:15) Through his Word, Jehovah repeatedly admonishes us to use our abilities for good. For example, in the Hebrew Scriptures, we read: “The plans of the diligent surely lead to success”; and “whatever your hand finds to do, do with all your might.” (Prov. 21:5; Eccl. 9:10) In the Christian Greek Scriptures, we are told: “As long as we have the opportunity, let us work what is good toward all”; and “to the extent that each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another.” (Gal. 6:10; 1 Pet. 4:10) Clearly, Jehovah wants us to do what we can to benefit ourselves and others. w17.01 1:1, 2




Monday, September 24

These things happened to them as examples, and they were written for a warning to us upon whom the ends of the systems of things have come.​—1 Cor. 10:11.



The descendants of Adam and Eve inherited imperfection and death from their disobedient parents. However, they retained the right to exercise the gift of free will. This is evident in the way God dealt with the nation of Israel. Through his servant Moses, Jehovah gave the people the choice to accept or reject the privilege of becoming His special property. (Ex. 19:3-6) What was their response? They freely chose to carry out the conditions of becoming God’s name people and unanimously declared: “All that Jehovah has spoken, we are willing to do.” (Ex. 19:8) Sadly, in time the nation misused its freedom of choice and broke that promise. Let us heed this warning example and always treasure our gift of free will by continuing to stick close to Jehovah and obeying his righteous requirements. w17.01 2:9




Tuesday, September 25

Walk in modesty with your God!​—Mic. 6:8.



Sometime during King Jeroboam’s reign, Jehovah sent a certain prophet from Judah to deliver a scathing judgment message to that apostate king of Israel. The humble prophet faithfully delivered God’s message, and Jehovah protected his servant from Jeroboam’s violent wrath. (1 Ki. 13:1-10) On his way home, the prophet unexpectedly met up with an old man from nearby Bethel. The man claimed to be a prophet of Jehovah. He deceived the younger man into disobeying Jehovah’s strict instructions ‘not to eat bread or drink water in Israel’ and ‘not to return by the way that he came.’ Jehovah was not pleased. Later, on his way home, a lion came across Jehovah’s prophet on the road and killed him. (1 Ki. 13:11-24) Why did the once modest prophet presumptuously go along with that deceitful older man? The Bible does not say. But it could be that he completely forgot that he was supposed to be ‘walking modestly with God.’ w17.01 4:1-3




Wednesday, September 26

I have spoken, and I will bring it about. I have purposed it, and I will also carry it out.​—Isa. 46:11.



The very first words of the Bible make this simple but profound statement: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” (Gen. 1:1) It is true that we have only a little understanding of the many things God created, such as space, light, and gravity, and we have seen only a small fraction of the universe. (Eccl. 3:11) Yet, Jehovah has revealed to us his purpose for the earth and for mankind. The earth was to be an ideal home for men and women created in God’s image. (Gen. 1:26) They would be his children, and Jehovah would be their Father. As explained in the third chapter of Genesis, Jehovah’s purpose encountered a challenge. (Gen. 3:1-7) However, that challenge was by no means insurmountable. No one can stand in Jehovah’s way. (Isa. 46:10; 55:11) Therefore, we can be certain that Jehovah’s original purpose will be fulfilled exactly on time! w17.02 1:1, 2




Thursday, September 27

Where is the One who put within [Moses] His holy spirit?​—Isa. 63:11.



Since holy spirit is an invisible force, how could the Israelites discern that it was operating on Moses? Holy spirit enabled Moses to perform miracles and to declare God’s name to Pharaoh. (Ex. 7:1-3) Holy spirit also produced in Moses beautiful qualities, such as love, meekness, and patience, that qualified him to lead the Israelites. The evidence was clear: Jehovah had selected Moses to be the leader of His people. Later, Jehovah’s holy spirit empowered other men whom he appointed to lead his people. “Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom.” (Deut. 34:9) “Jehovah’s spirit came upon Gideon.” (Judg. 6:34) And “the spirit of Jehovah began to empower David.” (1 Sam. 16:13) All those men relied on God’s spirit to help them, and that spirit empowered them to perform feats that they could not have done in their own strength.​—Josh. 11:16, 17; Judg. 7:7, 22; 1 Sam. 17:37, 50. w17.02 3:3-5




Friday, September 28

Not that we are the masters over your faith, but we are fellow workers for your joy, for it is by your faith that you are standing.​—2 Cor. 1:24.



Paul set a fine example of respecting his brothers’ right of free will to make decisions. Today, when giving counsel on matters involving personal choice, the elders should follow that pattern. They are happy to share Bible-based information with others in the flock. Still, the elders are careful to allow individual brothers and sisters to make their own decisions. That is logical because those individuals will bear the responsibility for the results. Here is an important lesson: We can show helpful interest in others and call attention to Scriptural principles or counsel. Still, others have a right and responsibility to make their own decisions. When they do this wisely, they benefit. Clearly, we should avoid any tendency to think that we are authorized to make decisions for other brothers and sisters. w17.03 2:11




Saturday, September 29

Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive.​—Heb. 13:17.



The faithful slave has exercised outstanding faith by zealously promoting and spreading the Kingdom good news. Are you one of the other sheep who supports the anointed in this vital work? How happy you will feel when your Leader, Jesus, says: “To the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.” (Matt. 25:34-40) When Jesus returned to heaven, he did not abandon his followers. (Matt. 28:20) He knew firsthand how much the holy spirit, the angels, and God’s Word helped him to take the lead when he was on earth. Therefore, he has supplied the faithful slave today with the same assistance. As anointed Christians, the members of that slave “keep following the Lamb no matter where he goes.” (Rev. 14:4) As we follow their direction, therefore, we follow our Leader, Jesus. Soon, he will lead us to everlasting life. (Rev. 7:14-17) And no human leader can promise that! w17.02 4:17-19




Sunday, September 30

Commit your way to Jehovah; rely on him, and he will act in your behalf.​—Ps. 37:5.



When we face problems that seem too much for us to deal with, it may be easy to see the need to rely on Jehovah. But what do we do when we have to cope with smaller issues of daily life? Do we resort to human thinking by trying to solve them in our own way? Or do we look for Bible principles and try to apply them, thus showing that we rely on Jehovah’s way to solve problems? For example, on occasion you may face some opposition from your family regarding attending meetings or an assembly. You ask Jehovah to direct you and help you discern the best way to handle the situation. Or what if you lose your job, and you are having difficulty finding another? When speaking with a prospective employer, would you still inform him that you will be attending weekday meetings regularly? Whatever the problem may be, we do well to heed the words of the psalmist who said the words of today’s text. w17.03 4:6




