Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Many indeed have been the heartwarming expressions of appreciation received from you regarding the auxiliary pioneer arrangement announced last summer. Truly it is wonderful to see your enthusiastic response to this opportunity to share more fully in preaching and disciple-making, and numerous benefits have resulted from it.
Many who have found pioneering too great a challenge up to this time now have pleasure in serving as auxiliary pioneers. One of them wrote: “For many years (24 in fact) I have wanted to be a pioneer but lacked stamina. Seventy-five hours was even more than I could handle. Sixty hours is just perfect. Best of all, I can do it continually, month after month.”
Another publisher, from Ohio, wrote: “Although I had to make some adjustments, it was truly a joy to start off the new service year in this way.” But was this done at the expense of the family? No, all in the family cooperated well and the sister had a fine schedule. She reported: “The entire family benefited from my pioneering. Meals were on time, the children were sent to school on time, our personal study habits were improved as well as our family studies. I am so grateful to Jehovah and to his organization for this wonderful new opportunity to increase our service to him.”
Clearly, such enthusiasm is shared by many. During September and October of 1975 we had 7,611 and 12,846 temporary pioneers respectively. But during the same two months in 1976, after the new arrangement went into effect, we had 16,388 and 21,344, a fine increase indeed!
Think of the many additional ones contacted with the Kingdom message and assisted spiritually, and of the joy this brought to Jehovah’s heart because of the additional time spent in praising him. (Prov. 27:11) Is it possible for more of us to join in this rewarding service arrangement and share in the joy and blessings? Why not talk to the presiding overseer and get an application from him and begin experiencing the joy of auxiliary pioneer service soon? May Jehovah richly add his blessing as you render sacred service to him with all your heart.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

