Help Your Brothers to Preach
1 The reports from presiding overseers covering last service year’s activity reflect that a number of publishers have become inactive in our God-given work of preaching and teaching, while others are irregular in field service.
2 Why have some drifted away or slowed down in sharing the truth with others? Was it tribulation or persecution? Was it the anxiety of this system of things or the deceptive power of riches? (Matt. 13:18-23) What can we do to help our brothers spiritually?
3 If some with your congregation are inactive in field service, perhaps even failing to attend the meetings of God’s people, what can you do to aid them? Go to them with a loving and helpful spirit; by getting them to talk, endeavor to determine the cause of their spiritual problem. Helping our brothers, which includes looking after those who are drifting away or need encouragement, is an essential part of our service to God. (Matt. 18:12-14; Acts 11:23) It may be possible to aid them to resume their active worship of God.
4 All elders and ministerial servants who serve as book study conductors should be alert to the spiritual needs of each one in their group. Reviewing the Publisher’s Record cards from time to time will enable them to be aware of trends developing with regard to a person’s field service. When an individual needs help or assistance, the study conductor should give him personal attention or enlist the aid of an experienced publisher.
5 If the problem is a failure to report field service, make a greater effort to encourage accurate, prompt reporting. Mention it at the book study near the end of the month and have report forms available there. By directly encouraging and arranging to work personally in field service with those who have become irregular, elders, ministerial servants and other publishers may aid many to regain their joy and satisfaction in doing the divine will.
6 During the visit of the circuit and district overseers, these brothers will be utilizing more of their time to aid inactive and irregular ones. Early in the week the traveling brother will observe how much aid has been given in the past few months and how it is currently being given. He will do what he can do to assist during his visit, as well as discuss arrangements with the elders for additional care and attention as needed after he leaves.
7 Never forget that we are to “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.”—Gal. 6:9, 10.

