Presenting the Good News—With the Holy Spirit Book
1 All persons have need of God’s holy spirit if they are to enjoy a life truly worth living and a hope for the future, for it is the force behind the coming new order! (Gal. 5:22, 23) Yes, our neighbors need to be informed about God’s holy spirit. They need to see how it can affect their own relationships with other people. This is something that we can all talk about. The Holy Spirit book can also help them to appreciate the reality of God’s spirit so it can become a force in their lives. Three presentations are outlined below as suggestions, but, of course, you can use any other presentation you may desire.
FOR NEW PUBLISHERS
2 “Hello. I have been studying the Bible recently, and this Bible verse will help to explain why I have come to your door even though you likely already have a religion. Galatians 5:22, 23 states: [Read it.] Most of us have heard of God’s spirit but wondered just what it is. Something that will help you to understand how God’s spirit can work in your life is this small Bible handbook. [Display book to householder. Add your own comment on how much the truth means to you.] God promises to put his spirit upon those desiring it. I am sure you will find this Bible handbook very helpful. You may have this copy for 25c.”
FOR YOUNGER PUBLISHERS
3 “Hello. From discussions at school I can appreciate that man is trying very hard to bring peace to the earth. I wonder, though, if the Bible’s comment here at Galatians 5:22, 23 is not being overlooked. [Read verses.] Did you notice that it says a fruit of God’s spirit is peace? So peace comes from God’s spirit. That is what this Bible handbook is all about. [Display it.] You may have this copy for 25c.”
FOR ALL OF US
4 “Hello. I am calling because of concern about the problem many people have in getting along together. I am sure you will agree that we see this almost everywhere—on the job, in the schools and even in the home. What do you think could be done to help people in getting along with one another? [Allow householder to respond.] I would like to get your opinion of what is stated here at Galatians 5:22, 23. [Read.] These qualities come from the operation of God’s spirit in our lives. Don’t you agree, then, that since God’s spirit produces such fine results, it would help people to be interested in one another’s welfare? [Allow for comment.] This book [display it] is designed to help us to understand how we can enjoy God’s spirit and its wonderful fruitage. Notice what it says about the future time when God’s spirit will operate on everyone living on earth. [Read page 181, ¶36, first two sentences.] The book is yours for a contribution of just 25c.”
5 Feel free to adapt these presentations to your area and what concerns people there or use whatever is appropriate in your territory. If you find a prospect for a Bible study, you may want to give a booklet to the householder and try to start a study. Let us make every effort during the month of February to help people to understand and benefit from the wonderful active force of Jehovah God.—Ps. 143:10.

