God’s Word Is Alive
Celebrations of Deliverance
WHAT a marvelous deliverance it was! The nation of Israel was in slavery in Egypt, and Pharaoh refused to let them go free. So Jehovah had the Israelites kill a lamb and sprinkle its blood on the doorposts and lintels of their houses, as you can see. That very night the angel of Jehovah passed over the houses with the blood on their doorposts but killed the firstborn sons in the houses of all the Egyptians. At that Pharaoh let the Israelites go free.
Was that deliverance of the Israelites really complete? Well, their firstborn lived; they were delivered from slavery in Egypt and eventually were brought into “a land flowing with milk and honey.” (Ex. 13:5) But still the people got sick; they grew old and died. They were not delivered from sin and its consequence, death.
Later, Jesus Christ appeared on the earthly scene. One day John, who had baptized Jesus, pointed to him and said: “See, the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world!” (John 1:29) As the blood of the Passover lamb meant deliverance for the Israelite firstborn, so Christ’s poured-out blood can deliver. It can provide a superior, complete deliverance. Those who exercise faith in Christ’s sacrifice will have their sins removed. (John 3:16, 36) They will be able to live forever without ever growing old, getting sick or dying.​—Rev. 21:4.
Jesus instituted a special meal to celebrate this grand deliverance, and especially as it relates to those who will be resurrected to be heirs with him of the heavenly kingdom. On the evening before his impalement, Jesus handed his faithful apostles bread and said: “Take, eat. This means my body.” Then he gave them a cup of wine and said: “Drink out of it, all of you; for this means my ‘blood of the covenant,’ which is to be poured out in behalf of many for forgiveness of sins.” Also, Jesus said: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”​—Matt. 26:26-28; Luke 22:19, 20.
So this was to be an annual celebration in observance of Jesus’ death. On this special occasion what the death of Christ means, not only to the Kingdom heirs but also to all believing mankind, is reviewed and impressed deeply on the mind and heart. On April 19, the anniversary date this year of Christ’s death, Jehovah’s Witnesses welcome you to join with them in this memorial celebration. Attend at the Kingdom Hall nearest to you. Check with Jehovah’s Witnesses locally for the exact time.

