Finding the Source of All Energy
THE sun is the earth’s primary energy source. Many scientists believe that coal and oil are the decayed remains of trees and plants that drew their energy from the sun.a The water that flows into hydroelectric dams is initially drawn from the oceans by heat from the sun and is transported overland in the form of clouds. The sun’s warming rays also propel the breezes that drive wind-powered generators. Yet, it is estimated that only about half a billionth of the sun’s energy reaches the earth.
Although awesome in power, the star we know as the sun is just one among billions of similar massive sources of energy in the universe. What is the ultimate origin of all this power? Referring to the stars, the Bible writer Isaiah says: “Raise your eyes high up and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who is bringing forth the army of them even by number, all of whom he calls even by name. Due to the abundance of dynamic energy, he also being vigorous in power, not one of them is missing.”—Isaiah 40:26.
When contemplating the sheer power of the stars, we may feel overwhelmed—and even more so when we consider their Creator. However, the Bible encourages us: “Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.” (James 4:8) Yes, the Creator of the earth and its abundant energy resources, the one who gave us the spark of life, can be found by those who look for him.—Genesis 2:7; Psalm 36:9.
When they see the earth and its resources being polluted and distributed unfairly, some people may find it hard to believe that God is interested in the earth and the individuals upon it. Nevertheless, the Bible assures us that change is soon to come, promising a major change in both the way the world’s resources are distributed and the way the earth itself is governed. (Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10) By installing one heavenly global government under the direction of his Son, Christ Jesus, Jehovah God will ensure that everyone living will share the earth’s abundant resources fairly. (Micah 4:2-4) He will also “bring to ruin those ruining the earth,” that is, those who corrupt the earth’s environment, whether in a spiritual or a physical way.—Revelation 11:18.
At that time the promise recorded at Isaiah 40:29-31 will prove true both spiritually and physically: “He is giving to the tired one power; and to the one without dynamic energy he makes full might abound. Boys will both tire out and grow weary, and young men themselves will without fail stumble, but those who are hoping in Jehovah will regain power. They will mount up with wings like eagles. They will run and not grow weary; they will walk and not tire out.” You too can learn more about the Source of all energy and the solution to earth’s energy problems if you take time to study the Bible.
[Footnote]
See the box “How Did Petroleum Form?” in Awake! of November 8, 2003.

