Telephone Witnessing Can Be Effective
 1. Why might telephone witnessing be considered an important part of our ministry?
1 Why might we consider using telephone witnessing in our ministry? Because it is another means of helping others to obtain accurate knowledge for gaining salvation. (2 Pet. 3:9) Although our primary method of declaring the good news of God’s Kingdom is house-to-house preaching, we willingly take advantage of other methods to reach those who may not be found at home.​—Matt. 24:14; Luke 10:1-7; Rev. 14:6.
 2. How is telephone witnessing organized?
2 How It Is Organized: As with field service arrangements for house-to-house work, telephone witnessing territory is also provided for the publishers. It may be done alone or with a small group of perhaps two or three. The place that is used should be conducive to the task at hand. Many find it advantageous to sit at a table and have in front of them items that they normally use when preaching from house to house.
 3. What should we keep in mind when witnessing over the phone?
3 How to Witness by Telephone: When witnessing over the telephone, our presentation should be conversational. Some who are just beginning may read a presentation to the householder but in a conversational manner. Introductions found in the Reasoning book, Our Kingdom Ministry, and the tract Would You Like to Know the Truth? can be helpful in this regard. When developing your own presentation, identify a theme, develop a question, and be ready to share a few scriptures that provide the answer. Generally you would offer the same publications that are being offered from house to house. Consider the following reminders: Relax and speak slowly. Be courteous, patient, and friendly, as this can be perceived over the phone. Listen as the householder gives his thoughts, then acknowledge and express appreciation for his comments. Be careful not to mention the donation arrangement, as this could be misinterpreted as a form of telephone solicitation.
 4. What may telephone witnessing enable us to do with our assigned territory?
4 The person you talk to on the telephone may be a shut-in or a person whose work schedule makes it difficult to reach him in the house-to-house ministry. There are others who live in gated communities or in apartments with restricted entrance. Therefore, in an effort to accomplish our ministry more fully and thoroughly, consider using the effective method of telephone witnessing.

