VOL. XXVII OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

The Heavens Shall Roll Together 323 

A Few National Reform Utterances 323 

A Remarkable Forecast 324 

The Gathering of the Churches 324 

"She Hath Done What She Could" 330 

Anointed for His Burial 331 

Selfishness vs. Generosity 332 

"This Do in Remembrance of Me" 333 

"Take Eat; This is My Body" 333 

"Drink Ye all of It" 334 

New Wine in the Kingdom 334 

For the Remission of Sins 335 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 

NEW MOTTO CARDS 

We have new full lines of Motto Cards, put up in $1 packages. 
If you desire large cards, so specify; otherwise we will 
send the medium and small sizes and the more of them. We 
supply these at about cost. German Mottoes ($1 pks.) we send 
direct from Germany. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 
WHO ARE THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? AND WHY ARE THEY THERE? 

This booklet is now ready and will be supplied at 10 cents 
each: wholesale rates 50 cents per dozen are open to all TOWER 
readers who may desire to circulate these among their friends. 
In leatherette binding, 25 cents. Prices include postage. 

"VOLUNTEER" TOWERS IN SWEDISH 

We have good quantities of Swedish literature for general 
circulation as Volunteer matter. We cannot send these by 
mail except in small lots, but where 2000 or more are ordered 
in one lot we can send by freight, charges prepaid. Order all 
you can use judiciously amongst the Swedish people of your 
neighborhood. 



R3872 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE HEAVENS SHALL ROLL TOGETHER 



IT is interesting to those who see the approaching Federation 

of Christian churches, as set forth in the 

Bible, to note the various little straws which denote 

the gradual change of sentiment on the part of the public 

into harmony with what the Bible teaches us to expect. 

For instance, how strange it seems that Presbyterians 

and Congregationalists, after fighting so long against 

all forms and ceremonies and liturgies and "printed 

prayers," should now be adopting these. The 

Congregationalist attitude toward the Church of 

England's Book of Common Prayer is thus set forth in 



their new 
BOOK OF LITURGY FOR CONGREGATIONAL SERVICE 

The Congregational attitude toward the English 
Book of Common Prayer is thus expressed by one of the 
leaders in that body: 

"Our real inheritance is in the English Book of 
Common Prayer, which gathered up the best elements 
of the service books of its time, both historic and reformed, 
and was the possession of the undivided 
English Church from which we derive. Our fathers 
used their liberty in discarding it. If we mean to 
return to written forms, we shall be using our liberty if 
we return to it, or such a modification of it as shall suit 
our modern life. We shall impoverish and not enrich 
ourselves by stepping further outside of the tradition of 
the whole Church. 

"The time is ripening for such a revision of the Book 
of Common Prayer as may serve our need."— (New Haven) 
Journal and Courier. 

A FEW NATIONAL REFORM UTTERANCES 



"We want State and religion; and we are going to 
have it."— Jonathan Edwards, D.D. In other words, 
they want a State religion. 

"Constitutional laws punish for false money, 
weights, and measure. So Congress must establish a 
standard of religion, or admit anything called religion." 
—Prof. C. A. Blanchard. And this will mean an established 
religion. 

"Our remedy for all these malefic influences is to 
have the government simply set up the moral law, and 
recognize God's authority behind it, and lay its hand 
on any religion that does not conform to it."— Rev. M. 
A. Gault. And this means religious persecution. 

They desire an amendment to the Constitution 
that will "place all the Christian laws, institutions, and 
usages of our Government on an undeniable legal basis 
in the fundamental law of the land."— Art. 2 of their 
Constitution. That is, they desire the Christian religion 
made the "legal" religion of the nation. 

"Those who oppose this work now will discover, 
when the religious amendment is made to the Constitution, 
that if they do not see fit to fall in with the majority, 
they must abide the consequences, or seek some 
more congenial clime."— Dr. David McAlister. This is 
what Rome said after Christianity, so-called, became 
the established religion of this empire. Justinian told 
the people that if they did not embrace the established 
religion, confiscation and other punishments would 
follow. 

"Give us good Sunday laws, well enforced by men 



in local authority, and our churches will be full of worshipers, 

and our young men and women will be attracted 

to the divine service. A mighty combination 

of the churches of the United States could win from 

Congress, the State legislatures, and municipal councils, 

all legislation essential to this splendid result."— Rev. 

S.V. Leech, D.D. 

A young man recently from Russia attending a 
Baptist Church service at which a resolution was offered 
urging legislation on the Sunday question arose and 
said: 

"I am from Russia, the land of intolerance, the 
land of a union of Church and State. I have seen the 
scars on the wrists of the missionaries whom you sent 
to my country,— scars made by chains placed on them 
by Russia's union of Church and State. I joined the 
Baptist Church in Russia because it trusted in God, not 
in the State. And now I come to America and enter my 
beloved Baptist Church, and hear you petitioning Congress 
for a law to bind chains on the wrists of your 
fellowmen. In the name of God, send your petitions to 

R3873 : page 324 

the throne of God, and not to the Congress of the United 
States." 

A REMARKABLE FORECAST 



In a sermon, in the year 1846, Charles Beecher 
declared: 

"The ministry of the evangelical Protestant denominations 
is not only formed all the way up under 
a tremendous pressure of merely human fear, but they 
live, and move, and breathe in a state of things radically 
corrupt, and appealing every hour to every baser element 
of their nature to hush up the truth, and bow the 
knee to the power of apostasy. Was not this the way 
things went with Rome? Are we not living her life over 
again? And what do we see just ahead?— Another 
general council! A world's convention! evangelical 
alliance, and universal creed!" 

When this state of things shall have been reached, 
then, in the effort to secure complete uniformity, it 
will be only a step to the resort to force. 

The following striking paragraphs show how 
another, with remarkable foresight, outlined this federation 
movement years ago: 

"There has been for years, in churches of the 
Protestant faith, a strong and growing sentiment in 
favor of a union based upon common points of doctrine. 
To secure such a union, the discussion of subjects upon 
which all were not agreed— however important they 
might be from a Bible standpoint— must necessarily 



be waived." 

"When the leading churches of the United States, 
uniting upon such points of doctrine as are held by them 
in common, shall influence the State to enforce their 
decrees and to sustain their institutions, then Protestant 
America will have formed an image of the 
Roman hierarchy, and the infliction of civil penalties 
upon dissenters will inevitably result." 

OUR OWN TESTIMONY ON THIS SUBJECT 

Our older readers will recall that, so long ago as 
Oct. 1881, this journal set forth that this Church 
Federation as the "image of the beast" (Rev. 13), 
was constructed in The Evangelical Alliance organized 
in 1846; and that the giving of life or living power to 
this federation might be expected by now, and that 
shortly it would prove its likeness to the original papal 
system which it imaged by violent suppression of the 
truth and persecution of its defenders. In all these 
twenty-five years the matter has been ripening, though 
nothing then seemed farther from realization. Our 
presentation on the subject in Millennial Dawn Vol. 
III., p. 1 19, is or should be in the hands of all of our 
readers. 



R3873 : page 324 

THE GATHERING OF THE CHURCHES 

-BY EUGENE WOOD- 

WE QUOTE the following from the columns of 
Everybody's Magazine, not by way of endorsing 
it, but because it gives a fairly good 
view of the way the "worldly wise" look at matters; 
and in order to the better point out the writer's 
erroneous view. Introducing the article the editor of 
Everybody's says; 

"We asked Eugene Wood, whose frank article on 
consumption set people thinking intelligently about 
the white plague, to attend the two religious conferences 
organized to discuss the unification of the 
churches, and to report what he saw and heard. This 
is his report. It is presented exactly for what it is— 
the individual impressions and thoughts of a plain-spoken 
man, who is himself a believer, but who takes 
the ground that Christianity is greater than dogma and 
more important than its sects. We submit this article 
to you, our readers, not as a contribution to theological 
controversy, for that has no place here, but in the 
sincere belief that a little "talking out in meeting" 
now and then will help the Christianity most of us 
profess, and aid morality and virtue. There are many 



new things in the world to-day. Thought is a living 
and growing thing. Modern scientific investigation 
has lightened up dark places in the annals of the race 
and we are all looking at life through different peep-holes 
from those through which our grandfathers viewed the 
eternal problem. Knowing more of the beginnings of 
religion than our ancestors, and realizing as we must 
that other men in other lands are thinking about the 
selfsame problems that are our concern, it is impossible 
not to believe that the God our forefathers regarded as 
a private possession of their particular sect is the God 
of the Chinese and the Hindus and the Mohammedans, 
as well as of us Americans and Europeans. As our 
outlook widens, we begin to see that the spirit of the 
Sermon on the Mount is of higher consequence than 
the Apostles' Creed, and that though forms may differ, 
most honest men, be they Buddhists or Confucians, 
Protestants or Roman Catholics, are struggling toward 
the same goal, looking up at the same stars, 
praying to the same God and for much the same 
things." 

The writer, Eugene Wood, takes as his text the 
words of Prof. Goldwin Smith, and begins: 

"This anxious gathering of the churches shows that 
they believe a religious crisis to be at hand. It is also a 
social crisis." 

Two extremely significant, not to say portentous, 
conferences, with apparently the same underlying purpose, 
were held in November last on nearly coincident 
dates, the New York State Conference of Religion at 
Rochester, 13th- 14th, and the Inter-Church Conference 
on Federation, in Carnegie Hall, New York City, 
15th-21st. 

To say that the underlying purpose of both conferences 
was to further the unity (either after the flesh 
or after the spirit) of the many dissident religious 
bodies will not be vividly interesting to the public at 
large. It might have been fifty years ago, when there 
wasn't much else to talk about, but being absorbed in 
weightier matters than differences of opinion as to the 
orthodox way to sharpen a lead pencil, or whether 
wetting the top of a man's head is more efficacious than 
having the water run out of his shoe-tops, the public 
has long ago dismissed the subject as impracticable and 

R3873 : page 325 

unprofitable. It is perhaps a little late in the day to 
query: Why separate organizations for the Reformed 
Church in America and the Reformed Church in the 
United States of America? Why a Presbyterian 
Church, and a Reformed Presbyterian Church, and a 
United Presbyterian Church, and a Welsh Presbyterian 
Church, and a Cumberland Presbyterian Church, and 
so on, to the end of the chapter? Why the colored 
Methodist Episcopal Church in America, and an 



African Methodist Episcopal Church, and an African 
Methodist Episcopal Zion Church? There is a Methodist 
Episcopal Church and a Methodist Episcopal 
Church South (and, I am told, some Methodist Episcopal 
churches in Baltimore that are neither one nor 
the other, but kind of betwixt and between), between 
whom there is no difference in doctrine or polity, but 
only a soreheaded poutiness about a quarrel fifty years 
old, settled forever by the rude arbitrament of war, as 
to whether the negro was ordained of God to work only 
for his board and keep, or for wages that will just about 
pay for his board and keep, if he is lucky in getting jobs 
and careful with his money. 

Conferences to make up the clothes-line fusses 
between Mrs. Cassidy and Mrs. Ryan would possess 
about the same interest for the general public, were it 
not for the notable fact that it sometimes happens that 
more comes out of the bag than was put into it. This 
is my only excuse for blackening good white paper to 
tell you what happened in Rochester and in Carnegie 
Hall on the dates I have given. 

THE PLAN OF FEDERATION 

Not by way of reporting so much as by way of 
refreshing your recollection, I will say that the Inter-Church 
Conference on Federation adopted a Plan. 
Delegates from some thirty evangelical bodies voted 
for it, and the legislative assemblies of these thirty 
religious bodies will ratify the Plan in due season, provided 
it doesn't prevent their sharpening their lead-pencils 
their own orthodox way. Then they will elect 
members of the Federal Council, four for each denomination, 
and one in addition for each 50,000 communicants. 
This Federal Council will meet for business in 
December, 1908, and once every four years thereafter. 
So there won't anything be done precipitately; we can 
rest easy as to that. "The Federal Council shall have no 
authority over the constituent bodies adhering to it; 
but its province shall be limited to the expression of its 
counsel, and the recommending of a course of action in 
matters of common interest to the churches, local 
councils, and individual Christians. It has no authority 
to draw up a common creed, or form of government 
or worship, or in any way to limit the full autonomy of 
the Christian bodies adhering to it." So we need not 
fear drastic action; we may rest easy as to that. 

To the objection that this seems a rather tenuous 
bond of union one may say that mighty empires have 
been formed of States whose first coming together was 
quite as— er— quite as— well, "cage-y." To speak of 
"Christian bodies adhering" to such a confederacy 
seems rather a brilliant metaphor than a precise statement, 
but we shall see— what we shall see. It's all 
over until 1908, anyhow. *** 



MANY SECTS-ONE RELIGION 

Membership in the Inter-Church Conference on 
Federation was representative. The delegates went 
there and voted, not as they thought as individuals, 
but as they thought their denominations thought, 
which is the same as what the most unprogressive of 
their denominations thought, the Uncle Billy Hardheads 

R3874 : page 325 

with ear-trumpets up there in the front seats. 
The fact that membership in the New York State Conference 
of Religion was individual, and that a man went 
there to represent himself, made all the difference in 
the world between the two conferences. At Rochester 
they didn't formulate a plan. I think all the voting 
that was done was on whether they should thank the 
city of Rochester for its hospitality, and whether they 
should accept the kind invitation to go to Schenectady 
the next time. Clergymen and laymen from the dissident 
bodies, Christian and Jewish, were present and 
spoke. The motto of this conference was "Religions 
are many; religion is one," and the effort was not so 
much to arrive at corporal union; not so much to constitute 
a council which should have no authority to do 
more than say that it looks like rain but may clear up 
after all, as to declare that spiritual kinship subsists of 
itself and without formulated effort— kinship not only 
between the Reformed Church in America and the 
Reformed Church in the United States of America; 
between evangelicals and the misguided but well-meaning 
creatures who think there is no hell; but also 
between Catholics and Protestants, between Christians 
and Jews— nay, more, between those whose heritage 
is the Bible, and Mohammedans, Buddhists, Jains, 
Parsees, Confucianists, Shintoists, Brahmins, even those 
who "in their blindness bow down to wood and stone. 

GOD IN IDEAL OR IDOL 

There were none of these latter present, but they 
would have been welcomed if they had come, for at this 
conference it was seen that whether a man forms a god 
with his hands and it is called an idol, or forms one with 
his mind and it is called an ideal, the Father of us all, 
in whom we live and move and have our being, knows 
how it is with us: how we grope in the darkness that is 
about us if haply we may find him. And the homage 
we pay to his broken reflection in idol or ideal he takes 
unto himself as he spake by the mouth of his prophet 
Malachi, saying, "In every place incense is offered unto 
my name, and a pure offering, for my name is great 
among the heathen, saith the Lord of Hosts." 

[This the Revised Version of Malachi 1:11, is not 



in our judgment correct. The Common Version reads: 
shall be instead of is, and thus agrees with facts and 
other Scriptures. See I Cor. 10:20. --Editor Z.W.T.] 

ROMAN CATHOLIC APPROVAL 

The air at this Rochester Conference was clearer, 
freer of the smoke of Smithfield and Geneva. Said one 
good soul: "It is of more importance that I shall understand 
your position than that you shall understand 
mine." You couldn't jaw with that man because he 
doesn't sharpen a lead-pencil the way you do. As a 
result of that spirit at Rochester, Jews learned that 
Christians, for all their insistence upon the Three Persons 
in the Godhead, can say with them the Sh'ma 
Israel, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is 
One," and Christians learned from Jews that Jesus was 
a typical Jew, and that what divides the creeds is not 

R3874 : page 326 

his teachings, but concessions made to heathen 
Europe afterward. 

It is matter for regret that at Rochester and at 
Carnegie Hall there was no representation of either the 
Roman Catholic Church, whose membership is estimated 
at about one-eighth of the entire population of the 
country (certainly one-third of the entire population of 
New York City is Roman Catholic), or of that unorganized 
but perhaps even larger body known as the 
Big Church, whose members loaf around home Sundays 
and read the paper. Of these two great bodies, the 
Big Church stayed away probably because it feels much 
as Noah did when a storm began to blow up. And the 
Roman Catholic Church stayed away because it knows 
there won't be much of a shower, anyway. If there 
were, there would be something about it in the "Summa 
Theologiae" of St. Thomas Aquinas. I haven't seen 
what the Roman Catholics have said of the Rochester 
Conference, but the Boston Pilot approved of the stand 
taken for the divinity of Jesus by the Federation Conference 
(meaning the shutting of the door in the face of 
the Unitarians), and the Rev. Morgan M. Sheedy in 
another Catholic paper commended the irenic spirit 
which prompted the gathering, and mentioned the significant 
fact that Catholics and Protestants found 
themselves able to cooperate in good works, as in 
associated charities. The purpose of the Federation, 
by the way, is "to promote catholic unity," but 
"catholic" and "Catholic" are not quite the same. 
Not quite. 

BIG CHURCH DOCTRINE 

The Big Church would have approved the Rochester 
Conference the more heartily of the two. For 



instance, Rabbi Schulman, of the Temple Beth-El, of 
New York, in his paper, "Our Definition of Religion," 
said that "religion is human life lived in the presence of 
God." Prof. Joseph Leighton, of Hobart College, in 
the discussion following, denied that the idea of God 
was necessary to religion, which in his turn he defined as 
"the tendency of personality to enlarge itself, the persistent 
demand for the ideal by the actual. Religion 
represents the demands of the individual for ideal 
environment," differing from philosophy mainly in 
method. This does not violently contradict the creed 
of the Big Church. 

But the most radical expression at the Rochester 
Conference was that of the Rev. Algernon Crapsey, 
D.D., rector of St. Andrew's Episcopal Church of that 
city. He was replying to the Rev. Dr. Josiah L. Strong, 
who had argued that in order that the coming generation 
should seek after righteousness of conduct it 
behooved us to see to it that the public schools taught 
these three formal dogmas: The existence of God, the 
immortality of the soul, and the future accountability 
of all men. (By the way, I hear that the proposition 
to split the kindlings for Dr. Crapsey's bonfire was 
defeated by a vote of three to two.) 

In this discussion he said: "I must take issue with 
Dr. Strong. The remedy he proposes is impracticable, 
and the three dogmas of the existence of God, the immortality 
of the soul, and the future accountability of 
all men are without ethical value. The Mohammedan 
believes all three far more devoutly, far more earnestly 
than the average Christian, and because he believes he 
murders Christians. The Russian believes all three, 
and because he believes he massacres the Jews. Those 
who have been prominent in the conduct of affairs, 
those whose wealth threatens the country now, are 
firm believers in the three propositions. If you were to 
pick out a man to-day who stands firmest for these 
three things it would be the Master of Standard Oil. 

"Every man's God— for 'God' is an abstract term 
—every man's God is the exact reflection of that man's 
moral nature. He makes his God in his own image. 
It is impossible to do otherwise. Therefore, a man's 
God to any human mind is simply the measure of his 
own ethical progress. Therefore, you will get in the 
name of God every sort of action from the sacrifice of a 
man's son upon an altar to the sacrifice of himself upon 
the cross. 

"To teach the existence of God is not to advance at 
all. It is the same with belief in man's immortality, 
because a man's notion of the life he is to live beyond 
will exactly correspond with the life he is living now. 
When we think of immortality it is with the idea of continuation, 
going on and doing the same things we are 
doing now. We seek to keep on in our own personality, 
we shrink from annihilation; our picture of the life 
beyond is a reproduction of the life we are living here. 



It is without ethical value. 

ORTHODOX INSURANCE THIEVES 

"So with the accountability of man," continued 
Dr. Crapsey. "Our notion of how we are to account for 
ourselves will accord with our ethical conception of 
what we do here. I do not think for a moment that 
those gentlemen lately so much spoken of in the public 
prints have been disturbed in their sleep, because I have 
known some of them. Those men who have taken 
$150,000 a year for not knowing anything about life-insurance 
are all real believers in God, in their own immortality 
and accountability, but their understanding 
of it is such that they can account for every dollar they 
have taken; can account to themselves, and thus 
account to God." 

That's Big Church doctrine, pretty High, perhaps, 
certainly very much Higher than Bob Ingersoll. As 
for Tom Paine— oh, well, he was a Low Churchman, 
away 'way down Low. That is, he would be nowadays. 
The essence of their doctrines is the same: That belief 
in the supernatural has no influence on conduct. But 
hark to this that follows from Dr. Crapsey: "We are 
living to-day in the midst of a great dissolution. We 
are standing by the death-bed of a great religion." That's 
Big Church through and through. 

In the discussion following, the Rev. Nelson Millard, 
D.D., said that the students of parochial schools 
where the teaching of religion is an emphatic factor were 
not more moral than those of the so-called "godless" 
public schools. He added: "In the South there is a 
very bad state of morals. Yet the South is most 
orthodox. The three points of belief in God, the immortality 
of the soul, and the future accountability of 
all men are well understood. Also, it is a demonstrated 
fact that Mammon is unimpeachably orthodox." 

AN IMMINENT CRISIS 

The Rev. Dr. Strong in closing said that he had 
been making investigations himself, and he had found 
that the hundred richest men in the United States who 
had the greatest influence in the financial world are 

R3874 : page 327 

almost without exception orthodox Church members. 

Here, at any rate, more came out of the bag than 
was put into it. What has this assumption that Mammon 
is immoral, no matter how orthodox it may be; 
what has this statement that this is an "age of dissolution," 
and that "we are standing by the death-bed of a 
great religion," to do with finding a common ground of 
unity of all faiths? What has it to do with federating 
the churches, and trying to get the scuffling sects at 



home to show the same table-manners that they do in 
the missionary field, where they do not all grab for the 
same piece at once, but carve the turkey so that it will 
go all around? Very much, very much indeed to do 
with it. "This anxious gathering of the churches 
shows that they believe a religious crisis to be at hand. 
It is also a social crisis." 

The Inter-Church Conference was less moved by 
this impending crisis than that at Rochester. Its 
getting together was more numerous and prolonged, 
but that was all. It was right after the elections, when, 
as you recollect, men heard the voice of God speaking 
through the people as it had never been heard before. 
The earth was still trembling with it. The laymen who 
spoke had much to say about the "awakened heart and 
conscience of the people" and the "new impulse toward 
civic righteousness," but all that got entirely by the 
reverend clergy, white-headed within and without. 
Their latest news on any subject is dated 1859. 

THE CLERGY BEHIND THE TIMES 

Apparently they could not discern the signs of the 
times. If they saw at all, they saw only that the 
evening sky of a dying day shines redly through the 
gloom. They wist not that it promises that the morrow 
shall be fair, fairer than earth has ever seen before. I 
heard one gentleman with a white tie whose theme was 
"Labor and Capital" make a fervent and a loud appeal 
for "a fair day's wages for a fair day's work," the open 
Bible, and the public schools. I am sure if he had had 
more time he would have said a good word for wearing 
rubbers when it is wet. And a bishop who may be 
described as the most extinct of his species squabbled 
and scolded at apartment-houses as destroyers of the 
home, and denounced the law by which a woman tied 
to a drunken, worthless hound may free herself and her 
children from him. 

To tell the honest truth, it wasn't much better at 
Rochester. The paper read that attracted the keenest 
attention was that of the Rev. Washington Gladden, 
D.D., on "The Relations of Moral Teachers to Predatory 
Wealth." He said that "predatory wealth" was that 
which has been "gained by plunder rather than by 
legitimate commerce, and which is used to promote the 
facilities of plunder. It has not been won by open and 
honorable competition, but by getting unfair and generally 
unlawful advantages; by secret agreements and 
rebates; by the liberal use of money to corrupt legislation 
and to subsidize the press; by using trust funds 
for private purposes; by arts which corrupt character 

and destroy the foundations of the social order 

It is childish," he urged, "to deny the existence of a 
class of rich men whose presence is a menace to liberty 

and a blight upon the national life The battle of 

the mart is often fierce, and men are often tempted to be 



hard and false and cruel. But the ordinary American 
manufacturer is not in intent, or in fact, a thief or a 

plunderer We may admit that he is not a 

saint, but he is not a pirate, and there are a number of 
things he will not do to win a fortune." 

And so on. The moral teacher, this being the case, 
must carefully distinguish between millions made 
honestly and millions made piratically. The truth is 
that "tainted money" taken by the moral teacher 
for his Church or charity or college does more 
harm than it does good. It isn't like taking the contributions 
of a gambler or the keeper of a house 
of ill-fame, because they are under the ban, and 
it is understood that whatever gifts they give will not 
take off the curse. But the predatory rich ought to be 
under the ban and are not. They are applauded, 
flattered, and courted; they sit in the seats of the 
mighty, which is an awful miscarriage of justice. 

Dr. Gladden's economics may be summed up by 
the statement that you have a right to beat your wife, 
only you mustn't hit her with a wagon-spoke. The 
moral teacher and panhandler may take the money 
gained by "open and honorable competition," but he 
must give back that "gained by plunder." 

GRAFT IN THE WAGE SYSTEM 

"Open and honorable competition!" What do 
our "moral teachers" think the scuffle for a living is? 
A game of tiddledywinks? If two starving men see a 
loaf of bread, is it going to be "After you, my dear 
Alphonse"? And if the two starving men see one job 
of work, will one give way to the other or will each 
underbid the other until the man that gets the job 
makes out of it just enough to keep him going? Part of 
what the Federation of Churches is to do when it gets 
started is to denounce "graft." Indeed, but what's 
the whole wage system but graft? What are profits 
but the difference between what a man earns and what 
he can live on, that difference going to his employer as a 
tip, a gratuity, a bribe— graft, if you please? And 
this employer must enter into "open and honorable 
competition" with others in the same business. Tell 
me, you American merchants and manufacturers whom 
Dr. Gladden praises so, how is it with you? Is it 
"After you, my dear Alphonse," or is it "Dog eat dog"? 
You know well enough what you hate to do and yet what 
you've got to do or go out of business. You've no 
illusions about "open and honorable competition." 
Is there such a thing? Tell me. Honestly now 

CHURCH COMPETITION 

If there were, we'll say, a dozen factories in a given 
trade, each outfitted with an expensive plant and a long 
salary list, but just managing to scrape along, working 



on half-time, we should see something doing in the 
reorganizing line right suddenly. It calls for no great 
intellect to see the similarity of a dozen denominations 
in a town, all outfitted with expensive plants, churches 
with stained-glass windows, altars, pulpits, organs, 
pews, carpets, Bibles, hymn-books, prayer-books, 
lesson-leaves; officered with pastors, lay-readers, 
organists, choristers, teachers, vestries, ushers, sextons, 
and Ladies' Aids; heated, lighted, swept, and garnished; 
running on one-seventh time and a little while after 
supper on Wednesday evenings, to very light business; 
all in debt up to the roots of their noses, and all grabbing 

R3875 : page 328 

after any stranger that appears. (I must tell you of a 
personal experience of mine. I was in my shirt sleeves 
and ragged trousers, opening up the barrel that had the 
dishes in it, when the bell rang. The gentleman in 
black I found at the door apologized for interrupting 
before we had got settled in our new home. "But," 
said he, "there's so much competition nowadays, I 
thought I'd call early and ask you to come to our 
Church.") 

The fruits of competition are skimped wages and 
scamped wares. Did you ever have to look to a vestry 
or the Church trustees for your money? I hope not. 
I know a very fine young man who, a little while ago, 
contemplated taking holy orders. His mother was 
distressed to death about it. It was terrible for her to 
think of him just throwing his life away, as you might 
say. And that brings me to another personal reminiscence. 
The rector of the parish went past the barber 
shop. "A fine man," I said to the barber. And he 
was, too, the finest all-around man I think I ever knew. 
"Yes," said the barber, "a fine man— in a mighty poor 
business. I'd be ashamed to get my living that way." 

CLERGYMEN AND CHURCH FAIRS 

And the barber isn't the only one of that opinion. 
Once in a while you get an inkling of what the clergy 
think about it themselves. Do you suppose when they 
were in the seminary, all on fire with high and holy 
enthusiasm for the souls of men, they ever thought it 
would come to trotting from hen-party to hen-party, 
from the Ladies' Aid to the Helping Hand; to rigging 
up catchpenny devices wherewith to get in the winter's 
coal, or pay the interest on the debt; to naming committees 
who should "mace" the department stores and 
the neighborhood groceries for contributions to the 
fancy-goods counter and the household counter, cash 
if you can get it, but if not, something to sell chances 
on? Do you suppose they like to do that? I know 
that some won't allow chances to be sold at Church 
fairs. They say it's gambling. I don't admire a gambler 



greatly, but I guess I think full as well of him as I do 
of a beggar. 

Do you suppose the clergy like to do this sort of 
thing? Not more than you, American merchant and 
manufacturer, like to do the things you have to do or 
get out of the business, the things we know about, but 
will not tell here. You have to; so do the clergy. 

Who can thunder at the Mammon of unrighteousness 
when the Mammon of unrighteousness is right 
down there in the best pew, when he is on the board of 
trustees and pulls the parish out of every financial hole, 
and when in an age of rampant unbelief he is "unimpeachably 
orthodox"? Who can denounce "predatory 
wealth" from the pulpit for getting "unfair 
advantages" and railroad rebates when the churches 
share the benefits of government and dodge paying 
taxes, and the clergy get transportation at half rates? 

RICH MEN'S SINS UNREBUKED 

If a son ask his father for bread, will he give him 
a stone? Ask your fathers in God for counsel. Shall 
I, as alderman, take the consideration that this set of 
capitalists wants to give me for a street-railway franchise? 
Somebody will get it if I don't. Shall I, as 
capitalist, give up to the demands of the aldermen? 
If I don't, the other set will, the set that would ask 
nothing better than to down me. What shall I do? 

It isn't because your fathers in God don't mean to 
do right, but because they don't know what is right. 
There's nothing about these problems in Suarez; there's 
nothing about them in Pearson on the Creed. All are 
very clear as to the wickedness of taking chickens off 
a roost after dark. That's a poor man's sin. But 
when it comes to the consideration of the fact that the 

R3876 : page 328 

public street is the only place in which we are free men, 

and that in every other place we exist only on the sufferance 

of our lords, who treat us as conquered people; 

that the very center of these streets solemnly dedicated 

to our common use is taken by our lords for their own 

private use, a continuous strip of the best city real 

estate, which no money could or should buy— the right 

of way of a street railroad— why, that's a rich man's 

sin. 

The experiment of Federation has been tried. 
Doubtless you have lived in a small town where there 
was a Union Church. There weren't enough Baptists 
or Methodists or Presbyterians or Lutherans or Congregationalists 
for each to maintain a separate little 
conventicle, so they all combined. Instead of a dozen 
stoves, they had one big comfortable furnace, and 
saved on the coal bill; instead of a dozen reed organs, 
or footy little heart-breaking thousand-dollar organs, 



they had one $10,000 organ that you could do something 

with; instead of a dozen preachers that hemmed 

and hawed and stumbled through their sentences, 

making a brave stagger at getting verbs to agree with 

their subjects, they had one smart, fine-looking man who 

could talk it right off. A great advantage over the 

old system. Yes, but as soon as enough Baptists and 

Methodists and Lutherans and Presbyterians and Congregationalists 

moved into town for each sect to set up 

its own conventicle, they left the Union Church. 

AT THE DEATH-BED OF A RELIGION 

Just hold that a minute, and consider another 
experiment in Federation, the Young Men's Christian 
Association. That is far from fizzling out. What's 
the difference? The Y.M.C.A. looks to the good of all, 
physical, mental, and moral. Right now. Here on 
earth. "Service" is its motto, not "support." That's 
the difference. 

The Rev. Dr. Crapsey has told us that we are 
standing by the death-bed of a great religion. Some 
of us are. An increasing number. But not all. This 
great religion is very much alive indeed, and long will 
be, to every man yet in that stage of progress in which 
he thinks that nothing is more important than that he 
save his own particular little soul. The whole world 
may well be lost if only he is not. What does it matter 
anyhow, these cruel wrongs, these black injustices, this 
trampling down of human souls and bodies by those 
who have seized the earth for their own possession? 
It will all be over in a few years, and then— a heaven of 
endless happiness. 

So long as "he that believeth not shall be damned," 
it is highly important to be "unimpeachably orthodox," 
and so to save one's soul (which is not incompatible 
with gaining the whole world, too, as Mr. Rockefeller 
has shown us). Federation with those who have 

R3876 : page 329 

different notions of the way to sharpen a lead-pencil will 
not appeal to such. 

Those of us who have risen beyond such blunt, 
frank selfishness, who turn the question end for end, 
and ask what it shall profit the world if it be wholly lost 
to save here and there a soul, will not linger in the 
death-chamber to see how long the doctor's oxygen of 
Federation defers the inevitable. 

That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and so must 
die; that which is born of the spirit is spirit, and can 
never die. All this clothes-line quarreling of the 
churches is born of the flesh, and except they be born 
again of the Spirit of the Coming Age, they cannot see 
the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith now as of old 
time, "How can these things be? Can all the sects 



enter the second time into their mother's womb and be 

born?" And, as of old, is the answer: They must be 

born again. They must start all over, start now as in 

the very beginning with the vivid expectation of the 

speedy coming of that age in which the sword of competition 

shall be beaten into the plowshare of cooperation, 

so that in no line of effort shall we be forced to 

skimp wages and scamp wares; when our government 

in city, state, and nation shall privilege no man or set 

of men, but shall be so just that it shall be in very deed 

the kingdom of God. "Have we not all one Father? 

Hath not one God created us? Why do we deal 

treacherously, every man against his brother?" 

"EVEN SO, COME!" 

That was how Christianity started. In their little 
sodalities they had all things in common, so the Bible 
says. "The communion of saints" was no empty 
phrase to them. And why did they look so earnestly 
for His coming, expecting it any day? Because then 
that kingdom, the Life of the Coming Age, would 
spread the whole earth over. And we, too, who see the 
western sky of this dying day all flaming with the red 
glow that promises a fair morrow; we, too, who have 
heard with our ears the oracles of God, speaking to us 
in the voice of the people last November; we, too, 
whose hearts are torn with grief at sight of the miseries 
of our brothers, when the world is rich enough for all; 
we, too, who see how special privilege rots the very 
souls of those who hold it; we, too, must pray the words 
the early Christians prayed, putting our own meaning 
upon them, it is true, but longing with the same unutterable 
longing as theirs— we, too, must cry with them, 
Even so, come quickly, Lord Jesus! 



OUR VIEW OF THE FOREGOING 

In the above is set forth the sentiment of the 
worldly wise in respect to the federation of the various 
denominations. This class of thinkers usually take a 
very practical view of everything, and mix with it very 
little of faith in the supernatural. It is still fashionable 
to refer to a personal God, though a great many of the 
worldly wise have lost any real conception of such a 
being, and think of God as merely a great force or 
power in nature. Others personifying nature as a God, 
leave out all thought of a personal being of body, 
shape and parts, willing, thinking, planning, creating, 
maintaining, etc., "working all things according to the 
counsel of his own will." (Eph. 1:11.) To this type 
of mind, which is to be found in many pulpits, banking 
houses and among many of the more intelligent mechanics, 
and which is rapidly growing, the foregoing 



article will appeal strongly. The last paragraph of the 
article, for instance, illustrates our point. The writer 
sees Socialism, and he sees that there was a start in this 
direction in the early Church at Jerusalem. He approves 
of that start, not as a divine example of what 
ought to be, but as a mere suggestion of something 
greater, that men will work out for themselves shortly. 
He dreams of an ideal kingdom in which love will be 
the controlling influence, and hopes that man will bring 
this about for himself through Socialism, though perhaps 
not without trials and difficulties by the way. 

To this writer and others the voice of the people 
last November was the voice of Nature— the voice of 
Reason, the voice of Right, the voice of God. To him 
it speaks of a social revolution and the bringing in by 
Socialism of a glorious Millennium. Carrying his figure 
of speech to the closing words of the article, he quotes 
a Scripture passage respecting the Lord's second advent, 
"Even so come, Lord Jesus." Not that he 
believes in the second coming of Jesus, but that the 
expectation of the early Church— that the second 
coming of Jesus would bring the Millennial Kingdom- 
accords somewhat with the conception of the worldly 
wise, in that they are hoping for the Spirit of Jesus to 
come into the world through Socialism— hoping for the 
spirit of love to gradually take possession of the world 
and reorganize it, and bring in the new heavens and 
new earth. 

As the Prophet has declared, "God is not in all their 
thoughts"— such plans and schemes of Socialism, etc., 
are purely worldly wise and are far from the hopes and 
expectations of those who are truly the Lord's people 
and directed by his Word. From our standpoint, the 
overturning of the political machines and the investigation 
of trusts and the bringing them under a measure 
of governmental control, are all very good in their way, 
as indicating that the world in general desires righteousness 
to the extent that they can see righteousness. 
Where their earthly interests would be advantaged, 
they would welcome so-called reforms, investigations, 
better politics, etc., but otherwise not. 

Alas, the poor world does not know itself: it does 
not realize that selfishness is at the basis of its every 
move and ambition; that the number who are not thus 
moved, controlled, is so insignificantly small as to be 
without weight and influence. Nor is it our thought to 
deride any efforts toward righteousness, even though 
they be inspired by selfish motives. We merely point 
out that the true Christian view of matters is a still 
different one— is the Bible one— that it recognizes God, 
the divine will, purpose, plan, revelation, as having to 
do with and overruling all of this world's affairs. It 
sees in the present upheaval of politics, the present 
uncovering of financial scandals, etc., another force 
making ready for the great time of trouble which the 
Scriptures indicate will be fully upon us in 1915, and 



gradually approaching in the meantime. 

From this standpoint it has been necessary that the 
gross superstition of the "dark ages" should to a considerable 
extent be dissipated, that the minds of the 
people might be set free, not only from a religious 
superstition but also set free from allied superstitions 
respecting the divine right of certain families to inherit 

R3877 : page 330 

the kingdoms, the dominions of the world, and to live 
on higher places of social privilege than other families. 
All these matters are now coming in review before the 
world, and Socialism is rapidly coming to the fore as the 
world's savior, deliverer from priestcraft, superstition, 
and political and financial autocracy. The world is 
being invited to look not to him who redeemed us with 
his precious blood, and promised to come again and 
establish his Kingdom in righteousness, but to look to 
itself, to its own affairs, to its own success at the polls, 
etc., as the only hope— thus ignoring the Lord and his 
overruling providences and the divine inspiration respecting 

R3877 : page 330 

the future outcome of present conditions in a 
glorious Millennial Kingdom. 

From our standpoint the gathering of the churches 
is the fulfilment of Scriptural prediction, and the Lord's 
intelligent and faithful and consecrated people are 
warned against having any part in any such Church 
federations, the Word of the Lord being to such, "Say 
ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people 
shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear nor 
be afraid." (Isa. 8:12.) It is the tares that are to be 
federated and bundled and gathered together for the 
great trouble time, which is shortly in a great revolution 
of society to set fire to all the social, religious, 
financial institutions and arrangements of this present 
time, eventuating in anarchy, which by overthrowing 
all things incompatible with righteousness will prepare 
the way for the Kingdom of God's dear Son at his 
second advent, a spirit being, in power and great glory, 
which will be manifested in various ways through 
earthly channels and agents. 



R3877 : page 330 

"SHE HATH DONE WHAT SHE COULD." 

-MATT. 26:6-13.-OCTOBER 28.- 
Golden Text:— "She hath wrought a good work upon me." 



THIS STUDY turns us back from the discourse of the 
Tuesday preceding our Lord's death to the Saturday 
night preceding his death— the close of the Jewish 
Sabbath day. In harmony with the prevailing custom, 
Jesus and his disciples and others were invited to a feast 
that evening. They had just arrived the previous evening 
from Jericho as intent upon keeping the feast of Passover at 
Jerusalem— the feast of which our Lord Jesus said, "With 
desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I 
suffer." (Luke 22:15.) Although Jesus had been telling the 
apostles that he was going to Jerusalem and would there be 
crucified, they seemed not to realize the matter, probably 
because he had spoken so many things to them in dark sayings, 
as, for instance, when he told them that he was the 
bread that came down from heaven, etc., and that they must 
eat his flesh and drink his blood. Perhaps the crucifixion 
suggested was also hyperbolical language; at least they could 
not realize that it would be so, even though Peter had been 
reproved for his disbelief in the matter. 

The feast was in the house of Simon the leper. Simon 
was a common name in those parts at that time, and this 
Simon was distinguished by the fact that he had been a 
leper— quite possibly he had been healed by the Lord, and 
this may have been the beginning of the intimate acquaintance 
between Jesus and the family of which Lazarus, Martha 
and Mary were prominent members. One of the Evangelists 
tells us that Lazarus was one of those who sat at the feast, 
that Martha was one of those who served, and the lesson before 
us tells especially of the work of Mary, who, while the 
Lord was reclining, approached and broke the seal of an 
alabaster box of precious perfume (not ointment, in the 
present use of the word). One of the accounts says that it 
was very precious, another that it was worth 300 pence, 
which in our money would be about $50. 

Such anointings were very rare, usually for kings or 
princes or nobles; and the disciples, under the lead of Judas, 
who seems to have been the spokesman (see John's account), 
were all filled with indignation at the waste. John tells us 
that Judas was a thief, who carried the bag, the treasurer of 
the company, and that his solicitous remarks respecting the 
use of the money for the poor were hypocritical. In any 
event we may sympathize with the other apostles for falling 
in line with his arguments, for they were all poor men, unused 
to such luxury and extravagance, and in this respect 
probably represented the majority of the Lord's people today, 
who likewise would consider a perfume bill of $50 a very 
extravagant waste of money. We are all the more interested 
to know how Jesus himself regarded the matter. We realize 
that our conceptions of matters of this kind are more or less 
biased by our own selfishness or poverty and necessity for 
economy. 

"WHY TROUBLE YE THE WOMAN?" 

Our Lord discerned at once the criticizing, fault-finding 
spirit amongst his disciples and promptly took the part of 



Mary, saying, "Why trouble ye the woman? For she hath 
wrought a good work upon me." Woman's intuition had 
guided Mary in the doing of the proper thing at the proper 
time. She realized that she owed the Master a debt that she 
never could pay, and that this costly offering of the perfume 
would be but a small tribute, a small expression of her 
gratitude. She had found in the Lord an object worthy of 
her heart devotion; she was not a woman's rights advocate; 
she found no fault with the Lord that he had not chosen her 
and Martha to be members of the company of apostles and 
to go abroad preaching his name and fame. Doubtless she 
would have gladly undertaken this work had she been so 
directed, but her womanly instincts did not lead her in this 
direction nor cause her to take offense at the Lord's showing 
a difference between the male and the female as respects the 
promulgation of his message. 

Although debarred from the honorable service of a public 
ministry of the Truth, our Lord declared, "She hath done 
what she could." She did what pleased the Lord; she illustrated 
the noblest and truest qualities of the feminine heart, 
love, devotion, fidelity; she spoke by actions rather than by 
words, and the perfume of her acts of love and kindness and 
adoration of her Lord have come down through the ages, 
filling the entire Church of Christ with the sweet odor of the 
perfume she poured upon his head and subsequently upon 
his feet. This is in accord with what our Lord prophetically 

R3877 : page 331 

declared respecting the act, "Verily I say unto you, wheresoever 

this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, 

there also this that this woman hath done shall be told for 

a memorial of her." 

What a sweet memorial of Mary! How we all love and 
reverence her true womanhood, and appreciate the fact that 
her intuitions in respect to this anointing of the Lord were 
superior to the reasonings of the twelve apostles on the subject 
—they were too cold and calculating, too business like. 
She made up for this deficiency in the warmth of her loving 
devotion. Undoubtedly woman has filled profitably just such 
a niche as this in the Church's history during all the centuries 
from then until now. Without her part undoubtedly 
the religion of Jesus would have been much more cold and 
business like and formal than it is; but the broad, deep 
sympathy of true womanhood has helped to interpret the 
heart of Christ, the love of Christ, and has proven a blessing 
to all of the followers of the Lamb. 

"THE POOR YE HAVE ALWAYS" 

It is a miscalculation to suppose that the moments spent 
in communion with the Lord, in the study of his plan, and 
the dollars and hours spent in his service, in the promulgation 
of his Truth, are wasted, and that thus the poor have 
less. On the contrary, in proportion as any one has true, 
loving devotion to the Lord, he will have devotion to his 



service and to the poor. No one can love the Lord in sincerity 

without being the more sympathetic and the more generous 

proportionately to the poor and to all within reach of 

his benevolence. As the Scriptures admonish us, "There is 

that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth 

more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty"— to want 

—to poverty of soul as well as poverty of purse. (Prov. 1 1:24.) 

The Lord's followers are to be prudent, economical but not 

parsimonious, not miserly, not stingy, not hoarders of wealth. 

They are to cast their bread upon the waters; they are to do 

good and trust to the Lord for the results; they are to use 

freely the riches of the Lord as entrusted to them, both temporally 

and spiritually, and are to receive their blessing 

from the exercise or increment of these. 

This very act on the part of the devoted Mary and our 
Lord's commendation of it have doubtless been helpful to the 
Lord's people along these very lines throughout this Gospel 
age. Similarly we were once inclined to consider the One-Day 
Conventions and the General Conventions of the Lord's 
people to be entirely too expensive, to represent a waste of 
money that might have been used otherwise; but our experience 
is that there is a blessing in the using of the money 
talent— that whoever fails to do some investing, some sacrificing 
in the interest of the Truth, will surely fail to get the 
large returns of spiritual blessing. Whoever on the contrary 
seeks to use his means in serving the Truth to others and in 
nourishing his own heart receives proportionately the greater 
blessing. We are even inclined to think that the Lord makes 
up to them in temporal matters also; but should this not be 
the case— should they be the poorer in temporal matters as 
a result of their spiritual feasting— we know that spiritual 
nourishment, fatness of soul, prosperity as New Creatures in 
Christ, is by far the most important matter with which we 
have to do. It is the very object of our present membership 
in the school of Christ, association with the fellow-members, 

R3878 : page 331 

that we may grow in this very grace as well as in knowledge 
and love in the Master's likeness. 

ANOINTED FOR HIS BURIAL 

Our Lord declared that Mary's action was a preparation 
for his burial. We remember that several of the honorable 
women of the Lord's company came to the tomb early on the 
first day of the week with spices and ointment, perfume, for 
his anointing, after the custom of the time, and because they 
failed to remember and recognize his prophecy of his resurrection 
from the dead on the third day. Their motive in 
thus going was undoubtedly a proper one, and yet Mary's 
conduct in anointing our Lord before his burial was very 
much more to the point, very much more appreciated by him. 
And so it is with us: with our dear friends, the brethren and 
others. It behooves us to anoint them with kindly words, 
loving sympathies, tender expressions, while they are still in 



the valley of conflict, before they have reached the end of 
the journey. We know not how much even the very strongest 
of the Lord's followers may need a word of sympathy and 
encouragement at times, and we do our own hearts good 
when we tender such sympathy. 

We do not mean that fulsome flattery should be poured 
upon one another; but there is a wide difference between 
flattery and encouraging, sympathetic words; and who is 
there of sympathetic heart, possessing a heart filled with the 
love divine, that is not himself an alabaster box of perfume, 
which should be opened and poured upon the spiritual 
brotherhood and all of our earthly friends and relatives as 
we might come in contact with them, and in proportion as 
the blessing of the Lord would be appropriately theirs. Let 
us not forget this; let us use these opportunities which are 
ours day by day of scattering flowers in life's pathway for 
others, and perhaps as we do this the Lord will allow some 
one to scatter some flowers also for us. On the principle that 
he who watereth others shall himself be watered, he who 
helps others should never go hungry, he who comforts others 
should never lack comfort. Doubtless the Lord will see to 
it that in proportion as we have and exercise the proper 
spirit of benevolence and generosity toward others, we will 
have our share of rich blessings in return when most needed. 

"OF THE PEOPLE THERE WERE NONE WITH HIM"--ABLE 
TO SYMPATHIZE FULLY 

Very evidently at the close of his ministry our Lord was 
feeling more or less of disappointment that a larger number 
of the Jews had not received his gracious message, had not 
believed on him. Especially would this thought come to 
him as he read in the mind of Judas that he already was 
planning to be his betrayer. Moreover, he saw something of 
the same spirit of fear in the other eleven of his apostles, for 
he already knew who should betray him, and knew also that 
the others would forsake him and flee in fear in the hour of 
his distress. If his message, if his love, if his Spirit communicated 
to these men would still leave them so weak in 
many respects, it argued that he had accomplished comparatively 
little in his ministry, and that the other five hundred 
brethren might not be more devoted than the twelve. 

What a comfort it must have been to the Lord in the 
midst of these thoughts to find that there was one loving 

R3878 : page 332 

soul which did appreciate him and brought the alabaster 
box and anointed him before his burial. The joy, the comfort, 
the blessing that came to the heart of our dear Master, 
and that strengthened him for the experiences of coming 
days, was worth far more than the 300 pence. Not only was 
he willing that the matter should be told for a memorial of 
Mary, but we may safely conclude that in the everlasting 
future Mary will be ranked very high amongst the faithful 
followers of the Lord. She may not be one with the apostles 



upon the twelve thrones of Israel, but we may be sure that 
she will have some grand, some honorable place near to the 
one she loved and for whom she showed her devotion. 
An unknown writer says, "Do not keep the alabaster 
boxes of your love and tenderness sealed up until your 
friends are dead. Fill their lives with sweetness. Speak 
approving, cheering words while their ears can hear them 
and while their hearts can be thrilled and made happier by 
them; the kind things you mean to say when they are gone, 
say before they go. The flowers you mean to send for their 
coffins, send to brighten and sweeten their homes before they 
leave them. If my friends have alabaster boxes laid away, 
full of fragrant perfumes of sympathy and affection, which 
they intend to break over my dead body, I would rather they 
would bring them out in my weary and troubled hours and 
open them, that I may be refreshed and cheered by them 
while I need them. I would rather have a plain coffin 
without a flower, a funeral without a eulogy, than a life 
without the sweetness of love and sympathy. Let us learn 
to anoint our friends beforehand for their burial. Post-mortem 
kindness does not cheer the burdened spirit. Flowers on 
the coffin cast no fragrance backward over the weary way." 

SELFISHNESS VERSUS GENEROSITY 

Our lesson concludes with the account of how Judas 
soon afterwards went to the chief priests and bargained 
with them that for thirty pieces of silver he would seek an 
opportunity and betray Jesus into their hands. What a 
sharp contrast is here drawn between the love and generosity 
of Mary and the mean selfishness of Judas! The one 
was so full of love that she could not do enough for the 
great Teacher at whose feet she loved to sit, from whose lips 
she had received so many blessings, such joy of heart, and 
by whose power her brother had been recalled from the 
tomb and probably previously her father healed of a loathsome 
disease. We also should remember how much we owe 
this same Teacher, that his are the wonderful words of life 
which have brought unto our hearts joy, peace and blessing. 
By his words we ourselves have been called from the dead 
condition, for, as the Apostle declares, we were once dead in 
trespasses and sins, but now are quickened, energized, by 
the Spirit of the Lord, by the spirit of love. 

We ourselves also had the leprosy of sin, condemnation, 
were children of wrath even as others, but our sins 
have been graciously covered by the Redeemer, the leprosy 
has been cleansed, and we have been made whiter than 
snow in the sight of our Lord through faith in the precious 
blood. We, too, have learned to sit at the Master's feet and 
to enjoy his teachings, and have been transformed thereby by 
the renewing of our minds. Is it not appropriate that we should 
feel that no offering we could bring him could in any sense or 
degree express the gratitude of our hearts? Can we not also find 
alabaster boxes of precious perfume for the Master? True, 
the Head has been glorified, and the members of the body, 
too, are now passed beyond the vail, but his "feet" are still 



with us, the last members of the body of Christ are here. 
Let us hasten to do all in our power, both temporally, and 
spiritually, for the feet of Christ; let us do all in our power 
to cleanse them from earth defilement, even though it cost us 
tears; let us anoint them with the precious spikenard perfume. 
The more costly the affection and love that we bestow 
upon the members of the body of Christ, the very lowest 
and humblest of them, the better; all should be but an 
expression of the warmth of love which is in our hearts for 
Him and His. The time is passing rapidly— soon the last 
members will have crossed and be beyond the vail, beyond 
our anointing and beyond the blessed word; "She hath done 
what she could." Let us earn that expression from the 
dear lips of our Lord by faithfulness to those who now represent 
him in the world— to the household of faith, to the 
members of the body of Christ. 

FOR THIRTY PIECES OF SILVER 

Selfishness seems to lie at the very foundation of all 
the mean, ignoble deeds of our fallen nature. It was selfish 
ambition that led mother Eve to grasp the forbidden fruit, 
and it is safe to say that selfishness ever since has prompted 
to all the mean and ignoble things of the six thousand years' 
reign of sin and death. The spirit of a sound mind is what 
we should each and all strive for. This would mean, on the 
one hand, that we should not be too extravagant, and, on 
the other hand, that we should not be too parsimonious. 
But if we should err on either side would it not be safest 
and best that we should err on the side of too great generosity 
rather than on the reverse? Well did the Apostle 
write that the love of wealth is the root of all evil. This 
might include not only money but wealth of honor, name, 
influence or power. The Apostle adds, "which some coveting 
after have erred from the faith and pierced themselves 
through with many sorrows."— 1 Tim. 6:10. 

As an illustration of this class take the case of Judas 
in our lesson, selling his Master for thirty pieces of silver! 
No matter if he did reason that Jesus had said that he was 
about to die, and said that this perfume was associated with 
his burial. No matter if Judas were sure that all these 
things would happen to the Lord anyway, and thought that 
he might just as well have the thirty pieces of silver. It did 
not condone the offence. Selfishness and meanness had so 
far been encouraged in his heart that, notwithstanding his 
intimate association with the Master, his knowledge of his 
precious words and mighty acts, neither love nor reverence 
stood in the way of selfishness. 

Judas "went to his own place," the Second Death, and 
that with a realization that it would have been better for 
him had he never been born. Whoever will allow selfish 
ambitions of any kind to have control in his heart, whoever 
will not allow the Lord's grace and truth to come into 
his heart and enlarge it and fill it with love, will likewise 
go to his own place, the Second Death. The divine provisions 
are only for those who will eventually be filled with 



love, the Spirit of God, the spirit of generosity. Let us all 

R3879 : page 333 

then more and more avoid the Judas spirit, the heart of selfishness, 
money love, self love and ambition, and let us more 
and more have the loving heart of Mary and her humility, 
which not only made her willing to spend her means to 
serve the truth, but made her willing also to humble herself 
even to the extent of tears and the use of woman's highest 
ornament, her hair, in the service of her Master, her Lord, 
and that upon his humblest members, the feet of him. 



R3879 : page 333 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME" 

--MATTHEW 26: 17-30. -NOVEMBER 4.- 

WHILE holding, in common with the great majority, 
that the Memorial Supper was instituted by our 
Lord on Thursday night in connection with his 
last celebration of the Passover, and that he was crucified 
on the next day, Friday, we have no contention with those 
who suppose that these events took place on other days of 
the week. We lay great stress on the fact there accomplished 
and its significance as the antitype of the Passover 
instituted by Moses, and as the finishing of our Lord's great 
sacrifice for sins— the sins of the whole world. For these 
vital principles we are willing to contend earnestly, as they 
are part of "the faith once delivered to the saints;" but as 
respects the particular days of the week we will not contend, 
as in our estimation they are trifling matters, of no value, no 
consequence, and should therefore in no sense of the word 
disturb the minds or heart-fellowship of the Lord's people. 

Our lesson opens with our Lord's instructions to his 
disciples as to where they should prepare for him and themselves, 
as a special and peculiar Jewish family, a place in 
which to celebrate the requirements of the Law in the type 
which pointed to our Lord Jesus as the Lamb of God. Respecting 
this supper our Lord himself said, "With desire 
have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer." 
He did not refer to the principal feast, which lasted a week 
from the 15th day of Nisan. He was referring to the roast-lamb 
supper, eaten with bitter herbs, which preceded the 
general feast, and which reminded them of their deliverance 
from Egypt, and became the basis of their subsequent rejoicing 
as a liberated people. The upper room was provided 
for this supper. Things were made ready, and at even, at 
sundown, after six o'clock, our Lord and the twelve assembled. 
One of the accounts tells us that there was a dispute 
amongst the disciples respecting the more honorable positions 
at the supper, and that Jesus rebuked this ambitious 
spirit in them by washing their feet, thus illustrating his 



own humility of heart, his readiness to serve each and all of 
them. Thus he set them an example that he, whom they 
esteemed greatest amongst them, should be their principal 
servant, willing and ready to serve any and all. 

"ONE OF YOU SHALL BETRAY ME" 

While they were eating Jesus remarked that one of them 
would betray him, and at once a spirit of sadness spread 
over the company, and each one— feeling it incumbent upon 
him to prove his innocence of such a charge— asked, "Lord, 
is it I?" With the rest, Judas also put this question, realizing 
that if he did not also ask, it would imply his acknowledgment 
that he was the one, and in response to his inquiry 
Jesus replied, "Thou hast said,"— that is to say, "Yes, I 
refer to you." Another account tells us that Jesus answered 
the query by saying that the one for whom he would dip a 
sup would be the betrayer, and having dipped the sup— a 
piece of the lamb and a piece of the unleavened bread they 
were eating— Jesus gave it to Judas, thus indicating him 
without directly naming him. It would appear, too, that 
the other disciples up to this time had not learned to know 
Judas— that it was subsequently they ascertained that he 
was a thief, etc. 

Amongst the Jews and Arabs deceit and betrayal were 
not so very uncommon, but there was a code of honor recognized 
according to which no one would eat the food of the 
person he would in any wise injure. As food was seasoned 
with salt, it was probably this custom that was known as 
the "covenant of salt"— the covenant of faithfulness. To 
succeed in having an enemy eat at your table or take of your 
food seasoned with salt was at that time amongst those people 
the equivalent of a pledge of his lasting friendship— that 
he would never do you injury. Apparently Judas was so lacking 
of a proper spirit that he did not even acknowledge and obey 
this custom of the time— to be loyal and faithful to the one 
whose bread he ate, of whose salt he partook. Hence our 
Lord's words, "He that dippeth his hand with me in the 
dish, the same shall betray me." 

Nevertheless Jesus testified that his death was not a 
victory on the part of his betrayer and his enemies, but in 
harmony with what had been written of him before by the 
prophets. Nor are we to consider that Judas in this matter 
was merely fulfilling a prophecy irrespective of his own 
responsibility, his own wilfulness in the matter: such a 
thought is negatived by our Lord's statement, "Woe unto the 
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed. It would have 
been better for that man if he had not been born." These 
words leave no question, we think, that Judas had already 
enjoyed his full share in the great atonement work through 
the intimate opportunities he had of coming to a clear 
knowledge of the truth, and the corresponding responsibilities. 
Evidently his was the sin unto death— the Second 
Death. Hence, aside from any future existence we are to 
consider that his life was a useless, wasted one, and that its 
joys did not overbalance its sorrows and anguish when to 



the latter were added his subsequent despair and suicide. 

"TAKE, EAT; THIS IS MY BODY" 

It was after the Passover Supper, after the eating of the 
lamb with the herbs and unleavened bread, etc., that Jesus 
instituted the Memorial Supper which, with all of his followers, 
by his direction takes the place of the Passover Supper 
of the Jews. This was a new matter, and the apostles 
listened with interest to his words as he blessed some of the 
thin cakes of unleavened bread and then brake them and 
handed portions to each of his disciples, saying, "Take, eat; 
this is my body." What could he mean? During their 

R3879 : page 334 

three years in his company they had learned that he spake 
in parables and dark sayings. On another occasion he had 
declared in their hearing that he himself was the bread 
which came down from heaven, of which if a man partook 
he would live forever. Now he was handing them some 
unleavened bread and said it was his body. They evidently 
understood him to mean that this bread to them would represent 
or symbolize his body, for he told them on this occasion 
that thenceforth they should do this in remembrance of 
him— thenceforth they should remember him as the slain 
lamb and use unleavened bread to represent his flesh, and 
partake of this instead of eating as previously of a literal 
lamb. 

He could not have meant, as Roman Catholics and 
some Protestants believe, that the bread was by his blessing 
turned into his actual flesh, for he still had his flesh— he 
was not killed for about fifteen hours later. Hence all the 
arguments to this effect are foolishness and sophistry. When 
he said, "This is my flesh," it was as much a figure of 
speech as when he said a little later, "I am the vine," "I am 
the door," "I am the Good Shepherd," "I am the way, the 
truth and the life," etc. The right, sane view of the Master's 
words is apparent: he was represented in all these different 
ways. In the case under consideration the bread 
would represent him, his flesh, to his apostles and to all his 
followers throughout the Gospel age. 

As bread stands for and symbolizes all food (indeed 
wheat is said to contain every element of nutriment in its 
proper proportion), so the teaching of this symbol is that 
whoever would have the life which Christ has to give must 
accept it as the result of his sacrifice. He died that we 
might live. The rights and privileges which he surrendered 
voluntarily may be eaten, applied, appropriated by all who 
have faith in him and who accept him and his instructions 
—such are reckoned as having imputed to them the perfect 
human nature, with all its rights and privileges lost by 
Adam, redeemed by Christ. None can have eternal life except 
by the eating of this bread from heaven. This applies 
not only to believers of this present time, but also to those 
of the future age. Their life-rights and privileges must all 



be recognized as coming to them through his sacrifice. In a 
word, the bread representing our Lord's body teaches 
our justification through the acceptance of his sacrifice. 

"DRINK YE ALL OF IT" 

Next our Lord took a cup containing the fruit of the 
vine. We are not told that it was wine; therefore it is an 
open question whether it was fermented or unfermented, 
and in view of all the circumstances of our time and the requirements 
of the Lord's Word, we may feel sure that unfermented 
grape juice or raisin juice will fulfil the terms of his 
injunction. Since it is never called wine, but merely the 

R3880 : page 334 

cup and the fruit of the vine, there is no room for disputation 
amongst the Lord's followers. Each may be free to follow 
his own conscience in the matter of what kind of a fruit 
of the vine he shall use: for our part we prefer the unfermented 
as being less liable to do injury or to awaken dormant 
passions for drink in the Lord's followers. 

In connection with the cup the Lord said, "This is my 
blood of the covenant, which is shed for many for the remission 
of sins" (the two oldest Greek MSS. of the New Testament, 
the Sinaitic and Vatican, omit the word "New"). 
True, the New Covenant must be sealed with the blood of 
the Christ before it can go into effect, and it is not to go 
into effect until the opening of the Millennial age. But 
there was another Covenant— the old Covenant, the foundation 
Covenant of all covenants— namely, the Abrahamic 
Covenant, which was sealed by our Lord's death. That it 
would be thus sealed was typically represented in the figurative 
death of Isaac at the hand of Abraham and his figurative 
resurrection from the dead. The Apostle assures us 
that Isaac represented our Lord Jesus, and also declares, 
"We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise" 
-the Oath-bound Covenant. -Gal. 4:28. 

Applying our Lord's words thus to the Abrahamic Covenant, 
which he was sealing or making sure, we see that it 
was by his death that he became the heir of that Covenant 
and all of its glorious provisions for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth. And from this standpoint we see a 
special meaning and force in Jesus' words to his followers, 
"This is my cup, drink ye all of it." Thus understood, the 
invitation to drink of the Lord's cup signifies an invitation to 
all of his elect Church of this Gospel age to partake with 
him of his cup of suffering and death— to lay down their 
lives with him that they also might have a share with him 
in the coming glories of the Kingdom, which will be the 
divine channel for the fulfilment of the Abrahamic promise, 
the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

While the eating of the bread and participation in the 
justification effected by our Lord's death and by the acceptance 
of the same, will be necessary to the whole world if 
they would have the restitution blessings purchased by our 



Lord's sacrifice, nevertheless the cup is not for the world 
but only for the Church, only for the consecrated of this 
Gospel age. "Drink ye all of it"— not only all of you drink 
of it but all of you drink all of it— leave none. There will 
be none of the sufferings of Christ left over for the coming 
age, no more suffering for righteousness' sake will then be 
known to the world— only evil doers will suffer thereafter. 
Now is the time when whosoever will live godly shall suffer 
persecution, and when all of the Lord's followers who would 
be loyal to him and counted worthy to share in his Kingdom 
glories must expect to drink of his cup. Hence again the 
Lord unites the two thoughts, saying, "Except ye eat the flesh 
and drink the blood of the Son of man, ye have no life in 
you." Those who consecrate during the present time as the 
Lord's disciples, to walk in his steps, must not only share in 
justification through faith, but must also share through sacrifice 
the cup if they would gain the life eternal promised 
to the elect who now forsake all to be his disciples. 

NEW WINE IN THE KINGDOM 

In declaring, "I will not drink henceforth of the fruit 
of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in 
my Father's Kingdom," our Lord implies a new wine under 
different conditions at some distant date. He thus confirmed 
in their minds what he had been teaching them for some 
weeks previously, namely, that he would not at this time set 
up his Kingdom, but that instead he would suffer, be crucified, 
and that they must expect also to suffer with him; and 

R3880 : page 335 

that by and by, when the Kingdom should be established 
and himself be in glory, his disciples should be with him in 
his throne. These new thoughts in their minds were confirmed 
by the lesson now given. 

The cup in the present time must speak to them of the 
crushing of the grapes, the blood of the grapes, their Master's 
blood, the life sacrificed, poured out, and their lives also 
sacrificed with him in his service, in his cause. But the sufferings 
of this present time were linked with the glory that 
should follow by the thought that all who would drink of 
the present cup of suffering, ignominy and death would also 
share in his cup of joy and blessing, glory and honor in the 
Kingdom. This same thought should be before our minds, 
and like the apostles of old it will help us more and more to 
look forward to the Kingdom as the time when suffering for 
the name of Christ shall cease, and when the glories shall 
follow and result in the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. Our Lord here identifies his Kingdom with his second 
advent, and in no sense of the word intimates that they 
would drink of this new wine at Pentecost, nor at the destruction 
of Jerusalem, nor at any other time but in that 
mentioned in the prayer which he taught them, saying, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 



This should be the thought before our minds also: in 
waiting for the Kingdom we are waiting for the second coming 
of our Lord and his subsequent setting up of the Kingdom; 
that is, the resurrection change, the glorification of his 
faithful ones who must be with him and share his glory. 
No wonder the Apostle declared that he who hath this hope 
in him purifieth himself even as he is pure. (1 John 3:3.) 
He that hath this hope of the new wine in the Kingdom, the 
participation with his Master in those glories and honors and 
blessed opportunities for uplifting the world of mankind, 
will take lightly, yea, joyfully, suffering, trials, sacrifices of 
this present time— yea, he will be glad to suffer with the 
Master that they also may be glorified together. 

"FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS" 

So far as we are concerned, it is in vain that men teach 
that God forgives sins without exacting a penalty therefor 
from anybody. It is in vain that they claim that Christ was 
not the ransom price for the sinner, that it was not necessary 
that he should die, the Just for the unjust, in order that he 
might bring us back to harmony with God— in order that 
God might be just and yet justify the sinner. It is in vain, 
too, that they claim that it was sufficient that Jesus was a 
great teacher, by whose words the world should be saved. 
Our reply is in harmony with the Master's statement here 
and elsewhere and the testimony of all the apostles, that it 
was necessary that Christ should die for our sins; that our 
sins could never have been forgiven by divine justice except 
through the divine arrangement by which he paid our penalty. 
To us it is a most precious thought, therefore, that our 
Lord's blood was indeed shed for the remission of sins of the 
many. And it is also a precious thought to us that we are 
privileged to be so intimately associated with him as members 
of his body; that our little sacrifices covered by his 
merit are in God's sight esteemed as part of the great sin 
sacrifice for the world; that as joint-sufferers with Christ we 
are permitted to drink of his cup and be immersed in his 
baptism into death. 

It is equally vain for Evolutionists and Higher Critics 
to tell us that, so far from man falling from God's likeness 
into sin and death, he has been on the contrary evoluting 
upward step by step, from beastly conditions to where he 
now is. We believe them not. We hold fast the divinely inspired 
testimony that there was a fall, and that this made 
necessary the redemptive work; that Christ was the honorable 
servant of God, privileged and authorized to make atonement 
for the sins of the whole world; that he began this 
atonement work in the sacrifice of himself; that he has been 
carrying it on during this Gospel age by the sacrificing of 
the members of his body, and that he will soon complete it, 
when he, with all of his members glorified, shall during the 
Millennial age distribute to the world the blessings of that 
redemptive work, causing all to come to a knowledge of the 
Truth, of the love of God; that its height and depth and 
length and breadth are immeasurable, yea, all accomplished 



through him who loved us and bought us with his precious 
blood. 

"IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME" 

The Apostle Paul, referring to this Memorial Supper, 
quotes our Lord as saying, "This do in remembrance of me," 
and then adds, "As oft as ye eat this bread and drink this 
cup ye do show the Lord's death till he come." (1 Cor. 11:24-26.) 
The thought is that we are to thus celebrate this 
great transaction until the time come for the Kingdom celebration 
of it with the new wine, the joy, the glory, the honors, 
which we are to share with him who loved us and bought 
us. The Apostle evidently does not mean merely until the 
parousia, the presence of the Lord to gather his servants and 
reward them, but rather until all shall have been gathered 
and the Kingdom class shall all thus have been set up and 
glorified. 

The same Apostle in the same epistle (1 Cor. 10:16,17; 12:12) 
emphasizes the thought of the unity, the oneness of 
the Church, with each other and with the Lord. He declares, 
"The loaf which we break, is it not the communion 
[the fellowship] of the body of Christ?" Are we not all as 
parts of one loaf broken with the Lord? "For we being many 
are one loaf and one body: for we are all partakers of that 
one loaf"; and again he adds, "The cup of blessing which 
we bless, is it not the communion [participation, fellowship] 
of the blood of Christ?" Assuredly this is the thought then, 
that from God's standpoint there is the one great Messiah, 
the elect Head and the elect members of his body. These, 
as one loaf, constitute from God's standpoint the bread of 

R3881 : page 335 

everlasting life for the world, and in order to fill this picture 

each and all must be broken, each and all must partake of 

the cup of Christ's suffering and death before entering into 

his glory. And not until all these sufferings have been completed 

will the Lord's time come for the new dispensation, 

the new day, the day of blessing instead of cursing, the day 

of restitution instead of dying, the day of uplifting instead 

of falling, so far as the world is concerned. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 