Insight on the News
Darwin “Being Discarded”
● More than a century ago when Charles Darwin promoted his theory that man evolved from the lower animals, he suggested that a key mechanism was “natural selection.” This was the idea that the stronger survive and keep improving to the point where newer forms of life are produced. However, in recent years that idea has come under assault. It has become evident that just surviving does not result in anything new.
In “Harper’s” magazine of February, Tom Bethell, an editor for “The Washington Monthly,” states: “The conclusion is pretty staggering: Darwin’s theory, I believe, is on the verge of collapse.” He added: “Darwin, I suggest, is in the process of being discarded, but . . . it is being done as discreetly and gently as possible, with a minimum of publicity.”
The facts continue to support the truth on this matter as stated at Isaiah 45:12, where God declares: “I myself have made the earth and have created even man upon it.” No, man did not get here by evolution. He got here by creation.
World Government Needed
● Advances in transportation and communications have ‘shrunk’ the world into something like a single community. Thus today’s problems have become global in nature, shared by all. Yet, the nations keep pulling in different directions. An article in the Montreal “Gazette” noted that world leaders “have said that some form of world government will be necessary.” It commented: “Surely it is worth working for when one considers the probable alternatives​—a breakdown in society or world dictatorship.” Even food shortages in various places, it acknowledged, are “caused by confused priorities and a lack of global management.” The report observed that “people must soon equate national or group allegiance with a much broader loyalty to all of mankind, a form of world or planetary citizenship.”
Is one government for all the world just a dream? By the efforts of humans, yes, as history shows. But one government over all the earth will be a reality because that is God’s purpose. Bible prophecy shows that soon God will rip control away from all the divisive political systems and bring them to an end. (Dan. 2:44) There will then be only one government over all mankind, his heavenly kingdom in the hands of Jesus Christ. (Matt. 6:10) Those who submit to God’s Kingdom rule will survive the end of this present unsatisfactory system of political rule. They will enter God’s new order as a united society of people “out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues.”​—Rev. 7:9.
Who Is to Blame?
● The Roman Catholic publication “Commonweal” states in its January 2, 1976, issue: “Today, at the end of the Holy Year, a year after the closing of the bishops’ synod on evangelization, and ten years after the closing of the Second Vatican Council, the word of God is preached no more clearly and effectively than it was a year ago. The preachers, it seems, are talking to themselves. The listeners, supposedly hungry for the word, have turned them off.”
This Catholic magazine further states: “The evidence is in the polls and sociological surveys, and before our eyes in the empty confessionals and pews. More and more of the people of God, kicking the dust from their heels, have walked out of the church . . . while those ultimately responsible for preaching the word, the bishops, have again become preoccupied in a fruitless political squabble, an ecclesiastical power play in which they will recklessly squander what little moral authority they retain.”
God’s Word long ago foretold the moral bankruptcy we now see in Christendom’s religions. The Bible also notes: “For truly, if the trumpet sounds an indistinct call, who will get ready for battle? In the same way also, unless you through the tongue utter speech easily understood, how will it be known what is being spoken? You will, in fact, be speaking into the air.” (1 Cor. 14:8, 9) The clergy have not taught the clear truths of God. They have prevented their flocks from learning God’s will and purpose. As a result, they have not been blessed by God, and the consequences are plain for all to see.

