Announcements
● Literature offer for October: Subscription to either Awake! or The Watchtower or both. November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and either Should You Believe in the Trinity? or “Look! I Am Making All Things New.” December: Mankind’s Search for God. January and February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock. If the congregation has no stock of such books to be offered, the book “Let Your Kingdom Come” should be used. The “Kingdom Come” book may be requested from Brooklyn.
● Congregations should begin requesting Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1991 with their October literature request. The booklets will be available in Arabic, Chinese, Croatian, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Iloko, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Samoan, Spanish, Swedish, Tagalog, Turkish, and Vietnamese. Until these booklets are available and shipments are made, they will appear as “Pending” on congregation packing lists. Examining the Scriptures booklets are special request items.
● As stated in the April 20, 1990, announcement sent to all congregations, the Society is reprinting the Watchtower bound volumes from 1960 through 1979 in SPANISH. We are presently accepting requests for the years 1960-1969 ONLY. Future announcements to all congregations will provide instructions for requesting the reprinted bound volumes for other years. Any interested in obtaining the reprinted Spanish Watchtower bound volumes for 1960-1969 should request them through the congregation on the next literature request form. Since the volumes are being reprinted one time only, we urge all to consider carefully their needs. Please bear in mind that these bound volumes are special request items.
● New Publications Available:
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Indonesian
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Arabic
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Preserving Life in Time of Famine​—Drama (single cassette)—​English

