Building Close Family Relationships
1 With so many demands on their time, parents face a challenge in building a family that is steadfast in true worship. Christian families need a close bond that provides support during present difficult times. (Eccl. 4:9-12; 2 Tim. 3:1-5) As spirituality grows, a family becomes more united and will be strengthened to withstand the onslaughts of Satan and his system.
BUILDING SPIRITUAL QUALITIES
2 Congregation meetings and family Bible study are essentials in the family’s weekly schedule. (Deut. 6:6, 7; Heb. 10:23-25; w86 11/1 pp. 23-5) Yet, more is needed. There is still a void if this is all the spiritual training children get.
3 A wholesome family relationship develops when parents take a genuine interest in the spiritual welfare of the children. In Israel, parents were responsible for the education and training of their children, instructing them by both word and example. The Israelite educational program included practical training for adult living, teaching of basic reading and writing skills, and instruction to develop spiritual qualities. In educating children, emphasis was placed on teaching them the fear of Jehovah, the Law, respect for parents and older persons, and the importance of obedience.
4 Strive to spend quality time with your family every day. Spiritual matters can be discussed in an informal setting, such as at mealtimes. One parent wisely observed: “Parents will spend time with their children​—either in developing spiritual qualities or in helping them get out of one problem after another.” How much better it is to build the needed spiritual qualities in children so they can avoid the world’s pitfalls!​—1 Cor. 3:10-15.
ENJOYING FIELD SERVICE ACTIVITY
5 Joy is an emotion excited by the acquisition or expectation of good. When a person is prepared for field service, he may properly anticipate good results. Thus, preparation is the key to joyful field service. Regularly practicing what to say as a family before going into the field service builds confidence. (Compare Titus 3:1b.) Each one can have a goal in mind. A simple presentation can be rehearsed with young children or those just starting in field service.
6 By working with their children in the Christian ministry, parents can help them cultivate the personal interest in people exemplified by Jehovah and Jesus. The ministry also helps us to develop a close relationship with Jehovah. (w81 11/1 pp. 14-20) Some families schedule full days together, planning wholesome recreation following field service. This allows time for conversation in a relaxed atmosphere and draws parents and children together.
7 Be determined to develop the needed communication skills in order to keep a close relationship with your children. Do not allow anything to prevent you from taking the necessary time to strengthen your family spiritually. Pray for and with your children, knowing that Jehovah can crown your building efforts with success.​—Ps. 127:1; Prov. 24:3.

