Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 1
Song 92
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Suggest two Awake! presentations that would be appropriate in local territory.
20 min: “Continue Teaching Without Letup.” Discussion and demonstrations. After considering paragraph 2, have experienced pioneers or publishers demonstrate how to offer a subscription to a person who shows genuine interest in the Kingdom message. If the person would like to receive the magazine(s) regularly, we will be pleased to write up a subscription so he can receive the magazines in the mail. Explain how our work is supported by voluntary donations. If he does not want to make a donation, we can encourage him to benefit from reading the magazines and offer to return and discuss further encouraging Scriptural information. Chairman points out the need to be discerning when offering the subscription. It is not necessary to mention that the magazines can be obtained for a specific period of time, such as one year. A six-month subscription should build the person’s appreciation for the Kingdom message published in the magazine and help us determine if he is truly interested. After paragraphs 3 and 4, have two enthusiastic publishers consider how they are going to apply these suggestions during October and in the coming months.
15 min: “Punctuality and You.” Talk by well-organized elder based on The Watchtower, June 15, 1990, pages 26-9.
Song 195 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 8
Song 215
 5 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
20 min: Parents, Do Not Be Irritating Your Children. Talk and demonstration based on pages 16 and 17 of the Awake!, January 22, 1990, and the subheadings “Encouraging Your Child to Be Expressive” and “Understanding the Needs of Teenagers” in chapter 11 of the Family Life book. Stress need for parents to understand each of their children and help them develop spiritually and otherwise. At end of Bible study, demonstrate how parent commends children for their efforts. Interest is shown in their schoolwork by giving encouragement and helping in areas where they have problems. Chairman concludes by stressing need to have child’s interest at heart at all times.
20 min: “Reach Hearts Through Effective Bible Studies.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. When considering paragraphs 3 and 5, demonstrate adapting to local circumstances. Emphasize appropriate points in August 1, 1984, issue of The Watchtower.
Song 43 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 15
Song 132
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Include Society’s acknowledgment of contributions, and express appreciation for financial support of local congregation needs. Briefly interview a family that is planning a full weekend of field service activity, highlighting plans that may be helpful to others.
20 min: “Building Close Family Relationships.” Talk by elder, with some audience participation. Include suggestions as to what can be done locally to build spiritual qualities in family members and to help all enjoy field service activity.
15 min: Preparing for the Field Ministry. Demonstrate family group preparing field presentations with one person highlighting the magazines, another offering a tract, and the third offering a free home Bible study. Show family members practicing these with one another.
Song 42 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 22
Song 31
10 min: Local announcements and Question Box. Report on progress of Awake! subscription campaign.
15 min: Appreciating the Work of the Circuit Overseer. Discuss with audience the material under “Circuit Overseer” on pages 47-50 of the book Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Chairman should stress how we can benefit from supporting visit fully. We should appreciate example of godly devotion set by circuit overseer and his wife in carrying out their assignment.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Conversing With People.” Question-and-answer discussion of material. Have two well-prepared demonstrations to show how to start conversations at the door and when finding people out-of-doors.
Song 20 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 29
Song 128
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Appreciating Our Ministerial Servants. Interview brothers caring for stage and sound, accounts, literature, magazines, and duties as an attendant. Outline their specific duties and how publishers can cooperate to make their work more joyful. Adapt to local needs.
10 min: Local needs. Or “Will You Keep On Walking in the Truth?” Talk based on The Watchtower, September 1, 1990, pages 29-31.
15 min: Prepare for November Ministry. Discuss talking points that would be appropriate to use in local territory in presenting the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and “Look! I Am Making All Things New” or Should You Believe in the Trinity? Demonstrate how publisher may speak with householder about importance of reading the Bible. Could use 2 Timothy 3:16, 17 to show that God’s Word is inspired and beneficial, followed by John 17:3 to point out specific benefit. Tie in November offer.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.

