Presenting the Good News​—By Conversing With People
1 According to a dictionary, conversation is an “oral exchange of sentiments, observations, opinions, or ideas.” But how can you start a conversation based on the Bible when the people you meet may be religiously opposed or are occupied with their own affairs? Jesus asked questions to get listeners involved.​—John 4:9-15, 41, 42.
2 We should earnestly pray to God to help us find honesthearted people and open the way for us to converse with them. Witnessing becomes easier if we view each householder as a potential servant of Jehovah. This frame of mind will help us convey the truth in a warm, sincere manner that will attract interested ones.
USE WHAT WE HAVE
3 The Reasoning book offers many excellent introductions on pages 9-15. Most of these make effective use of questions. When the householder responds to a question, listen respectfully and then reply in a manner that will show the householder we have considered what he has said.​—Col. 4:6.
4 Of course, when you ask a question, you do not know how the householder will answer. Be ready to adjust your discussion accordingly. Try to keep the conversation going by introducing further information from the Bible dealing with his interests and by asking further thoughtful questions.
PREPARE IN ADVANCE
5 You may already be acquainted with the general thinking of people in your territory. If so, then select introductions in the Reasoning book that will be the most effective in your particular territory. Adapting one of these introductions to the current Topic for Conversation may be just what you need. Begin your conversation with things that you believe are of concern to the householder, briefly present the problem, and then lead into the Bible solution. When he makes an observation, comment positively, not critically, on what he says. Your interest in his thoughts and feelings should encourage him to continue conversing with you. Try to find points of agreement and comment on these. Keep the conversation positive by emphasizing Kingdom blessings as the Bible’s solution for man’s problems.
6 Consider differing viewpoints as keys to continued conversation. If the householder is willing to reason, you might ask, “Did you ever think of it from this standpoint?” Then point to what God’s Word says on the subject. If you find that the person is unreasonable, do not insist that he accept what you have said. Rather, conclude with a friendly comment, leaving the way open for a future opportunity to present the good news to him.​—Prov. 12:8, 18.
7 Some people are more inclined to converse when you meet them informally. Do not hesitate to start conversations with people you meet on the street or who are working or relaxing in their yard. They may welcome your genuine interest in their activity, and you may be able to lead the conversation into a discussion of the Bible promise that the earth will soon be a paradise. When you start a conversation, try to make it a pleasant experience for the householder. Insofar as it depends on you, leave the person with a more favorable attitude toward God, his Word, and his servants. In this way, even if you are not successful initially in reaching his heart, he may be more receptive the next time a Witness calls.

