Question Box
● What factors should be kept in mind when two or more different-language congregations work the same territory?
The March 1984 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, under “Presenting the Good News,” stated: “The publishers of each congregation should concentrate their efforts on their own particular language group.” This is because congregation territory assignments in multilingual areas are according to language. Congregations working multilanguage territory may find it helpful to make a list of homes and apartments where their publishers should not call. It is the responsibility of the service overseers of the concerned congregations to work out a mutually acceptable system for working the territory thoroughly and directing interested ones to the appropriate congregation. This should be done to prevent householders from being unnecessarily disturbed by publishers of different-language congregations, perhaps during the same morning or afternoon. We do not want to “offer any hindrance to the good news about the Christ.”​—1 Cor. 9:12.
When adjustments need to be made because of people moving, quickly pass on names and addresses of interested persons to the appropriate congregation. This will assist in keeping the territory records up-to-date. Love, mutual concern, understanding, reasonableness, and cooperation are vital.​—Phil. 4:5.
When participating in street work, informal witnessing, and so forth, publishers may carry literature in various languages. However, when going from house to house, we would normally not offer literature in languages other than that of our congregation. Keep in mind that territories in these areas are prepared according to language so that publishers placing literature can also direct the interested householder to the congregation meetings held in the language the householder best understands or prefers.
Obviously at times there will be some overlapping of our efforts. But as stated in the article referred to above, “it is good to keep foremost in mind that as we preach, our purpose is to make disciples​—to teach the truth. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Teaching should be done in the language people understand best. (1 Cor. 14:9)” By concentrating our ministry on people who best understand or prefer the language of the congregation we attend, much good can be accomplished in helping many more to gain salvation.

