





Did You Know?



Why does the Bible repeat itself?

BIBLE writers occasionally repeated the same phrases word for word. Consider three factors that might have influenced the writers to do so:
The time period when it was written. In ancient Israel, most people did not have personal copies of the Law. They primarily heard the Law read when the nation gathered together at the tabernacle. (Deut. 31:10-12) Very likely there were distractions as they listened and stood for several hours in the large crowd. (Neh. 8:2, 3, 7) On such occasions, repeating key phrases would have made it easier for the people to remember the scriptures and apply them. Repeating certain words would have especially helped them to remember detailed matters, such as God’s regulations and judicial decisions.​—Lev. 18:4-22; Deut. 5:1.
The type of writing. About 10 percent of the Bible is composed of songs​—including the books of Psalms, Song of Solomon, and Lamentations. Sometimes songs contained a refrain, which unified the composition and helped the listeners to memorize the words. For example, note the words found at Psalm 115:9-11: “O Israel, trust in Jehovah​—He is their help and their shield. O house of Aaron, trust in Jehovah​—He is their help and their shield. You who fear Jehovah, trust in Jehovah​—He is their help and their shield.” Can you see how repeating those words would have helped to sound down precious truths into the mind and heart of the singers?
The need to emphasize important matters. Bible writers sometimes repeated crucial phrases. For example, when Jehovah instructed the Israelites not to eat blood, he had Moses repeat the reason multiple times. God wanted to emphasize that the life of the flesh is in the blood, that is, blood represents life. (Lev. 17:11, 14) Later when the apostles and the elders in Jerusalem listed the essential ways to avoid displeasing God, they emphasized again the need to abstain from blood.​—Acts 15:20, 29.
Jehovah did not intend for the repeating of Scriptural phrases to become a ritual. For instance, Jesus said: “When praying, do not say the same things over and over again.” (Matt. 6:7) He then went on to provide us with appropriate subjects for prayer that are in harmony with God’s will. (Matt. 6:9-13) So while we avoid repeating the same words over and over in our prayers, we are free to return to the same topics again and again.​—Matt. 7:7-11.
For good reason, God’s inspired Word repeats certain words and phrases. It is one of the many ways our Grand Instructor teaches us how to benefit ourselves.​—Isa. 48:17, 18.



