
Questions From Readers



What does the Bible reveal about Jehovah’s ability to foretell the future?

The Bible makes clear that Jehovah can foretell the future. (Isa. 45:21) It does not spell out every detail about how or when he does so or even how much he chooses to know. So we cannot be dogmatic about such matters. Nonetheless, consider a few factors.
Jehovah has no limitations except those he sets for himself. With his infinite wisdom, he can foretell anything he chooses. (Rom. 11:33) Because he has perfect self-control, he can also choose not to know what will happen.​—Compare Isaiah 42:14.
Jehovah causes his will to be done. How does that fact relate to his ability to foretell the future? Isaiah 46:10 explains: “From the beginning I foretell the outcome, and from long ago the things that have not yet been done. I say, ‘My decision will stand, and I will do whatever I please.’”
So one reason why Jehovah can foretell the future is that he has the power to make things happen. He does not need to fast-forward, so to speak, to see what the future will bring​—as if all future events have already happened in some form and Jehovah merely reviews them in advance. Rather, Jehovah can decide that something will happen at a specific time and then cause it to happen when that time arrives.​—Ex. 9:5, 6; Matt. 24:36; Acts 17:31.
For this reason, the Bible uses such terms as “prepared,” “formed,” and “purposed” to describe what Jehovah does concerning some future events. (2 Ki. 19:25; ftn.; Isa. 46:11) These terms are translated from an original-language word that is related to a word meaning “potter.” (Jer. 18:4) Just as a skillful potter can shape a lump of clay into a beautiful vase, Jehovah can shape, or maneuver, things to accomplish his will.​—Eph. 1:11.
Jehovah respects the gift of free will. He does not set a destiny for each person; nor does he cause honesthearted people to do something that would lead to their destruction. He allows all to choose their own course, and he urges them to choose the right one.
Consider two examples. The first example involves the inhabitants of Nineveh. Jehovah foretold that the city would be overthrown because of its wickedness. But when its inhabitants repented, Jehovah “reconsidered the calamity that he said he would bring on them, and he did not bring it.” (Jonah 3:1-10) Jehovah changed his mind about what he had foretold because the Ninevites used their free will to respond with repentance to the warning message that Jehovah had sent them.
The second example is the prophecy about a conqueror named Cyrus, who would release the Jews from captivity and order the rebuilding of Jehovah’s temple. (Isa. 44:26–45:4) King Cyrus of Persia fulfilled that prophecy. (Ezra 1:1-4) However, Cyrus did not worship the true God. Jehovah used Cyrus to fulfill prophecy without interfering with Cyrus’ free will to choose whom he would worship.​—Prov. 21:1.
Of course, these are not all the factors involved in Jehovah’s use of foreknowledge. Realistically, no human can fully understand Jehovah’s ways. (Isa. 55:8, 9) Yet, what Jehovah has revealed strengthens our faith that he always does what is right​—including when he foretells the future.




