You Are Invited to the “Divine Peace” Conventions
HOW eagerly each Christian witness of Jehovah looks forward to the annual district conventions! There is no question about their being a highlight of each calendar year. The fine talks, the Bible dramas, the releases, the association​—at times also the large attendance—​combine to make these gatherings something truly special.
Consider, for example, some of the “Integrity Keepers” Conventions held last year. The two in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, had a peak attendance of 249,351, with 2,645 symbolizing their dedication to Jehovah God by water baptism. The convention at Montreal, Canada, attended by 78,804, was outstanding both for its trailer park and for its being held in 11 different languages. Those who attended the convention at Zurich, Switzerland, reported that never in all their life had they experienced anything like its enthusiasm and overflowing joy. Delegates attending one or more of the conventions held in Poland expressed similar sentiments.
An incomplete worldwide report shows an attendance of 5,653,689 at 754 “Integrity Keepers” Conventions, with 75,202 new Witnesses being baptized. How wonderfully did Jehovah bless these gatherings of his people!
Contrary to the popular adage, for those attending these conventions realization exceeded the anticipation. Almost invariably the consensus was that the latest was the best yet. So all of Jehovah’s Witnesses will be eagerly looking forward to this year’s “Divine Peace” District Conventions, to be held worldwide​—130 of them being scheduled for the United States.
What a fine theme for our district convention: “Divine Peace”! Today human society is riddled with strife. Not only are literal wars presently being fought around the earth but there are also other kinds of fighting: economic warfare and strife between marriage mates, as well as between parents and children. But in striking contrast, there is peace among Jehovah’s dedicated people. Theirs is a divine peace, emanating from the Divine One, Jehovah God, the God of peace who gives peace. They are at peace with him as a result of faith and works, so they are able to be at peace with one another, in the congregation and within the family.​—Philippians 4:7; Romans 16:20.
Let it be noted, too, that this divine peace is not merely the absence of strife. The word for peace in Hebrew is sha·lohmʹ, and it means not only peacefulness but well-being and prosperity. Yes, Jehovah’s Witnesses are enjoying prosperity as well as an absence of strife because of being in a spiritual paradise. This convention will enable all who attend to be ever more peace conscious and to be concerned about promoting peace, as far as it lies within their power.​—Romans 12:18.
As in previous years, these conventions will begin on Thursday afternoon at 1:30. Each day has a theme related to peace, that of the first day being “God Will Bless His People With Peace,” based on Psalm 29:11. Meaningful prayer will be discussed, and the session will be climaxed by a talk on how Jehovah is proceeding to make all things new.
On Friday the keynote speech, “Divine Peace for Those Taught by Jehovah,” will emphasize the source of our peace. Among other program features will be a heartwarming Bible drama tying in ancient times to our day.
In addition to the baptism talk, Saturday morning’s program will stress our Christian obligations toward one another and the need ever to make progress as Christian witnesses of Jehovah. In the afternoon, there will be fine counsel for family members and appointed overseers.
A frank and hard-hitting modern-day drama will be featured Sunday morning. In the afternoon, the powerful public lecture “Peace at Last!​—When God Speaks” will be one of the convention highlights. No doubt all attending the convention will go away feeling fully equipped by the God of peace to do his will.
Therefore, come for all four days with a good spiritual appetite, fully conscious of your spiritual need. (Matthew 5:3) Schedule your affairs so as to be on time for the opening song and prayer each day. Come equipped to take notes, too, for writing down key points will help you to concentrate on what the speaker says. Moreover, the thoughts expressed will thus be more firmly imbedded in your heart and mind.
But let us never overlook the fact that the pure worship of Jehovah God is not just a matter of receiving. It is also a matter of giving. We want to keep in mind the Bible principle: “He that sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.” (2 Corinthians 9:6) More than that, since Jesus said that “there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving,” let us get the greatest joy possible at the convention by giving as much as we can, freely volunteering our services. (Acts 20:35) Really, never should it be necessary to make appeals for volunteer help.
Further, let us take seriously the provision for sharing in field witnessing on Friday afternoon. And may we be on the lookout all four days for opportunities to do informal witnessing. This reminds us of another Bible principle: The generous soul will prosper, and he that waters will be watered. (Proverbs 11:25) Yes, let us invite all whom we can to learn for themselves how Jehovah’s Witnesses are indeed basking in divine peace.

