Kingdom Proclaimers Report
‘The One Finding Wisdom Finds Life’
“THE TRUTH is attracting ‘all sorts of men,’ from the various communities that make up the modern State of Israel,” the branch office of the Watch Tower Society in that country writes. These honesthearted truth seekers are assured: “The one finding me [wisdom] will certainly find life, and gets goodwill from Jehovah.” (1 Timothy 2:4; Proverbs 8:35) The experience of a woman in Israel illustrates this.
□ One of Jehovah’s Witnesses called on a Watchtower subscriber and arranged to conduct a Bible study with her. The lady was happy to have the study. A neighbor of hers heard about it and attended. The neighbor “immediately recognized this as the thing for which she had been searching for the last few years,” said the report. And what changes she rapidly made in her life! She and her husband were within a few days of a divorce decree but canceled it and made peace. She was deep into astrology and attached to a cult, but she threw out expensive books and everything else associated with demonism. She started attending meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses and talking to relatives and friends about her newfound faith. Regarding the friends that she lost as a result, she says: “Apparently, they weren’t real friends.”
Now this woman witnesses enthusiastically to customers in the family-owned store and shares regularly in preaching the good news from house to house. How happy she is that she has found wisdom and has learned about Jehovah’s wonderful provisions for eternal life in his new system! Her neighbor who originally wrote for the subscription has also continued to study and make progress.
□ Lloyd lives in Guyana. His march to religious freedom was long. He began his trek as a Presbyterian. He married a Hindu, and she became a Presbyterian too. “I was overwhelmed by the hypocrisy that prevailed” in that church, he later confessed. So he turned to Islam, but this did not satisfy his quest for freedom. Next he tried Hinduism. After learning much about reincarnation and the laws of Karma, he began to question these doctrines. He changed to occultism, built an altar, and indoctrinated his family with that teaching. “But the fearful and frightening experiences I and my family suffered made me abandon this religion,” he said. He adopted a materialistic way of living, but his family life was falling apart. So he said: “I prayed to God, Father, Allah, and Ram, and I told him that I am speaking to the Creator of all things. I let him know that I wanted to please him and not man.”
At this point, a “well-dressed, soft-spoken, mild-mannered” Jehovah’s Witness called at Lloyd’s door and answered his questions satisfactorily. The Witness left him the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life and a Bible. Soon a Bible study was started with Lloyd and his wife. They progressed in knowledge, separated from Babylon the Great​—the worldwide system of false religion. In time they dedicated themselves to Jehovah and were baptized. Lloyd said: “Love, real love, replaced hate and anger; but most important of all, meaning and purpose have been added to our life.”
Now they are rejoicing in the ‘truth that set them free.’​—John 8:32.
□ A young woman in the Seychelles also learned of Jehovah, which resulted in a blessing. She had been living in a consensual relationship with a man and had several children by him. The woman appreciated the truth she was learning from the Bible but found it hard to take her stand so as to qualify for Jehovah’s service. She was living in a fine house with comforts few people enjoyed. After prayer and encouragement from the circuit overseer, she put the alternative to the man she was living with​—they would have to get married legally, or separate. The man was reluctant to take either step, so she moved out. How happy she was that she then qualified to preach the good news and dedicate her life to Jehovah and be baptized! This she did. Interestingly, the man she was living with was so impressed by her bold stand for Bible principles that he began to make arrangements to unite the family by legal marriage.
The psalmist acknowledged: “For with you [Jehovah] is the source of life.” (Psalm 36:9) These persons acknowledged this, too, and sought wisdom so as to know Jehovah and his requirements for life. How they appreciate the fact that “the one finding [wisdom] will certainly find life”!

