Living and Preaching in the Shadow of a Volcano
“IT IS a frightening experience. It could very well be like the end of the world that the Bible speaks of. We must remain alert and be in good standing before Jehovah God every moment.” Those are the words of Víctor, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, in relating his experience of living very near the Popocatépetl volcano, popularly called Popo, in Mexico.
This rumbling volcano has been in the international news since 1994.a The authorities concluded that everything within a 20-mile [30 km] radius of the crater is in a high-risk zone. The south side of the volcano is especially dangerous because the crater is tilted in that direction and there are a number of deep ravines through which lava and mud could spill out from the crater.
Naturally, many wonder what would happen to Mexico City in case the volcano had a major eruption. Is that city at risk? Then there are also all those people in the state of Morelos to the south of the volcano. Are all in that area also in danger? And what is it like living in the shadow of the volcano, not knowing what might happen from day to day?
The Threat of the Volcano
Downtown Mexico City is about 45 miles [70 km] northwest of Popocatépetl, although some suburbs are as close as 25 miles [40 km]. Technically, the entire metropolitan area, with its population of 20 million, is outside the danger zone. However, depending on the direction of the wind, this area could be affected if a large quantity of ash is expelled by the volcano.
The effects of volcanic ash are usually more severe on the east side of the volcano. This area includes the city of Puebla and a number of smaller cities and towns, with about 200,000 living within the high-risk area. On Sunday, May 11, 1997, the volcano spewed tons of ash into the air and scattered it all over this area, reaching as far as the state of Veracruz, more than 200 miles [300 km] to the east. In the area south of the volcano, in the state of Morelos, there are several cities and towns with a total population of about 40,000 that could also be in serious danger.
In the midst of all of this, Jehovah’s Witnesses live and work. In Mexico City, there are more than 90,000 of them in some 1,700 congregations. The Watch Tower Society’s branch is located outside of Mexico City to the northeast, within about 60 miles [100 km] of the volcano. There are more than 800 volunteers serving at the branch, besides some 500 volunteers who are working on a large construction project. All of them are outside the risk zone.
In the state of Morelos, there are about 50 congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses with more than 2,000 Kingdom publishers. Some of these, located in Tetela del Volcán and Hueyapan, are as close as 12 miles [20 km] to the crater. In addition, to the east in the state of Puebla, there are congregations with about 600 publishers living within 15 to 20 miles [20-30 km] from the volcano. These, of course, could be in serious danger.
Jehovah’s Witnesses Remain Active
In spite of the constant threat, Jehovah’s Witnesses have not stopped their preaching work in this area. They have also kept up their schedule of Christian meetings, which gives them a sense of unity and confidence under these adverse circumstances. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) A report from one of the congregations states: “There has been a remarkable change in the attitude of the people toward the Kingdom good news. In a small village, for instance, 18 people have recently accepted home Bible studies.”
Another congregation, located 12 miles [20 km] from the volcano, reports: “The growth has been outstanding. This congregation was established in November 1996. During the following six months, 10 individuals became qualified to share in the field ministry. Some publishers live only ten miles [about 20 km] from the crater. Christian meetings are being held there, and they have about 40 in attendance.”
Magdalena, who lives in San Agustín Ixtahuixtla, Puebla, just 15 miles [25 km] from the volcano, has kept very active conducting Bible studies. She relates what happened after one serious eruption.
“We were notified that we should leave our homes, which we did—under a rain of ash. In spite of the urgent situation, I thought of the Dorado family with whom I was studying the Bible. Some brothers and I went to the Dorados’ house to help them move to a safer place. In the nearby city of Puebla, the relief committee of Jehovah’s Witnesses had already set up operation. The Dorado family was very impressed with the way we all were treated there. We had accommodations in different places, prepared for us in advance by our Christian brothers. We lacked nothing, even though we were far from home. This family had attended some meetings at the Kingdom Hall, but they were surprised by the love shown them by brothers whom they had never met. Some weeks after returning to our homes, this family began to attend all the meetings regularly. Soon they qualified to be publishers of the good news. Two of them have now been baptized. They have served as auxiliary pioneer ministers for some months and are making plans to enter the regular pioneer service.”
Martha, a 20-year-old girl who lives 13 miles [21 km] from the crater, did not let a disability prevent her from taking advantage of every opportunity to preach. She learned the truth three years ago when the volcano once again became active. Instead of using a wheelchair, which would be hard to handle in the steep terrain where she lives, she rides a donkey to share in the preaching work. She also rides that donkey to the meetings. Martha is deeply grateful to Jehovah to be part of the loving brotherhood, since she depends on the help of the sisters in the congregation to get on and off the donkey. Every month, she spends over 15 hours in the ministry.
In these isolated areas, Jehovah’s Witnesses often face pressure from their neighbors to join them in celebrating religious holidays. In Tulcingo, a village located about 12 miles [20 km] from the volcano, a man was assigned to visit the Witnesses to collect donations for the celebrations. The brothers patiently explained why they could not participate in those religious holidays. The man was so persistent in trying to get funds from the brothers that he began associating with them, getting to know some of their beliefs. He enjoyed finding the answers to his questions in his own Catholic Bible. Along with his wife and daughter, he has been attending the meetings regularly for a year and has expressed his desire to become a publisher of the good news.
How Can You Be Prepared?
Volcanologists conduct their studies and issue official reports about the menacing Popocatépetl, but no one really knows what will happen or when. According to the news media and the people living nearby, the volcano may erupt at any time. The threat is real. Of course, the authorities are very concerned and want to do everything they can to be ready in case of an emergency. But it is understandable that they must be cautious about issuing a warning, since they do not want to trigger a mass exodus if there is no imminent danger. What, then, should one do?
“Shrewd is the one that has seen the calamity and proceeds to conceal himself, but the inexperienced have passed along and must suffer the penalty,” says a Bible proverb. (Proverbs 22:3) The wise course, therefore, is to take the necessary steps to ensure one’s safety while the door of opportunity is still open, not to ‘pass along’ as if nothing will ever happen, playing waiting games with such awesome natural forces. This is the way Jehovah’s Witnesses in the area view the matter.
Recently, representatives from the Watch Tower Society’s branch office met with traveling overseers in the state of Puebla, who are in close contact with the congregations in the danger zone. Plans were made for the traveling overseers and members of a relief committee to visit each one of the families living within 15 miles [25 km] of the crater. These families were helped to consider moving out of the danger zone before panic strikes. Transportation and accommodations were arranged in order to relocate 1,500 people to the city of Puebla. Some families moved to live with relatives in other cities.
Warning on a Larger Scale
The smoke, fire, and rumblings from Popocatépetl are clear indications that an eruption is close. All those who wish to escape must heed the warnings issued by the authorities and take appropriate action. Jehovah’s Witnesses in the immediate area of the volcano keep a constant vigil to ensure their own safety as well as to help others to see the danger and to do something about it before it is too late.
On a larger scale, Jehovah’s Witnesses are also alert to world events in the light of Bible prophecies. Wars, earthquakes, famines, diseases, and crime are just as significant as the activities of a volcano. They are elements of a composite sign that Jesus Christ foretold would mark “the conclusion of the system of things.” Though no one knows exactly when that end will come, there is no doubt that it is coming and that it is very, very close.—Matthew 24:3, 7-14, 32-39.
The urgent need today is for people everywhere to take very seriously Jesus’ warning: “Pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you.” (Luke 21:34) This is clearly the wise course to take. Just as the warning signs of the volcano are not to be taken lightly, we must not ignore the approach of the Son of man, Jesus Christ, who urged: “On this account you too prove yourselves ready, because at an hour that you do not think to be it, the Son of man is coming.”—Matthew 24:44.
[Footnote]
Awake! magazine of March 8, 1997, reported on this menacing volcano.
[Pictures on page 23]
Martha (on donkey) and others witness in the shadow of Popocatépetl

