Make the Best of Your Life
THE father was in the house, in bed, dying of cancer. His son was in the workshop, tidying up his father’s woodworking tools. As he handled the tools, he thought about the wonderful things his father had made with them. Though the workshop was next to the house, he knew that his father would never enter there again, never again hold the tools that he was so skilled at using. That time was past.
The son thought of the scripture at Ecclesiastes 9:10: “All that your hand finds to do, do with your very power, for there is no work nor devising nor knowledge nor wisdom in Sheol [the grave], the place to which you are going.” He knew that scripture well. He had used it many times when teaching others the Bible truth that death is a state of inactivity. Now the force of Solomon’s argument struck his heart—we should live life fully and enjoy our days while we can because the time will come when we are no longer able to do so.
Enjoy Life
Throughout the book of Ecclesiastes, wise King Solomon exhorts his readers to find enjoyment in life. Chapter 3, for example, states: “I have come to know that there is nothing better for [people] than to rejoice and to do good during one’s life; and also that every man should eat and indeed drink and see good for all his hard work. It is the gift of God.”—Ecclesiastes 3:12, 13.
Solomon was inspired by God to repeat this thought: “Look! The best thing that I myself have seen, which is pretty, is that one should eat and drink and see good for all his hard work with which he works hard under the sun for the number of the days of his life that the true God has given him, for that is his portion.”—Ecclesiastes 5:18.
Similarly, he exhorts young people: “Rejoice, young man, in your youth, and let your heart do you good in the days of your young manhood [or, womanhood], and walk in the ways of your heart and in the things seen by your eyes.” (Ecclesiastes 11:9a) How fine it is to enjoy to the full the strength and vigor of youth!—Proverbs 20:29.
‘Remember Your Creator’
Of course, Solomon does not mean that it is wise to pursue everything that may appeal to our heart or eyes. (Compare 1 John 2:16.) This is clear from what he writes next: “But know that on account of all these [pursuits that may satisfy your desires] the true God will bring you into judgment.” (Ecclesiastes 11:9b) Whatever our age, we should remember that God observes what we do with our lives and will judge us accordingly.
How foolish it is to reason that we can live a self-centered life and postpone godly devotion until our later years! Our life could be cut short at any time. Even if it is not, serving God becomes no easier in old age. Recognizing this fact, Solomon writes: “Remember, now, your Grand Creator in the days of your young manhood, before the calamitous days proceed to come, or the years have arrived when you will say: ‘I have no delight in them.’”—Ecclesiastes 12:1.
Advancing age takes its toll. In symbolic terms Solomon next describes the effects of advanced years. Hands and arms tremble, legs weaken, and teeth become few. Hair becomes white and falls out. Sleep is so light that one is awakened by the sound of a bird. The senses—sight, hearing, touch, smell, and taste—all fade. The weakened body gives rise to fear of falling and other “terrors” on public thoroughfares. Eventually the person dies.—Ecclesiastes 12:2-7.
Old age is particularly calamitous for those who have failed to ‘remember their Grand Creator’ during their youth. Because of wasting his or her life, such a person ‘has no delight’ in later years. A godless life-style may also add to the problems and pains of old age. (Proverbs 5:3-11) Sadly, when looking ahead, such ones see no future but the grave.
Rejoicing in Old Age
This does not mean that elderly ones cannot enjoy life. In the Bible, “length of days and years of life” are also associated with God’s blessing. (Proverbs 3:1, 2) Jehovah told his friend Abraham: “As for you, . . . you will be buried at a good old age.” (Genesis 15:15) Despite the discomforts of advanced years, Abraham found peace and serenity in his later years, looking back with satisfaction on a life devoted to Jehovah. He also looked forward in faith to a “city having real foundations,” God’s Kingdom. (Hebrews 11:10) Thus, he died “old and satisfied.”—Genesis 25:8.
Solomon therefore exhorted: “If a man should live even many years, in all of them let him rejoice.” (Ecclesiastes 11:8) Whether we are young or old, true joy is linked to our relationship with God.
As the young man in the workshop put away the last of his father’s tools, he thought about these things. He thought about all the people he knew who tried to make the best of their lives but who did not find happiness because they had no relationship with their Creator. How fitting it seemed that after giving encouragement to rejoice during one’s life, Solomon summarized matters with the words: “The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments. For this is the whole obligation of man”!—Ecclesiastes 12:13.

