Announcements
● The Society is arranging for a limited number of regular pioneers to serve temporarily as special pioneers in isolated territory for a two- or three-month period. The assignments are designed for a team of two. The requirement will be 140 hours each month in field service. Also, a car that is in good condition will be necessary. Some financial assistance will be provided. Before writing to the Society, arrangements should be made for a partner. Please submit a letter giving the name of your partner, as well as the congregation(s) with which both of you are presently associating. Also state whether you will be willing to work with a congregation that needs assistance in covering its territory. (No financial assistance is given for this.) The elders should sign the letter, indicating that they believe the individuals would do well in this work.
● Please order Memorial invitations now so that your congregation will receive them well in advance of the Memorial celebration, April 11, 1979. Invitations may be ordered in lots of 250, 500 and 1,000, using the special order blank. Please do not remit with your order. The Memorial invitations will be charged to your congregation’s literature account. Payment should be included in the money remitted for literature.
● There will be a special public talk on Sunday, April 1, 1979. Congregations holding their public talks on a midweek night will schedule it during the week of April 1. We would like to advertise this particular public talk widely. So please order handbills as soon as possible. Use the special talk handbill order blank now being sent out to the congregations.
● New Publications Available:
Life Does Have a Purpose—Danish, Finnish, Swedish
Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!—Italian
My Book of Bible Stories—Spanish
Our Incoming World Government—God’s Kingdom—Norwegian, Swedish
Your Youth—Getting the Best out of It—Melanesian-Pidgin, Zulu
Bible Topics for Discussion—Chinese, French
● During the months of January and April, the offer is the Watchtower subscription and one free 384- or 416-page book, or the pocket-size book God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good. If your congregation does not have an adequate supply of the large bound books, the Society still has on hand a stock of the books “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”—How? and Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!, which you may order. Publishers placing the large bound books may obtain them from the literature counter for 10c each. The congregation may request 35c credit for each large book placed over the counter during January and April. The pocket-size “Eternal Purpose” book may also be obtained for 10c by the publishers and the congregation may request 20c credit for each of those books placed with the brothers. There is also a supply of this pocket-size book on hand in Brooklyn, if any congregations desire to order it. Congregations requesting credit should use the Remittance and Credit Request form on the lines below “other items.”
● Please note that starting January 1, 1979, congregations will be charged $1.90 for each one-year subscription submitted at publisher rate. This is the rate shown in the Cost List and on the Weekly Subscriptions form (M-203).
● Literature offer for February and March: The book Making Your Family Life Happy for 35c.
● The price for Watchtower and Awake! binders has been increased to $2.50 each. This will be the price for the public, congregations and pioneers.
● Effective immediately, the Byington translation, known as The Bible in Living English, will cost $8.00 for the public, $7.75 for congregation publishers, and $4.00 for pioneers.
● In the future, the secretary of the congregation will be responsible for keeping the meeting attendance records for the congregation, instead of the Bible study overseer. If the secretary keeps these records, it is felt that there will be easier access to these records both by other elders and by the circuit overseer when he visits.

