More Meaningful Meetings for Service
1 Have you ever felt at a loss for words when you started out in your field activity, especially when going from house to house in territory that is worked often? Most of us at one time or another have had that feeling. What would help to overcome such feelings? We believe it would be most beneficial, just before starting in the field service, to spend a few minutes discussing what we hope to accomplish in our work and how to do it.
2 We would like to encourage congregation elders and all others who handle meetings for field service to give thought to presenting helpful suggestions at these meetings. Therefore, beginning with this issue of Our Kingdom Service, you will find a section called “Meetings for Field Service.” Therein will be suggestions on what might be discussed before a group goes out in the field service. It may be beneficial to use the same points at every meeting for field service during the designated week. Some advance thought by the brother handling the meeting will be needed. He should consider how to present the material so as to get the minds of the brothers and sisters ready for the work they will be doing during that service period. Plan to ask the publishers for suggestions on the points outlined. Also be ready to offer helpful suggestions. Stress not merely what to do, but how and why.
3 These are not to be lengthy discussions. No more than 10 to 15 minutes should be spent in these meetings for field service. This should be carefully adhered to so that those meeting together can use their time to the best advantage in the field. It will not usually be necessary to consider the text for the day from the Yearbook. If the text is especially appropriate for field service, then it may be considered briefly. This will be left to the discretion of the one handling the meeting. The important thing is to help the publishers to be prepared for the activity in which they will engage after the meeting.
4 We hope these meetings will be helpful to all and that they will serve as an encouragement to those participating in field service.

