Presenting the Good News—Talk About the Kingdom
1 God’s kingdom is the only solution to the world’s problems. Yet literally millions upon millions of people do not know this, even though many of them at one time or another have heard that kingdom mentioned. What can we do to help them appreciate the significance of God’s kingdom in their lives?
2 Perhaps one of the more simple approaches we can make to people is to help them to reason on something that many of them already know. What is that? The Lord’s Prayer. In Matthew 6:9, 10, we find the model prayer Jesus gave, asking for God’s will to be done on earth as in heaven. Just how might we present the matter? Maybe something along the following lines will be appealing. After a short introduction of yourself to the householder, say:
3 “I’m sure you are interested in the security of your family and home, especially in today’s world where there are so many things that undermine that security. Most people look to some means of protection. They may have extra locks on their doors, or alarms, or a dog to sound a warning when strangers approach. [Get householder’s reaction.] The Bible promises the best possible means of security for all mankind. You may have asked God in prayer many times for this means of security without knowing it. [Read Matthew 6:9, 10.] Have you ever thought of the Lord’s Prayer as holding the answer to the need for real security for mankind? Really, the kingdom of God is the solution to the problems mankind faces.” From that point on, depending on the reception you have received, you can proceed with the conversation, or make an offer of the Watchtower subscription or other publications to the householder.
4 A briefer approach could be along the following lines. After you introduce yourself, say: “We are calling because of a common concern we share as to one of mankind’s most pressing needs—for peace and security. The solution is found in the familiar words of the Lord’s Prayer at Matthew 6:9, 10. [Read.] I’m sure that this God-given solution is of interest to you.” From there proceed with the conversation or the offer you may wish to make to the householder.
5 It is good to remember that in advocating God’s kingdom as the solution to mankind’s problems, your conviction and sincerity will go a long way toward helping the honest-hearted ones you meet to take seriously what you say. If their hearts are drawn toward God, it can be your happy privilege to assist them to take the necessary steps to become disciples of Jesus Christ, our King. Why not try using this scripture during the coming months as you seek to help others know that God’s kingdom is the solution.

