Part 4
The Only Hope for Perfect Government
EVEN before the American presidential election was over, some leaders of the Electric Church expressed concern that their candidate, if elected, might not keep his promises to them.
How different it is with God, who cannot lie!​—Heb. 6:18.
END OF POLITICS UNDER CHRIST’S RULE
“In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Dan. 2:44.
END OF WAR
“He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”​—Ps. 46:9.
END OF MURDER, HOMOSEXUALITY, PORNOGRAPHY
“Do not be misled. Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men kept for unnatural purposes, nor men who lie with men, nor thieves, nor greedy persons, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners will inherit God’s kingdom.”​—1 Cor. 6:9, 10.
END OF PAIN AND SUFFERING
“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Rev. 21:3, 4.
PERFECT JUSTICE ON EARTH
“He will not judge by any mere appearance to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to the thing heard by his ears. And with righteousness he must judge the lowly ones, and with uprightness he must give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth.”​—Isa. 11:3-5.
TO COME IN OUR GENERATION
“The disciples approached him privately, saying: ‘Tell us, When will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?’ And in answer Jesus said to them . . . ‘Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another. And this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come. Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.”’​—Matt. 24:3, 4, 7, 14, 34.

