R311 :pagel 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA. , JANUARY, AND FEBRUARY, 1882. 

NOS. 7 AND 8. 

WITH TABERNACLE SUPPLEMENT. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave. , PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P. O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 



N. B. -This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Service held in "Curry Institute Hall, " corner Penn avenue and 
Sixth street, Pittsburgh, at 3:00 o'clock P. M. , every Sunday. Every 
Wednesday evening, at No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny, at 7:30 
o'clock P. M. All are cordially invited. 



R311 :pagel 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THE thousands of letters which still continue to come in from all 
parts, have been greatly increased within the last three weeks, by 
letters and cards, inquiring about the January number. 

We regret the delay of this number, but it was unavoidable. Part of 
the paper on which the supplement is printed was detained by the 
railroad blockade: We had a part of it and a part of THE WATCH 
TOWER printed and could not finish either; nor could we find a 
paper to match closely enough to substitute. Now that it has come, 
we hope it will be satisfactory to you all. The supplement is larger 
than we had at first expected to make it. 

The work in general progresses; the interest of old and new readers 
seems to increase daily. Two new preachers are preparing 
themselves for the field, Bros. Boyer and Leigh, both are here at 
present, and with two others are endeavoring to obtain and 
systematize the Bible teachings, so they can the better present them 
to others. 

Oh that more could realize what a privilege it is, to preach the "glad 
tidings. "The pay is extraordinarily large, but will scarcely allure 
any but the wholly consecrated. It is as follows, paid regularly— viz. 
: Trials of faith, of patience, of perseverance, of privations, of 
forbearance, of forgiveness, of self-sacrifice; these are also sure- 
plain bread and water, sometimes more. You shall, in all, have a 
hundred fold more of houses, lands, brothers, sisters, etc. , than you 
gave up to enter the service; and (here comes the grand and glorious 
part of our wages) in the world (age) to come, eternal life and glory. 

Many who receive "calls" for their services at from $2,000 to 
$10,000 would consider the above a very poor call indeed. But it is 
a poor call, only to those who look at the dollars which are seen, 
and not at the glory which is unseen. Ours, is the same "call" that 
Jesus had to the ministry however— He, (not for ease, comfort, 
wealth, respectability or honor,) but for the joy that was set before 
him, endured the cross and despised the shame. It was our call that 
Peter, Paul, and others received, and they said it was a "High 
calling," a "Heavenly calling. "Let us, like all of these, esteem our 



calling to suffer for a while, and to be glorified after (1 Peter 5:10) 
a great privilege; and as we draw our wages of shame and reproach 
daily, let us rejoice that we are accounted worthy to suffer the 
reproaches for Christ and the words of his testimony, and esteem 
these greater riches than all earthly things; for while so doing "the 
spirit of glory and of God resteth on you. " (1 Peter 4:14.) 

Now some are so situated with families dependent on them, that 
they cannot see their way clear to go forth in the mission work of 
teaching these glad tidings; and quite a number have expressed 
regrets, thereat. To such we would say, one talent or one 
opportunity used to the best of your ability, will as thoroughly 
demonstrate the degree of your sacrifice as ten could; and we know 
it to be one of the Lord's ways, to increase the talent and 
opportunity as we make use of it. Let us see how one talent of 
ability could be used. You could study and plan the more 
thoroughly, how these subjects could best be presented privately to 
your Christian neighbors and friends. If you have many talents of 
ability and only one of opportunity, then try to use it, study how 
you may say much in few words, pointedly. Deprive yourself of 
some of the time you spend otherwise, and have a meeting in your 
room for Bible study on Sunday, and on a week evening. Or call on 
any fruit bearing consecrated Christians you may know of; hand 
such a tract with a few brief expressions relative to your own view 
concerning it. Always have three or four charges of such 
ammunition in your pocket. If you attend any meeting, be sure you 
make it count for TRUTH if there are any who seem to have "an ear 
to hear. " 

But let us remember always, that it is their fear of God which is 
injuring them, (Isa. 29:13) and hinders their coming into the 
sunshine of his love. We remember that we, (as all, "of this way") 
first got to see a little of the Love of God, and then we found the 
entire plan to be "just like him"-Love. "The love of Christ 
constraineth us. " (2 Cor. 5:14.) 

Love is the lever which will move men's hearts in the Millennial 
Age, when they will learn of God's love as exhibited in the 
selection of the "little flock" to bless them; and the love of the 
"head and body of Christ," whom they persecuted and who suffered 
patiently, etc. ,— yes, that will move where fear will not. 

And it is this same mighty lever that must now be used by us, to 
move all who are running the heavenly race to press with vigor on, 
and so run as to obtain the prize of our high calling. Then let all be 
actively engaged in the service- preaching the TRUTH by act and 
word— "doing with our might what our hands find to do"-that "so 
an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord. " (2 Pet. 1:11.) -Thus we may 
have it true of us- He or "she hath done WHAT she could," the 
Lord expects no more: but how few, are doing all they could. 



Let us not forget that while we may be deeply interested in doing 
good to the world, in such ways as preaching temperance, etc. , yet 
that is not our mission now. The injunction is always "Preach the 
Word;" "Feed the flock;" "Feed my sheep;" "Feed my lambs. " Are 
you a partaker of the Spirit of the Anointed one? If so, remember it 
was not designed to qualify you for any work except preaching— in 
some sense, in action or word; as we read: The Spirit of the Lord 
God is upon me (head and body) because he hath anointed me to 
preach the glad tidings to the meek, etc. (Isa. 61:1.) 

The fact that what is preached generally is very bad tidings of great 
misery to more than nine-tenths of the race, makes it the more 
necessary for those of us who have some knowledge of the "good 
news" to let it be known; that all hearts may bow before our God 
and worship, and in truth adore. 

Among the many refreshing letters received, we wish you to enjoy 
with us, the spirit of the following: 



AUSTINTOWN, O. , Jan. 16, 1882. 

DEAR BRO:— The publication entitled, "Food for Thinking 
Christians," was duly received a few weeks ago, and I have 
carefully distributed the greater portion of them among such as 
would appreciate such teachings; and they all speak volumes of 
praise. It is indeed food for Christians -rich food. Would to God 
we could only have the whole world read and fully understand. 
May God bless the work, and may the blessed seed sown sink deep 
in each and every heart, and bear much fruit to the honor and glory 
of God. 

Please send me a few copies of the Tabernacle and its Teachings, 
and much oblige. 

Yours, etc. , 



R312 : page 1 

MIXER VILL, FNDIANA, Jan. 14, 1882. 

"ZION'S WATCH TOWER"-My dear good friends:-Your kind 
favor, "Food for Thinking Christians," reached me in due time. To 
say that it is an exceeding welcome gift but feebly expresses my 
appreciation and gratitude. I have learned what I never knew 
before, and it has brought to me such a flood of light that I am 
amazed at the grandeur of the scheme and plan of redemption. To 
allow the phrase, I have literally devoured it, and my soul is 
ravished with the indescribable excellency and magnitude of God's 
plan of salvation. Oh, how dull and blunted does now appear the 
common method of Christian instruction. Who can read these 
things and longer doubt and waver about the truth, beauty, and 
inspiration of the Bible, or the manner in which its glorious truths 
should be inculcated and demonstrated. I trust and believe that the 



great Author of the Word will prosper and bless you abundantly. 
Whatever else you have of like nature for grateful hearts, I trust you 
will favor your present correspondent with. At present I am very 
poor, but have better prospects before me, and when they arrive I 
will not forget "Zion's Watch Tower. " 

Yours truly, 

, M. D. 

P. S. —Please send me some "Food" for five friends, and let me 
know whether a preacher could come here. In truth and gratitude, 



_, KANSAS, Dec. , 10, 1881. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have derived great comfort from 
the December number of "Watch Tower. " What a substantial meal 
of "strong meat. " I have read it nearly all twice over; some of it 
three and four times. I derived especial comfort from the article 
entitled, "The Blessed dying. "I have always dreaded dying, but if 
its conclusions are correct (and it at once impressed me so), I think 
I want to die-anything to be with Christ. The "Creative Week," by 
W. I. Mann, I thought was especially strong in its conclusions and 
deductions; shall read it again and study it. 

Now, dear brother, perhaps it would be as well to introduce myself. 
I am a preaching member of the Minnesota Conference of Christian 
Adventists. I have long been leaning toward the age-to-come views, 
much as one 

R312 : page 2 

would grope in the dark-seeing much truth in it; but with the light I 
had, could not make all points harmonize. It remained for your 
September number of "Watch Tower" to supply the missing link. I 
am thankful to God for it. I received it (humanly speaking) by the 
merest accident, but I believe it was sent of God. Now, dear 
brother, I would like a few copies of "Food for Thinking Christians. 
"I will treat and place each one as though it were pure gold. I want 
to send one to my brother, a minister, and to others. I am anxious to 
do all I can. Am very poor, but if God blesses will contribute to 
your Tract fund. Yours in hope. 



ONTARIO. 

DEAR BROTHER:-The books and paper I have received safely, 
for which accept my sincere thanks. I have received a great deal of 
profit from the reading of them. God's plan of salvation as seen by 
the aid of the "true light" (as I firmly believe), is sublime beyond 
anything of which I have had conception. My heart is overflowing 
with thankfulness to our Father and Saviour that I have been 
thought worthy to receive the "good news. "I feel as though my 
experiences were something like Paul's— as one born out of due 



time. My wife also believes, but does not seem to be able to forget 
the old teachings so readily as myself. Do you know of any other 
members of Christ in this neighborhood? 

Please put my name on your list of subscribers for the "Watch 
Tower. " Enclosed find one dollar to pay for above and postage on 
books, etc. 25 cents of the above was the price of a theatre ticket; I 
should have spent it for that before I received the light; now when I 
am tempted I shall send the money to you to use in the good cause. 
Will you kindly advise me in regard to severing my connection 
with the church of which I am a member. I feel as though I should 
not attend, because it would be consenting to their teaching, which I 
do not now believe. I have not really believed it for a long time, but 
I knew no better way. Now, thank God, it is different. I remain 
yours in the hope of eternal life. . 



page 2 

MEHERRIN DEPOT, VA. , 

Dec. 21st, 1881. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I am filled with thanks and praise to our 
heavenly Father for the precious truths received through your paper. 
I have spent much time in studying the subject of baptism; and just 
as I came out with my convictions on the subject, the "Watch 
Tower" came with an article ("Importance of Baptism") expressing 
my views better than I could. O, how gratifying to see what the real 
baptism is ! Now we can see that "he that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved. "But, my dear brother, I would like you to say a 
little more on one point, viz: If Jesus went into that eternal death of 
the human for us, why should we be baptized into and go through it 
for ourselves? 



[Answers to your question have been given in former numbers; but 
a very clear answer will be found in the reading of this month's 
supplement -"The Tabernacle" tract. We do not die for ourselves; 
but have fellowship with our Head in the atonement sacrifices for 
the world. We "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ. " Col. 1:24. -EDITOR. ] 

R312 : page 2 

EDINBURGH, SCOTLAND, To the Editor "Zion's Watch Tower. 

DEAR SIR:-I have perused your little book "Food for Thinking 
Christians," with very great interest, and also with profit. I am a 
missionary and divinity student in the last session of my course. I 
am very desirous of preaching on these glorious themes so well 



handled in your little volume; and will ever be much indebted to 
you, if you will supply me with some more copies, say 40. 1 shall 
certainly distribute them with judicious care, and sincerely trust 
they will be much blessed to those who read them. I will also be 
glad to receive some copies of the "Tabernacle and its Teachings. 

I remain, my dear sir, ever yours, most sincerely, 



R312 : page 2 

TRUTH SIFTING IN THE TOWER. 

We would like every interested reader to feel that he has an interest 
in the WATCH TOWER, and that it is our paper: a paper belonging 
to the Lord and hence to all his children. It is, and we hope will 
always be conducted, with an eye single to God's glory and hence 
to the blessing of his children. Like the Bible, it will not discuss 
questions, but will state what is believed to be truth and nothing 
else; accepting— The harmony of God's Word— as the definition of 
truth. No compromising with error to double the circulation; no 
withholding of truth lest some should be offended. No, the truth, the 
whole truth, and nothing but the truth is our motto. 

But who shall judge what is truth, and how? This, to every 
conscientious editor, becomes an important question, but in our 
own case it is doubly so, because the subjects treated in our 
columns are, many of them, "new" (Matt. 13:52) and "strong meat. 
"We believe our readers are more effectually armed against error, 
by being instructed in the harmony of God's Word, than by having 
the columns of the W. T. devoted to the dissecting of all the various 
forms of error. Let the sunlight in, and the darkness will flee away. 
And with the plan of God clearly before the mind, the deformity of 
error is easily discoverable. The Bible, then, is our only standard, 
by which to test the truth or falsity of any subject. 

We will inform our readers what has been our method of sifting 
truth, that they may know of our carefulness in trying to separate 
truth from error. 

The editor seeks to test his own articles by the Word of God, but 
every article which appears in the paper, has the special criticism of 
some one or more of those who are walking in the light. If it be a 
new point of interpretation, it must have the assent of at least two of 
those best posted and most conversant with the Scriptures before it 
shall appear. If not seen by these intelligent and conscientious 
persons to be truth, it will lie over until such time as it shall be seen 
either to be truth and published, or error and destroyed. 

This rule which we apply to our own writings, we apply to others 
also, and as a consequence, very many articles are written for our 
paper which are never seen in it. This stringent rule is not liked by 
some, who consider it a reflection against their ability, thus proving 



that their human nature is not yet crucified,— the dead have no 
reputation to sustain or wound. But to those who are intent only on 
getting and spreading truth, this rule is generally very agreeable. 

We know of no other way to do, and the Lord has seemed to bless 
this method, for he has fed us richly; and though we stand ready to 
contradict the statements of any issue when shown to be erroneous, 
and would feel it both a duty and a privilege to do so, yet to the 
praise of our Lord's leading the course and teachings of the W. T. 
for the past three years have been connected, progressive and 
harmonious. And furthermore, those who are teachers of these 
things, never saw truth with so clear a vision as to-day, and never 
were so harmonious in sentiment. 

Be not offended then, if your article, should not appear. It is treated 
with the same loving consideration as all other articles. One dear 
brother to whom we returned an article with criticisms for re- 
consideration, in his reply, gave the following quotation: Offended- 
-how could I be? —"Great peace have they who love thy law and 
nothing shall offend them. " 

The course which we pursue relative to the dissemination of truth, 
we commend to our readers— use your time, your means, your 
influence, for truth, not error. Teach nothing, lend nothing, give 
nothing— neither book, paper nor tract, by whomsoever published, 
which you have not carefully examined and feel sure would glorify 
God. 



R312 : page 2 



BACK NUMBERS. 



We regret to say that the Nov. and Dec. 1881 issues of the 
TOWER, are all gone. However, the new readers should all have 
them; therefore we will republish them as soon as possible. All who 
want them should send a postal card. We published 6,000 of each of 
those numbers, and at the time, supposed that sufficient. 

R313 : page 2 

Of the present issue, there will be 10,000, which we expect will be 
sufficient for all requirements. We send the present number to 
many whose wrappers were marked to stop with last number. This 
is because, being overcrowded with fresh mails, we had not time to 
correct all of our list, and to some others, it is sent because of the 
Supplement, which we hope may be acceptable and profitable to 
them. 

We have plenty of tracts and September numbers, which you can 
have for free distribution by asking for them. Be discreet in their 
use, giving only to thinking Christians, so far as you can know, 
accompanying them with some words of your own. It is better to 



lend than to give them. Make a list of those to whom you lend, and 
never let them be idle. 



SUPPLEMENT. 

As a supplement, we send you "The Tabernacle and its Teachings," 
referred to in several previous numbers, and on the back of the 
pamphlet, FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS. 



page 2 
Questions and Answers are crowded out of this issue. 



R313 : page 2 

"Z. W. T. TRACT SOCIETY. " 

This Society was organized less than one year ago, for the object 
indicated by the name. It is but proper that a statement should now 
be made at the beginning of the year 1882. 

The object of the Society was stated but no requests for help were 
made. The donations below mentioned, were free-will offerings- 
some giving until they could feel it. The amounts ranged from one 
dollar up to thousands. 

Total am'ts of cash received, . . $35,391. 18 
expenditures in printing, etc. . . . 35,336. 18 

Balance in treasury, Jan $55. 00 

Bills coming due, about 400. 00 

To all whose donations have been over one hundred dollars, we 
have made special reports, and to any donor the books are always 
open for inspection. 

We propose continuing this fund, and will endeavor to use it 
prudently as fast as it is received. In fact as will be noticed in the 
above report, the expenditure generally exceeds the receipts, but a 
brother who has already contributed largely, guarantees any debts 
incurred, to the amount of one thousand dollars in excess of 
receipts. 

It is a principle with us, not to allow the Lord's money to rust. 

Should the fund increase sufficiently to permit it, we propose using 
some portion of it for sending out other laborers. 

We never solicit donations. Those who possess this world's goods 
and are wholly consecrated need only to know how they can use it. 
Donations to this fund should be specified. Address C. T. Russell, 
Pittsburgh. 



An article from Bro. A. D. Jones of the Day Star, relative to "The 
blessed dying"-in harmony with views presented in our last two 
issues —is crowded out of this number, but will appear in our next. 

Bro. J. requests us to correct an error which occurred in fourth 
column second page of the last (Dec.) number of the Day Star, viz: 
"To the division of the land," sixty instead of six years. 

We sent samples of the Day Star to about seven thousand names of 
our list, that they might have opportunity to judge of its merits. 



R313 : page 2 

ALEXANDER AND THE BANKRUPT 

It is related of the late Czar of Russia that in answer to the 
question, "Who is to pay all these?" he wrote -"I, Alexander. "It 
appears that one of his officers had contracted bills which it was 
impossible for him to pay, and, after contemplating them 
despairingly, had written the above query at the bottom of the 
paper, and fallen asleep. 

The Czar happened to pass through the room, and, observing the 
bill and its appended question, generously took the pen and wrote, 
"I Alexander," and quietly withdrew without disturbing the aid-de- 
camp. It is easier to imagine than describe the emotions of the 
debtor, who, on awakening, found all his pecuniary obligations 
cancelled. 

So the sinner looks at his condition and inquires, as the Russian, 
"Who is to pay all these?"We thank God we can answer that "Jesus 
paid it all. "He was wounded for our transgressions, and by His 
stripes we are healed. 

Jesus writes on our list of sins "I even I am he that blotteth out thy 
transgressions. " 



R313 : page 3 



PERILOUS TIMES. 



Perilous times in the world are at hand- 
Perils by water and perils by land; 
Perils in churches and perils in state, 
Perils attending the good and the great. 

Watchman, how readest thou touching this hour? 
Fearful corruption in places of power; 



Presidents, princes and kings in dismay- 
Tragic unfoldings the news of the day. 

Scriptures prophetic discoursing on time, 
Teach us the doctrine of increase of crime; 
"Evil seducers shall wax worse and worse," 
Ere the Jehovah shall "smite with a curse. " 

Is the church powerless to draw from the skies 
Help when Goliath their army defies? 
Is there no king in the camp of "to-day"? 
Is the true Israel "fallen away"? 

Is it the sign of the presence of Christ, 
Of the Messiah in person to reign? 
Has sin attained to its manhood of power? 
Is this its zenith? Is morning the hour? 

The son of perdition, the god of this world, 
Down from his kingdom of sin must be hurled; 
Tares must be gathered and burned in the fire- 
Type of all Christians in name— not in power. 

Jesus is come ! O let it be known, 
Jehovah's anointed, now takes the throne; 
He takes the helm and the power to command, 
He'll guide affairs on the sea and the land. 

Jesus is come ! let all the world hear, 
"Who's on the Lord's side" let him draw near. 
"Come with your armor, your loins girt about"; 
Come with your trumpets, and join in the shout. 

Jerichoes tremble and Sodoms consume, 
Kingdoms are tottering before the "Commune"; 
Davids, go forth with your sling-stones of faith, 
Take ye the heads of "the giants of Gath. " 



Selected. 



R313 : page 3 



JESUS MADE PERFECT. 

"Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things 
which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of 
eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. " (Heb. 5:9.) 

Knowledge of both evil and good is essential to a hearty acceptance 
of the good and invariable rejection of evil. Therefore, we believe 
that Jehovah has given, and is giving such knowledge to every 
intelligent creature, both in heaven and on earth. 

We see how all of the human family are getting their knowledge by 
contact and actual experience with sin and its penalty-misery and 



death. And we believe, as we have previously expressed, that the 
heavenly creatures— angels and arch-angels, are learning the same 
lessons by watching man's experiences. Thus mankind in general, 
and the church in particular, is made a "spectacle to angels. " (1 
Cor. 4:9.) 

If we look backward, we see him who as a man was called Jesus, in 
his pre-human existence, "The beginning of the creation of God"- 
The agent and "righteous servant" of Jehovah, in the creation of all 
that has since been created. 

Perfect as a being, as are all of Jehovah's creatures, yet he knew 
only good— had never experienced evil, nor witnessed its effects. 
Later, after angels and arch-angels had been created he witnessed 
the apostasy and rebellion on the part of Satan and his host, then the 
setting up of the rival spiritual kingdom defying the 

R314 : page 3 

power of Jehovah to overthrow it, and offering freedom from all 
restraints and from all obedience to God, to those who would join 
them. 

Though the law of God was "The wages of sin is death and the soul 
(being) that sinneth, it shall die— yet the execution of that sentence 
tarried and no evidence of his power to enforce it, was given, and 
even yet, though he declares that Satan shall, be destroyed, we see 
it not accomplished. How for ages he has seemed to triumph over 
Jehovah, his influence even reaching the intelligent creatures of 
earth, beguiling and alluring them into sin and consigning them to 
death. What a test of faith in, and love for Jehovah, was this 
spectacle! For hundreds and thousands of years they must walk by 
faith in the power of Jehovah to accomplish the destruction of evil 
doers, and reward the patient fidelity of the loyal and obedient. 

Let us now in thought stand side by side with Jesus when tempted 
by Satan and imagine the trial of faith, he endured, for we believe 
that he, as we, walked by faith and not by sight. He had witnessed 
Jehovah's works of creation and preservation; he had marked the 
wise and loving benevolence that adapted competent means to 
glorious ends, and such was the strength of love and unbounded 
confidence awakened by this general knowledge of Jehovah's 
character, that he did not for a moment hesitate to submit all he had, 
even life itself, to his will, for the accomplishment of his purposes. 
The language of his obedient faith was "Though he slay me yet will 
I trust in him. " 

So he submitted to the Father's will to accomplish the work of 
redeeming mankind by exchanging his glorious body and heavenly 
honors for the form and the nature of man, that by so doing he 
might be obedient unto death-even the death of the cross, and thus 
become a ransom for man. All this he did by faith, for he had never 
yet seen any being restored from the death condition into which he 
volunteered to go, trusting alone in God's ability as promised, to 



restore him to a higher form of life, and through him to restore 
humanity to its perfection. 

But when he had become a man, Satan again appeared to tempt him 
sorely, and we might thus paraphrase the temptation: Ah, says he, 
how unwise you have been; once you were greater than me, now I 
am your superior —a powerful spiritual being, while you have 
become a man— "lower than the angels. "How absurd to let Jehovah 
thus degrade you. True, he has made great promises and greatly 
boasts of his power to execute them, but he cannot. I have the 
power of death (Heb. 2:14.) and the human race are all subject to 
my "power" and never has Jehovah been able to liberate even one 
from death, nor destroy me as he threatened. Now, let me, as your 
friend, counsel you wisely: Since you have so unwisely forfeited 
your higher form of life, so that you may never regain it, don't give 
up, but keep the life you now have. If you die you never shall live 
again, neither will you be able to liberate mankind from death. 

Why should you waste it in a fruitless effort for this race? 

If you are the Son of God command that these stones be made 
bread (Matt. 4:3)-use your power for self-gratification and 
preservation, and don't present your body a living sacrifice, dying 
daily, when you have a perfect right to life. Jesus answers "Man 
shall not live by bread alone," I could not enjoy life, even with all 
my wants supplied, out of communion with my Father. 

Your trust in Jehovah is misplaced; first prove Him and see if he 
will keep his word. Cast yourself down from this pinnacle of the 
temple-it is written, "He shall give his angels charge concerning 
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou 
dash thy foot against a stone. " 

Jesus replied: "It is written, thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. " 
We may not thus test the Almighty by needless exposure. 

Then Satan showed Jesus the kingdoms and honors of earth, saying: 
I am the "Prince of this world. " (John 14:30. )A11 the kingdoms of 
earth are under my control; you long for power yourself to do good 
to mankind; now, I propose that you shall be my representative in 
the world and rule all these kingdoms. I will put all under your 
control, if you will yield allegiance to me. You will be great indeed, 
for you are a perfect man, while all others are imperfect, and you 
can live forever. Since your life is not forfeited, no one can take it 
from you. You can thus be Lord of lords and King of kings; to bless 
mankind throughout all generations. All this power you can have 
without suffering and you can enter upon the work of blessing at 
once. And by your wise and prudent ruling, you can greatly elevate 
and benefit them while they live, whereas, if you die, you simply 
waste your life and benefit no one. 

But Jesus again replies— No matter what inducements you may 
offer, I will yield allegiance to none but Jehovah-It is written, 
"Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God and him only shalt thou 



serve. "Thus, his faith in Jehovah's power and promise was tested 
beyond our power to comprehend; but faith founded on the 
knowledge of Jehovah's character triumphed —"By his knowledge, 
shall my righteous servant justify many. " By lack of that 
knowledge of God, Adam fell into transgression while through his 
knowledge, Jesus remained the righteous servant— therefore, able to 
justify many. 

By faith, he consecrated; by faith, he resisted all temptation; by 
faith, he endured the self-sacrifice even unto death, as a reward for 
which he was made perfect as a divine being -the first-born into 
the divine family. 

Thus in Jesus' case faith ended in fruition of that which Jehovah 
had promised, and being thus perfected- "exalted," as a divine 
being- "he is the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey 
him. " 

Hence the author and finisher of our faith is he who was made 
divinely perfect, through the sufferings of the sinless human nature 
even unto death. (Heb. 12:2.) 

This agrees with Phil. 2:8-1 1, where Paul declares that Jesus "being 
found in fashion as a man, (30 years old) humbled (sacrificed 
himself during 3-1/2 years) and became obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross. Wherefore, God also HATH HIGHLY 
EXALTED HIM [to Glory-IMMORTALITY -DIVINITY-], and 
given him a name above every name. . . that every tongue should 
confess that Jesus is Lord to the glory of God, the Father. 

As with the leader and forerunner so with the disciples: We are 
being made perfect through sufferings yet not the flesh (or human 
nature) is being perfected but our new nature. The outward man 
perishes but the inward man is renewed day by day until in our 
resurrection or change we shall be "raised spiritual" like unto 
Christ's glorious body-made perfect. 



R314 : page 3 

THE JEWISH SABBATH. 

Because seven was so intimately connected with all God's works 
and plans, and because he intended all his works to culminate in 
perfection, therefore, when he selected Israel as a typical people, he 
gave them several Sabbaths or rests which shadowed certain 
blessings of rest in future, and as was His method, he used seven to 
represent that coming perfection of rest. 

Hence, we find in their Law, a number of Sabbaths. The seventh 
day and its cycle of seven times seven days or forty-nine days, 
reached and pointed to the fiftieth or Jubilee day, the day of 
Pentecost. So they had year Sabbaths; every seventh year was a 
Sabbath year to the land, during which it rested. The cycle of the 



year Sabbaths was seven times seven or forty-nine years, reaching 
and pointing to the fiftieth or Jubilee year. Thus we see the 
Sabbaths and their cycles to have been- 

The 7th day; 7 x 7 = 49 bringing the 50th or Jubilee day-Pentecost. 

The 7th year; 7 x 7 = 49 bringing the 50th or Jubilee year. 

Now, these things they did, in a shadowy or typical sense and did 
not discern the meaning of the types. But as the Apostles declare, 
these things were done and written before for our (the gospel 
church's) edification; that we might understand and locate the real 
Sabbaths by examining the types. Types are not to last forever, but 
must cease when the antitype has come. 

Now, our claim is, that all these typical Law Sabbaths ceased, at or 
before the death of Jesus, who made an end of the Law which 
commanded the types. None of these types were commanded before 
the giving of the Law to Israel at Sinai (Deut. 5:3-23) and they were 
all done away when Jesus "made an end of the Law, nailing it to his 
cross. " (Col. 2:14) 

The year Sabbaths as types ceased first; they ceased at the 
Babylonian captivity, and there the great cycle of fifty times fifty 
years commenced, which reached to the anti-typical or real Jubilee 
time, the Millennial age- "Times of restitution of all things. "This 
cycle carried us 1 874 years into the Christian era, and showed us 
when the work of restitution was due to begin-beginning by 
breaking in pieces and removing the rubbish of error and bad 
government, preparing for the blessings of all the families of the 
earth. 

The typical day Sabbaths, did not pass away for long years 
afterward; 

R315 : page 3 

it was part of the Law when Jesus was in the flesh, and every 
feature of the Law was duly kept by him. It then must have been a 
one part of the Law, which ended at the Cross. Now, if the type 
ended there, the anti-type must have come, and if we can find an 
anti-type in place of the type, we shall have conclusive proof of the 
end of the type to support Paul's statement, that "Christ made an 
end of the Law. " 

Let us look for the anti-type: Israel was commanded to count from 
the morrow after the (Passover) Sabbath. There we begin to count 
the cycle of seven times seven days which would bring us to the 
real Sabbath (rest) typified by their day Sabbaths. You know how 
Jesus rose from death on the morning after the Passover Sabbath, 
and counting fifty days it brings us to Pentecost day. Jesus was with 
the disciples forty of these days, and then as he had commanded, 
they waited for the blessing of Pentecost, viz: the outpouring of the 
Holy Spirit-that sealing of the Spirit, or witness of the acceptance 
by the Father, gave the rest (Sabbath) of faith. 



There then, the disciples entered 

R315:page4 

into a rest of faith, of which the seventh day was but an imperfect 
type— a rest not of one day in the week, but of all days. As Jews 
they had scrupulously observed the seventh day as a rest day; no 
work, of any sort must be done in it. Yet they were in a condition of 
unrest, for though they kept this one feature of the Law, many 
others they could not keep and Jesus had said that the failure in 
keeping one point constituted the person a breaker of the Law, and 
consequently none of them ever kept the Law, but Jesus only. So 
they were in a condition of unrest actually and hence Jesus 
addressed himself to all such, saying "Come unto me all ye that are 
weary and heavy laden (trying to do a thing impossible to you, as 
members of a fallen race, viz: to keep the perfect Law of God)— I 
will give you rest. "(Sabbath means rest. (Matt. 1 l:28.)While with 
them, Jesus did not give them the rest, but, he like them, observed 
the type as was necessary until it was "finished" on the cross. And 
after his resurrection he did not give them the promised rest, but 
told them to tarry until they should receive the Comforter-the 
evidence of their acceptance as Sons of Jehovah. When thus sealed 
by the Spirit, it was the evidence of the truth of all Jesus promised, 
the witness of their adoption to the divine family. 

This same rest or Sabbath is the privilege of every true child of God 
ever since, "We that believe do enter into rest. " (Heb. 4:3.) 

But no one can enter into a full rest of faith, who does not realize 
Christ as the end of the Law to every one who believeth. (Rom. 
10:4.) To all such, love is the fulfilling of the law. Love to God will 
produce a spirit of obedience, so that we will do so as far as able, 
those things which are well pleasing in his sight; even so far as the 
crucifixion of the flesh with its affections and desires. Thus, "Love 
is the fulfilling of the Law. " (Rom. 13:10. )Thus "The righteousness 
(or spirit) of the Law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh 
but after the spirit. " 

We may rest if we require it, on the seventh or first or any other day 
and be blameless; but if we observe any of these days in an attempt 
to keep the law given to Israel (Gal. 5 :4) but never given to the 
Gentiles nor to Christians, and fulfilled and ended in the person of 
Jesus, even so far as it applied to Israel— has failed to fully 
appreciate the value of Christ's finished work, and failed to 
appreciate his standing as a son, not under the written law which 
was given to the house of servants. 

Such as are seeking to commend themselves to God by works of the 
Law, are not resting but working, for as Paul says- "He that is 
entered into rest has ceased from his own works as God did (rest) 
from his. " (Heb. 4:10.)God rested from his works and committed it 
all to the Son, and we, if we would rest, must cease from our 
works— cease from the law and accept of its legal fulfilment as 
being accomplished once for all in our representative, Jesus. 



When we realize that even were we Israelites, we are no longer 
condemned, but justified by that Law, Jesus having ransomed all 
who were under it; and, that as new creatures in Christ, we are 
under only the "Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus," viz: Love. 
Now we rest well pleased to have it so; and to enjoy this real 
antitypical rest (Sabbath) which Christ gives to the house of sons, 
rather than the type of it given to the house of servants. Thus, by 
letting Christ do it, we rest from our own works as God did from 
his. [As shown in last issue, God rests since his creation of man and 
"has committed all judgment (ruling and administration of earth) 
unto the son. " "The Father worketh hitherto, and (now) I work," 
said Jesus. ] 

There remaineth a rest [Sabbath] for the people of God-when we 
enter fully into all the blessings promised; but let us not only look 
forward to it, with joy, but endeavor to use and enjoy the earnest of 
our inheritance; the sample of our coming rest which is now our 
privilege. "Come unto me and I will give you rest. ""They that 
believe do enter into rest. " 

SUNDAY. 

We are glad that by common consent some one day in the week is 
generally observed as a day for rest from worldly toil. The day 
generally observed— the first day of the week— we regard as 
especially fitting and appropriate, because on the first day of the 
week, Jesus, our Lord, arose from death— and on the first day came 
the Holy Spirit upon the church in the upper room (Pentecost). 
Concerning the name of this day, whether it be called "Sunday," 
"The first-day," "The Sabbath day," or "The Lord's day," we care 
little. At most they are only names, though our preference would 
rather incline to the latter. Our objection to calling it a Sabbath or 
rest day being, first, that to the fleshly Israel, God called the 
seventh day the Sabbath, and there is a liability to confusion of 
thoughts, and a mistaking of the servants' law for the liberty or 
privilege of the Sons of God. Secondly, with most of christians, the 
first day of the week is the one on which they work the most and 
hardest, and consequently it could not appropriately be termed a 
rest or Sabbath. 

We much regret, that even among thinking christians, the "Lord's 
day" and its privileges are so little understood and appreciated. To 
most of them, its observance is but the keeping of the fourth 
command of the Law though they well know that the Law reads 
"The seventh day is the Sabbath," and that the day they observe is 
the first. For the ignorance and superstition and legal dread of the 
Lord's day, the clergy is largely to blame. Many of them doubtless 
fear that if recognized as a privilege, and not as a law, it would be 
violated. But the fear of man always gets us into a snare of the 
devil, and so this fear has borne much poisonous fruit in the church, 
for it has helped to put christians under the Law of Moses, instead 
of under that of Christ- "Love," and thus has deprived many of 



entering into rest. It would be far better that christians should be 
resting fully in Christ and free from the Law-standing fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ has made them free (Gal. 5:1.) both on this 
and other subjects, though the preaching of the truth on the subject 
had left the world at liberty to disregard the "Lord's day. "This age 
we must remember is especially designed for the preparation of the 
body or Bride of Christ, that when they are united or made one with 
him, now in the end of this age, the world may believe during the 
incoming age. 



R315 : page 4 



SON OF GOD. 



There seem to be different senses in which God is a Father; or he is 
a Father of his creatures, on different planes. But there is no 
mother, on either plane. As the Creator of Angels and men, he is 
their Father, and they his sons, though on different planes. 

That the Angels (Spiritual beings) are called sons of God, seems 
evident from several statements; for instance —Job 1:6 and 2:1; 
There was a day when the Sons of God came to present themselves 
before the Lord, and Satan came also among them. 

Also Job 38:7. When the morning stars sang together, and all the 
Sons of God shouted for joy. Man is also a Son of God by creation. 
Luke 3:38 says, Adam was a Son of God. 

Then there is a higher sense in which some are to become sons, not 
only on the spiritual plane, but immortal sons. Those, who present 
their bodies a living sacrifice, and thus suffer with Christ, are made 
partakers of the divine nature, and will be made in the express 
image of God's person-Heb. 1 :3. The body of their humiliation 
changed, and fashioned like Christ's glorious body. Phil. 3:21. Has 
not the Son of God, been a Son, successively, in all of the three 
senses? 

It would seem that he appeared to Abraham, vailed as a man, when 
the three men came to him in the heat of the day; Gen. 18:1,13,22; 
that he was with three Hebrews in the fiery furnace-Dan. 3:25; and 
Daniel saw him as a spiritual being, and fell as a dead man. Dan. 
10. Unquestionably he was the beginning of the Creation, of God in 
his pre-existent state, whatever application may be made of Rev. 
3:14. 

R316:page4 

In due time he was born of a woman, and became a man; and was a 
son of God, as the first Adam— man—, was a son, as seems clear 
from Luke 1:35. 

On that plane he was the second son; and gave himself a ransom for 
the first. The first man's disobedience and death involved the whole 
human family in a state of death; the second man's obedience unto 



death, secured for the same family justification to life— the same life 
that was lost. God sending his own son— son before he came— in the 
likeness of sinful flesh etc. Rom. 8:3. 

The blood of Jesus Christ, his son —son after he came— cleanseth us 
from all sin. 1 Jno. 1 :7. 

Let us examine Phil. 2:5, on, in the light of the new Revision, text, 
and marginal reading by the American Committee. 

Have this mind in you which was also in Christ Jesus: who existing 
in the form of God, counted not the being on an equality with God, 
a thing to be grasped; but emptied himself, taking the form of a 
bond servant, becoming in the likeness of men, etc. 

Here is certainly a clear statement of his pre-existence in God's 
form,— a spiritual being; yet not equal with him; and of a change of 
condition from a spiritual to a human being. He certainly was not 
immortal in either of these phases of his existence. If he had been, 
as a spiritual being, he could not have become a man; and as a man, 
he could not have died; but being found in fashion as a man, he 
humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, yea, the death of 
the cross. 

Wherefore— because of this— God highly exalted him, and gave him 
a name-position and condition— which is above every name. He 
could not "grasp" it himself, but God exalted him; raised him from 
the dead, and now he is the express image of his Father's person, or, 
being the effulgence of his glory, and the very image of his 
substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when 
he had made purifications of sins— by his death,-sat down on the 
right hand of the majesty on high; having become, by so much, 
better than the angels, as he hath inherited a more excellent name 
than they. Heb. 1:3,4. 

Does not Paul have in mind these three phases or planes of sonship 
in Rom. l:3,4?Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an 
apostle, separated unto the gospel of God, which he promised afore 
by his prophets in the holy Scriptures, concerning His Son, who 
was born of the seed of David according to the flesh; who was 
declared to be the Son of God with power, by the resurrection from 
the dead. 

Though we may not be able to explain all the mystery, yet it seems 
that on the last two planes, there was a begetting and birth. Now the 
birth of Jesus— the man— was on this wise; Mary. . . was found with 
child of the Holy Spirit-power of God—. . . that which is conceived 
in her is of the Holy Spirit; and she shall bring forth a son; and thou 
shalt call his name Jesus. Matt. 1:18-21. 

Again in Luke 1 :35. And the Angel answered and said unto her; 
The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most 
High shall overshadow thee; wherefore, also that which is to be 
born shall be called holy, the Son of God. Out of Egypt I did call 
my Son. Luke 2:15. He grew in favor with God and man, and at the 



age of thirty, he made a covenant of death and expressed it by 
baptism; when the Holy Spirit came upon him. Through that Spirit 
he offered himself-his human nature and body- without spot to 
God-Heb. 9:14. — ; and it became the germ of a new nature so 
when he was put to death in the flesh, he was made alive by the 
Spirit— 1 Pet. 3:18; and became a quickening-life giving Spirit. 1 
Cor. 15:45. The perfect natural man was crowned with glory and 
honor, Heb. 2:7, and lost it; but Jesus came to restore him. So he 
was crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace of God, he 
should taste of death for every man -Heb. 2:9; which shows that he 
did not take our fallen nature. And the word became flesh, and 
dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only 
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. For God so loved the 
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but have eternal life. For God sent not his 
Son into the world, to judge the world, but that the world should be 
saved through him. 

Was it the only begotten on the spiritual plane who died?We would 
say on the earthly. 

The man Christ gave himself a ransom for all. 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 
Because he gave his human nature, his heavenly Father gave him 
the divine nature —because he gave his earthly body, God gave him 
a spiritual body. God gives to every seed its own body, as it hath 
pleased him. 1 Cor. 15:38. 

He does with all who present their bodies a living sacrifice, as he 
did with Jesus. Having suffered with him, even unto death, they 
will be glorified with him, to become his body; the fullness or full 
development of him who is filling all things with all-Eph. 1 :23. In 
brief, this completed Christ, having died and lived again, becomes 
Lord-Rom. 14:9; 

R316 : page 5 

or Agelasting Father of the human family restored, by the "better 
sacrifice, "-Heb. 9:23, to the original condition of sons. These 
restored sons, instead of being required to sacrifice the human, to 
become partakers of the divine nature; are given each a hundred 
years to fully develop the human. Isa. 65. 

B. W. KEITH 



R316 : page 5 



ASSEMBLING TOGETHER. 

"Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together. . . and so 
much the more as ye see the day approaching. " (Heb. 10:25.) 

The necessity for the assembling together for mutual edification, 
encouragement and strengthening, has been very generally 
acknowledged among Christians, yet we doubt if this most 



desirable end is very frequently attained— and why? Because we 
think, in most cases, God is not permitted to speak, among them, or 
if so, he is limited. 

These assemblings together, oftenest take the form of prayer and 
experience meetings, unless there is one of the number who is able 
to preach, and then the tendency is to depend upon that one, to a 
greater extent than is profitable. 

The writer attended one of these experience meetings among those 
professing the higher life, where God was almost shut out, and poor 
weak humanity, ignorant of its weakness as it always is, had 
abundant opportunity to boast itself. At the beginning of the 
meeting, one text of scripture was read, the context of which, all 
were ignorant of, and consequently its true application could not be 
understood. The dear old book was closed and reverently laid aside 
and a prayer was offered, after which, one after another told how he 
or she felt and acted. One lady told how she, before rising in the 
morning, received her morsel of food (a single text of scripture) on 
which she fed all day. How many do so— taking a text that happens 
to be stored in memory, often interpreting it out of all harmony with 
the context because they fail to examine it closely, taking a little 
crumb of comfort, when the Lord has spread his bountiful table and 
invited them to feast at it. 

Nearly two hours passed and the human spirit had magnified itself 
greatly, while the holy spirit (God-like mind) of the "new 
creatures," (for such I believe they were) was almost quenched. A 
brother seemed to perceive that something was wrong, and said 
"What these meetings want is more prayer," and then proceeded to 
pray for every thing he could think of, ignorant of the fact that he 
asked for many things in direct opposition to God's expressed will. 
And so the meeting closed without attaining the object for which 
they met, because God was shut out. 

Again, at another of these meetings, one hungry sister ventured to 
ask information with reference to a certain scripture, and was told 
that lest it should provoke controversy, and since they wished to 
have harmony, they would just pass over that, and so she was left 
unfed. 

Now is this right-shall we sell the truth to purchase harmony-and 
are we so puffed up as to be offended if God's word should 
overthrow our former convictions? Or shall we limit God to five or 
ten minutes and take the remainder of two hours to listen to each 
others experiences, which in nine cases out of ten, would be better 
untold? Why not open the doors wide and let the blessed Master 
come in and lead our meetings? 

It matters not whether there is any one learned or talented among 
you. Let each one bring his own Bible, paper, and pencil, and avail 
yourselves of as many helps in the way of a Concordance, Em. 
Diaglott, old and new versions of the New Testament, etc. , as 
possible. Choose your subject; ask for the Spirit's guidance in the 



understanding of it; then read, think, compare scripture with 
scripture, and you will assuredly be guided into truth. "And the 
truth shall make you free"-free from error, superstition, and the 
corruption of our perverse nature, and the Holy Spirit (mind of God 
and Christ) if entertained will liberate you from formality, as well 
as from self-exaltation. 

Our prayers need not be long— or vain repetitions of the same thing, 
since we are not heard for our much speaking. In few and simple 
words, 

R317:page5 

we can make known our wants as far as we can estimate them; but 
God has so much more to tell us than we have to tell him. Let him 
speak, much and long and often-through his WORD. "Sanctify 
them through thy truth, thy word is truth," was Jesus' prayer, and 
his admonition, "Search the Scriptures for these are they that testify 
of me. "(John 17:17 and 5:39. )So will we learn to delight ourselves 
in God's Law; it will be our meditation by night and by day. (Psa. 
1 19:97. )So also will he work in us to will and to do of his good 
pleasure. (Phil. 2:13.) 

R.W. 



R317:page5 

CONSECRATION TO A WORK. 

Among Christians there is much which passes for "entire 
consecration," but it is often a consecration to some self-imposed 
task, or work, instead of to God. 

Some are consecrated and are living sacrifices to business, some to 
their families, some to the temperance work, some to building up a 
denominational church or Sunday School, some to ministering to 
the poor and the sick. These are each good enough in their way, but 
none of these are the proper consecration for a follower of Jesus. 

Our consecration, like that of Jesus, should be to do the will of our 
Father in Heaven. Jesus says he came not to do his own will, but the 
will of Him that sent him. (John 6:38)The fact that you have any 
choice or preference as to what you shall do, is an evidence in 
itself, that your will is not dead. 

Consecration to a work of our own choosing merely, will never 
bring us to the great reward. "I beseech you brethren, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable UNTO 
GOD. "Then, if He sends you into the "temperance work," or into 
any other work, it will be acceptable as unto the Lord. 

If will less, and seeking only to do his will it will bring us to His 
Word much and often, to learn that will, and "He that seeketh 
findeth. "We leave the subject here, merely suggesting that thus 



seeking after, thus consecrating, some who are now— laboring 
chiefly for "the meat that perisheth" or Temperance and moral 
reforms in the world, or for the extension of sectarian church 
influence, would find directions something like the following: 

This is the will of God even YOUR sanctification. (1 Thes. 4:3.) Do 
"good unto all men [in any way] as you have opportunity especially 
to the household of faith. " (Gal. 6:10.) "Forsake not the assembling 
of yourselves together" (Heb. 10:25.) but meet for the purpose of 
"BUILDING UP YOURSELVES on your most holy faith. " (Jude 
20.) 



R317:page5 



INQUIRIES ANSWERED. 

The following letter received recently was handed to Sister Russell 
for answering, and as the points might interest others, we publish. 

DEAR SIR:- 

Sent you a card which you will receive before you see this. Wished 
to ask several questions. I am interested in your paper, am a 
thinking Christian, but not settled in my views, seeking MORE 
LIGHT. Are we to expect revivals and the conversion of sinners 
now? Are we to labor for this result? Is the church coming up 
higher? Are we to come out of the church, take our name off church 
books, or remain in the church and labor to bring the rest upon the 
higher plain; or is each individual to be fully persuaded in his own 
mind and act according to his conscience? Shall I tell my sisters of 
like faith, better come out from among them nominally? In spirit, I 
am far from the majority— this I have called "coming out from 
among them. I want to be right. Will you take the trouble to answer 
"the thinking Christian's questions? Please be plain. Many are 
inquiring. What shall I tell them? I may read your letter (should you 
write one) to others. 

My husband is a Methodist minister. Not preaching this year 
however. 

Tell me plain truth, fear not. 

DEAR SISTER:-Your letter is at hand, many such show us that 
there are very many hungry, thinking christians. Our love and 
sympathy reach out to all such though we have never met face to 
face, and we call them brother and sister because we see in them the 
family likeness-the spirit of Christ. 

You ask if we may expect revivals of religion in the nominal 
church. No, we do not look for any evidence whatever of God's 
favor to this last phase of the nominal Gospel church which is 
spewed out of his mouth, because in her own estimation, she is rich 
and increased in goods (both spiritual and temporal) and has need 
of nothing. See how perfectly the picture of the church of to-day is 



drawn in Rev. 3:14,18. That mixed condition of worldliness and 
lukewarm Christianity we believe to be the Babylon (confusion) of 
Rev. 18:2, out of which (vs. 4) the Lord calls the few of his own 
who still remain in that city doomed to destruction. There will 
probably be some accessions to their membership, but mainly from 
the Sunday Schools-the church is straining every effort to keep up 
appearances and urging immature childhood to join its ranks and 
swell its numbers. But this is not making christians as we 
understand the word. Christians are those who have consecrated 
themselves to the Lord— agree to follow Jesus' footsteps in the 
crucifying of the flesh (the human privileges and honors, etc.) 

All others than the true wheat brought in, help to swell the numbers 
of the tares. Tares are not wicked people necessarily (though some 
are wicked) but people who are out of place in the church- 
imitating Christians in some respects as tares imitate wheat. Those 
who get such into the church nominal, do an injury both to the 
person and to the church. The church is injured by getting a lifeless 
member to absorb its vitality, and who as a representative will serve 
to lower the standard of Christianity. 

The individual is injured by being told that he is a Christian when 
he is not, and thus is worse off than if aware of his own position. 

Surely, then, many people who engage in this improper work, some 
of whom, if not all, think they are doing God service, must be 
mistaken. And this work has been going on for years so that much 
of the wheat has been almost choked with tares. It is not God's 
work but Satan's. The tares do an injury to the church, and Satan 
was instrumental (using God's children as his instruments) in 
getting them into the church to work the havoc they have. "He that 
sowed the tares is the devil," (Matt. 13,) no matter who was willing 
or unwittingly the instrument, (vs. 21). 

With this, I will mail a June No. of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, the 
first article of which ("He on the housetop") will more thoroughly 
answer your question with reference to coming out of Babylon. It is 
of no use, to remain there trying to prop an organization which God 
has doomed to destruction: Better far, to trust his judgment with 
reference to expediency and promptly obey his command as soon as 
he makes it clear. The Lord loves prompt obedience, and then it is a 
great advantage, as it gives no opportunity to confer with flesh and 
blood. 

Since we are in the "harvest" of the age, the work to be done is 
harvest work: The great work of the present is to help to ripen and 
gather into the barn-condition of safety, the true wheat. We would 
"do good to all men especially to the household of faith"-But if we 
find enough of this special work to keep our time fully occupied, 
we have no occasion whatever to worry about the rest of the world; 
for in God's "due time," they shall all be brought to a knowledge of 
the truth "and a full, fair opportunity to gain eternal life, and though 
they may first die (in Adam) the ransom price entitles them to a 



restoration from the Adamic death, and an opportunity to escape the 
second death by obedience to the law of God written in their hearts, 
no more stony but fleshly. (Jer. 31:33.) Then, instead of being 
prone to do evil as the sparks to fly upward, it will be the reverse- 
easy and natural to obey when the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth, and when the Lord rules instead of Satan. 

Knowing God's glorious purposes for the world, Jesus let the 
Gentiles alone and devoted his time entirely to the harvesting of the 
Jewish church. Though Gentiles as well as Jews were constantly 
going down in death, he did not try to save them then, knowing it 
was not yet God's due time. 

I am glad to know that in spirit you are separate from the nominal 
church; I think all of God's true children are. They see the effects, 
but they do not understand the cause of the loss of God's favor to 
her. "Woe to those who are at ease in Zion;" but the Lord will 
"comfort all that mourn in Zion. "When? Isaiah says her condition 
shall be a vexation to such, only till he makes 

R318:page5 

them to understand the doctrine-or the plan of God. And his plan is 
now being made clear to those who can rest their faith on a "thus 
saith the Lord," ignoring entirely the traditions of men. 

R318:page6 

In coming out there are many sacrifices to be made, and you 
especially will find it so. A minister in our city said:Bro. R. , I 
believe these things are true, but it would not be prudent to preach 
them. Husband replied, I would fear to be too prudent in this matter 
since the Lord "hides things from the wise and prudent. "That 
minister had a large family well supported by a fashionable, 
worldly congregation who did not want to be disturbed in their 
sleep. He ventured to preach a little of what he believed and they 
told him it would not do; and to-day he is hiding his light under a 
bushel, or rather, it has gone out and he is walking on, hand in hand 
with the world, flourishing in worldly affairs; yet who can estimate 
that poverty in spiritual things? 

You may be called upon to sacrifice your present means of living, 
but fear not, the Lord will provide another. No man hath forsaken 
all to follow Jesus, who did not receive a hundred-fold in return. It 
was refreshing to read that sentence in your letter- "Tell me plain 
truth, fear not. " I could tell you much more than I have time to 
write at present. The Lord has so wonderfully led me from darkness 
to light, and from husks to corn, that my heart is filled with his 
praise. 

The great sacrifice necessary, has kept the majority of ministers 
from the truth, but thank God, there is some ripe wheat among 
them, not choked by the tares. May God's grace be sufficient for 
you and your dear husband. 



Your Sister in hope, 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R318:page6 

THE BEAST AND HIS IMAGE. 

DIALOGUE-REV. 13. 

READER:-To properly appreciate the following, you should read 
and have clearly in mind, the articles in our last issue, (Dec. 1881,) 
headed: "The Antichrist" and "The Counterfeit of the Kingdom of 
God. " 

B. I am here again Bro. A. , anxious to pursue the investigation of 
Revelation 13, as you suggested at our last meeting. I have long felt 
a deep interest in this chapter, and especially because other 
scriptures refer to the beast and image here described, and say that 
the overcomers get a victory over the Beast and Image and the 
number of his name. My difficulty has been that not understanding 
the significance of these symbols, I could not know whether I had 
gotten a victory over them or not. I shall give earnest heed and 
endeavor to weigh your arguments by the Word of God only, and 
not by the "traditions of the Fathers. " 

A. That is the only proper way to study Scripture. We should come 
to it believing that "It (and it alone) is able to make us wise," (2 
Tim. 3:15,) and it is this class who shall understand. Daniel said-In 
the time of the end many shall run to and fro and knowledge shall 
be increased, and the wise shall understand. To rightly understand 
how it is that certain parts of truth could be hid from all past ages, 
and yet be due to be understood by us now, we should remember, 
that God's Word is a great treasure house in which he has hid in 
past time, all knowledge needful to his children in all ages. It is a 
great storehouse from which his servants may bring forth things 
both new and old— meat in due season for the household of faith. 
(Matt. 24:45.) It is because this truth is generally overlooked or 
disregarded, that so many of the Lord's saints go to old musty 
volumes of the traditions of the Fathers, instead of going to the 
fountain of living truths-The Bible. 

B. When we look at it, this is very dishonoring to the words of 
Jesus which he puts on a par with himself saying, "Whosoever shall 
be ashamed of me and of my words. . . of him also shall the son of 
man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of his Father. " 
(Mark 8:38. )It dishonors the Father also, for Jesus said that his 
spirit would guide us into all truth and show us things to come. 
(John 16:13.) 



A. Let us then commence: I will use the "Emphatic Diaglott" 
translation as it is so much more clear; then you can have the 
benefit of both versions. 

Let me first lay down a simple rule for interpreting some symbols 
found in this chapter. Dragon-civil power, Pagan Rome; Heavens- 
the higher or ruling powers; Earth- the people under, or obedient to 
the ruling powers (heavens); Sea— the general masses of mankind, 
not under religious restraint. 

The first two verses of this chapter, direct our attention to the 
Dragon which in the preceding chapter we found to symbolize the 
Roman Empire; the same which Daniel saw in vision called the 
"fourth beast dreadful and terrible" (Dan. 7:7.)This dragon passed 
its dominion over to a beast which arose out of the sea— a 
government which came up from among the irreligious masses; in 
other words the Roman Empire passed under a new rulership-The 
Leopard Beast— whose mouth was lion like, its body leopard like, 
and its feet bear like. This beast which came into possession of the 
Dragon's seat and power, we understand to be Papacy: it 
corresponds to the "man child" of the preceding chapter. It has 
certain qualities which resemble the first three beasts of Daniel 7, 
viz: the Lion, Bear and Leopard-described as representing 
Babylon, Persia, and Greece. This new Beast then, would combine 
certain leading characteristics of the preceding empires and unite 
them in the power of the last-the Roman. 

Babylon was celebrated for its splendor and its pride-the Lion the 
king or ruler of all beasts— so Papacy had a mouth of this sort, i. e. , 
it claimed to be the kingdom over all kingdoms by divine right-the 
kingdom of God, which was to break in pieces and consume all 
others— a strong mouth. 

The bear's feet suggest another of Papacy's peculiarities as an 
empire— viz: persistency. Like the Bear Empire (Medo Persia) 
which would besiege for years, and even turn a river aside from its 
channel to accomplish its ends; so Papacy moves cautiously, and 
gets possession of kingdoms rather by strategy than by battle. This 
same quality is illustrated in the bear; it hugs its prey to death with 
its paws. 

The body of the Papal beast was like a Leopard. The Leopard was 
the third beast seen by Daniel- viz: Grecia. Greece was noted as the 
center of learning, piety and wisdom (Acts 17:23): so Papacy's 
chief claim, to be the ruler of all kingdoms, is based on the claim 
that it is the center of wisdom, learning and piety. Other 
peculiarities of the Leopard are its activity, vigilance and 
secretiveness; so with Papacy. Again, a Leopard is spotted 
irregularly, so too Papacy's policy varies in various parts of the 
earth: In enlightened liberal countries it is liberal, in other places it 
varies in its rulings to suit the circumstances. 

This Leopard beast (Ecclesiastical Empire) is given the power, seat, 
and great authority of the [Dragon] Pagan Roman Empire, and for a 



time becomes the only representative of that dominion— the various 
horns (kingdoms) rendering allegiance and support to it. * 

"And the whole world wondered, after the beast, and they 
worshiped the Dragon because he gave the authority to the BEAST, 
saying, "Who is like unto the BEAST, and who is able to make war 
with him?" (Vs. 3,4.) 

The people respected this BEAST because of its peculiarities- 
leopard body and lion mouth-and they respected the civil power all 
the more, because it had so honored ecclesiastical authority. The 
various kingdoms (horns) soon learned that their hold of power 
over the people was strengthened, rather than weakened by 
allegiance to Papacy, for Papacy in turn recognized them and 
commanded the people to recognize those despots as of divine 
appointment. 

Thus it is, that to this day, the rulers of Europe claim to rule by 
divine right and appointment and their children after them, no 
matter how incapable. For the same reason the Protestant churches 
of Europe, to gain national favor, protection, and assistance, 
became State churches and they, as Papacy did, recognize the 
reigning families as possessed of Divine title to the office, and 
rulership of the people. [God's Word on the contrary, denounces all 
the governments of earth, as selfish, oppressive, and beastly, and 
recognizes only one kingdom as being of God's appointment, viz: 
the kingdom soon to be established in all the earth-Christ and his 
saints IN GLORY. (Danl. 7:27. Rev. 11:15. 2 Tim. 2:12.) It is in 
that kingdom only that the saints have their citizenship-it alone 
they recognize and for it pray "Thy kingdom COME. " 

B. But Bro. A. , has not the reign of that kingdom in some sense 
commenced? Do we not add in the same prayer Thine is the 
kingdom, etc. ? (Matt. 5:13, Luke 11:4.) 

A. No Brother, this is the time to suffer ignominy with him at the 
hands of the World, as a test of our worthiness to reign with him 
when he shall take (use) his great power and reign. It is not until 
about the close of the Seventh Trumpet's sounding, that the 
kingdoms of earth become the kingdoms of our Lord and his 
anointed (body— church). Then you know, we are told they will be 
angry and his wrath must first come before they are obedient. (Rev. 
11:18.) These are so deceived by this false teaching of Papacy, still 
continued to some extent, by all of the reformation churches, that it 
naturally 



*It should be remembered that the church of Rome consists only of 
the clergy-the Pope, the "Father" and all Bishops, Priests, Monks, 
etc. , "brothers. " 

R319 : page 6 



makes both people and rulers angry, to intimate that the Devil is the 
prince of these governments. (Eph. 2:2.) Certainly many of their 
deeds are worthy of such a diabolical head. 

As to your quotation from the Lord's prayer, "Thine is the kingdom, 
etc. ," you should remember that we found that to be an addition 
made to the original prayer during Papacy's rule. It is lacking in all 
ancient copies of the N. T. and is properly omitted in the new 
revision. No Brother, nothing in God's Word countenances the idea 
that these oppressive governments are God's, nor recognized by 
him except as parts of evil— to be wiped out by the exaltation of the 
real Christ, head and body, glorious spiritual beings, to the 
Ecclesiastical dominion which for several hundred years was 
counterfeited by Papacy-the chief Antichrist. 

But to return to the subject: The people respected the BEAST 
saying: "Who is able to make war with him? —who would be able 
to withstand the withering curse of Papacy, the spiritual empire? 

"And there was given him a mouth (Lion-like— strong— terrible 
utterance) speaking great and blasphemous things;" [The utterances 
we examined at our last interview, as you will recall. —Dec. '81.] 
"and authority was given him to act forty-two months. " (Vs. 
5.)This permission we understand to have been— to execute and put 
to death saints of God, which it called "heretics. "These 42 
symbolic months, or 1260 days are the same as mentioned in the 
preceding chapter and also foretold by Daniel (12:7) as 3-1/2 times 
(years). With the end of those 1260 years, Papacy's power to act-or 
execute for heresy, ended -1798. There the delusion that none 
could successfully war or contend with Papacy was shown, when 
Napoleon in defiance of the curse, took Pope Pius VI. a prisoner to 
Paris where he died. The dread of this BEAST has not been so great 
since, and the various horns (kingdoms) which once defended, have 
made war with the woman. (The dominion has been taken away.) 
(Rev. 17:16.) 

Now we turn back again to see how this BEAST succeeded during 
its career of power. We read (vs. 6): "And he opened his mouth in 
blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name and his 
tabernacle, and those who tabernacle in heaven. " 

This BEAST power was a slur upon God and upon the true coming 
kingdom. Verses 7 and 8 ("New Vers. " "Diaglott "rendering 
poor.)" And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and 
to overcome them; and there was given to him authority over every 
tribe and people and tongue and nation. "[Papacy's authority as a 
spiritual empire or "kingdom of God,"-was generally 
acknowledged. ] "And all that dwell on the earth shall worship him- 
-every one whose name hath not been written in the book of life, of 
the Lamb that hath been slain from the foundation of the world. " 

The deception of Papacy was so complete that the World was 
deceived and all the church, except the overcomers, whose names 
were "written in heaven" were deceived in the same way, and 



hasted to unite themselves with, and to worship the BEAST, and 
have it enroll their names on its books. From this has sprung the 
delusion so common to all Protestants at this day —viz: That their 
names must be connected with some SUCH earthly church system, 
or they are not the Lord's saints. But, the important item is, to have 
our names recorded in the Lamb's book of life-His is the only 
record of any value. 

"If any man hath an ear, let him hear. " (Vs. 9.)Only those whose 
ears had been circumcised— those who had come to a considerable 
knowledge of God's word and who had the hearing of faith-to 
respect him and his word, despite the magnificence, success and 
power of error, would be able to receive the foregoing statements 
concerning those who were deceived 

R319:page7 

by Papacy: that they were of those unwritten in the true church, of 
which that was the counterfeit. 

"If any one is for captivity, into captivity he goes away; if any one 
will kill with the sword, with the sword must he be killed. Here is 
the patient endurance and the faith of the saints. " (Vs. 10.) 

The Papal system was one of bondage. All who acknowledged its 
claims must of necessity render implicit obedience, as unto God; 
for it claimed to be the Kingdom of Heaven; and its head, the Pope, 
to be God's vicegerent; consequently those who were for, or in 
favor of such a captivity of individual thought, and who 
acknowledged the right of that Papal system to limit and define the 
faith of all, by consenting, became captives. 

Many Protestant sects have got into the same snare of the devil, and 
are vainly striving to make a dominion by blending church and 
state. 

On the other hand, there were some who asserted that Papacy was a 
usurpation of the titles and power of the true head and ruler of the 
church, and claimed their right to the individual liberty wherewith 
Christ had made them free. Such used, the "sword of the spirit, 
which is the Word of God," in the defense of their liberty, and such 
were put to death by Papacy-it overcame the saints during its 1 260 
years of power. This was a severe test of true saintship— Would they 
go into captivity and join in the usurpers ranks, or would they 
remain faithful to the true king and wait for the kingdom which he 
promised to establish? Those whose names were written in heaven, 
stuck to the sword and sealed their testimonies by death. 

THE TWO-HORNED BEAST. 

"And I saw another wild beast ascending from the earth, and he 
had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon. " (Vs. 1 l.)If 
the preceding wild beast represented an ecclesiastical power, as we 
have just seen, then this beast called another should be understood 
to represent a similar ecclesiastical or church power. 



As the first beast had ten horns, or powers which gave it their 
strength and protection, so this beast has "two horns" which 
indicates that two powers or governments will support it. 

B. Could this refer to Mohammedanism? 

A. No, I think not; this revelation was not given to be a general 
history of the world, but was a revelation given to the church, and 
relates to matters and things closely related to the church's history. 
There is no reason, for giving an account of Mohammedanism; for 
the same reason that it would have been useless to give a history of 
Confucianism, or Buddhism. None of these were Christian systems, 
and though they were all anti-christian, yet they were openly so and 
not so harmful to real Christianity. Papacy on the contrary, is 
mentioned because it attempted to palm itself off as the kingdom of 
Christ and to deceive, while really, it was the Dragon or Roman 
Empire united to an apostasy. 

Again, notice that this beast "ascended (came gradually) out of the 
earth," while the first one came out of the Sea. Now, if our 
definitions of these symbols be correct— as the coming of Papacy 
from among the irreligious masses of the Roman empire, was 
shown by its coming out of the "sea," then the coming of this 
second beast out of the "earth" should signify that it sprung up 
among a professedly religious people. 

B. I see the force of this: But can it refer to any of the branches of 
the Protestant churches? 

A. I understand that the wounding of the Papal head, (referred to in 
vs. 3,) by the sword, (vs. 14) refers to the Reformation work, when 
Luther, Zwingli, Calvin, Knox, and others, by advocating the 
teachings of the Word of God, as opposed to the teachings of 
Papacy, showed that it was the system referred to in Revelations, 
and in Paul's writings called the "Mystery of Iniquity"— "Anti- 
Christ" -"The Man of Sin. "They struck so mightily at this Papal 
head, that the system had well nigh died; but as the cause of the 
Protest-ants became more popular, the sympathies of some in 
power came to be exercised on their behalf. Soon various small 
German kingdoms (princedom's) were found on the side of the 
Reformers, and lent their sanction to them rather than to Papacy. 
Soon Belgium, Holland, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and others, 
withdrew all allegiance to their former head and RULER-the Pope; 
and though not acknowledging Luther, Calvin, or other, as a new 
head or spiritual emperor, they supported the various Reformation 
churches with state funds and protection. About this time also, (A. 
D. 1531) the church in England threw off her allegiance to Rome 
and became a separate ecclesiastical government. It thus followed 
exactly the example of Papacy, in blending civil with ecclesiastical 
power, and made the same person, Henry VIII. and his successors, 
head of all power. 

The effect of this governmental favor upon the teachings of the 
reformers, can well be imagined. Once they had complained about 



empire and church being united in Papacy; had shown that the 
Virgin espoused to Christ awaiting His kingdom, was unfaithful to 
him (therefore termed a Harlot) when she united with, and leaned 
for support upon earthly powers. This part of their smiting with the 
"Sword of the Spirit," soon ceased, as they began to regard the 
favor and smile of earthly governments upon themselves. They 
could not consistently condemn in Papacy, what they themselves 
had come to enjoy and crave. It was their desire (lust) for power, 
name, and influence, to do a great work, and have many children, 
that led these daughters of Rome to follow the example of their 
mother- "Babylon the great, the mother of harlots. " (Rev. 17:5.) 

But, Brother B. , do not forget that we are now talking of church 
SYSTEMS, and not of all who are under, or bound by, and serving 
those systems. We believe that the Lord has had dear children in all 
of these (Papal mother, as well as her daughters), who, in 
supporting them, verily think they do God service. This is the 
delusion which induced all but a few to respect the Papal BEAST as 
the 

R320 : page 7 

true empire of Christ, instead of waiting for "the Lord from heaven. 
" From that ancient snare and deception of the devil, all the 
consecrated saints need to be liberated, and nothing but truth can 
liberate. The coming out of Babylon was commenced by the 
Reformers; but, as we have seen, their followers made only a brief 
journey, until to a great extent they fell into the same "snare of the 
fowler. " 

B. There are some who have evidently made more progress than 
those state churches you refer to in Europe. All the churches in U. 
S. of America are free and unsupported by the government. 

A. Yes, knowledge and liberty in general are opponents of religious 
bondage and bigotry; but in many of these free organizations it is 
more because they cannot, than that they would not be supported 
by, and united to, civil power. 

B. Well, now I am anxious to find proof of the second- the TWO 
HORNED BEAST. It cannot be all of those churches, can it?It must 
be some one church system, just as Papacy was one church system. 

A. Exactly, it is one ecclesiastical system; and the two horns show 
that it is supported, and its authority recognized by two kingdoms. 

B. Let me see: the Presbyterian church is the established church of 
Scotland, but of no other country; that would be but one horn. The 
Dutch Reformed church is the established church of a number of 
countries; that would be too many; and the same is true of the 
Lutheran. 

A. Hold on, Bro. B. !You fall into a very natural mistake. 
Remember that to be simply aided, or supported by the empire does 
not make a symbolic "BEAST"; no, a BEAST is a government, and 



to become a symbolic beast, a church must needs become an 
element in, or part of the government. This was not the case in 
those you have mentioned. No, there is but one church which this 
symbol fits perfectly, viz. : The established "Church of England and 
Ireland. " This system, like the Papal, was a blending of church and 
state— an ecclesiastical empire. 

In the year 1200 England became subject to the Pope. In 1531, 
owing to a dispute between her king, Henry Vm. , and the Pope, 
England withdrew from allegiance to Papacy. The Convocation of 
its clergy, called the same year, in its decrees, declared King Henry 
VIII. to be "The one protector of the English Church, its only and 
SUPREME LORD; and as far as might be, by the law of Christ, 
ITS SUPREME HEAD. "I quote the very words. 

B. I am astonished; why those are the exact sentiments of Papacy; 
that is exactly the sense in which the Pope is recognized as Christ's 
Vicegerent. What a glorious representative of Jesus they had in 
Henry VIII. , who, out of six wives, was divorced from two; 
beheaded two; and by many is supposed to have poisoned one. He 
was a worthy rival of some of the Popes as an Anti-christian 
claimant of headship to the church. 

B. The reformation movement had not reached England at this time, 
and certainly it was much needed. The Clerical Convocation which 
could acknowledge such a head was certainly not far from being as 
corrupt as Papacy. 

The fact that the title, "head of the church," was not an empty 
honor, may be judged from the historian's words- "At the same time 
it was ordained that no regard should be paid to censures which the 
Pope might pass on account of this law, and that Mass should be 
said and sacraments administered as usual. In 1534 all payments 
made to the apostolic chamber, and dispensations were abolished; 
monasteries were subjected to royal government, and exempted 
from all other; the right to summon Convocations, approve or reject 
canons [laws or doctrines enacted by the Convocation of clergy] 
and hear appeals from the Bishops, was vested in the King alone. 
Though now honored with the title of SUPREME HEAD OF THE 
CHURCH ON EARTH, Henry contemplated no change in the 
doctrines of the church; as then held. Indeed, it was not until 30 
years or more after these steps, that the Roman Catholics and the 
Reformers [of the English Church] were looked upon as separate 
bodies, or had separate ministrations and separate places of 
worship. " 

Relative to the establishment of "the Church of England" as 
separate from the Papal church, another historian says: 
"Convocation declared that the Pope had no more authority in 
England, than any other bishop. The act of supremacy was passed, 
making Henry the head of the church, which act has been described 
as the epitome of all the measures which had been passed against 
the encroachments of the spiritual powers [of Rome] within and 



without the realm; and, as being at once, the symbol of the 
independence of England, and the declaration that thenceforth the 
civil magistrate was supreme within the English dominions over 
church as well as state. " 

B. I am inclined to think that these matters are very imperfectly 
understood by people in general. But are the same titles- "Supreme 
head of the church on earth," etc. , still applied to English 
sovereigns? 

A. Yes; and furthermore the crown worn shows the title, for it is 
surmounted by a cross. And the present "Great Seal of England," 
besides describing Victoria as the defender of the faith, illustrates it 
by a picture of the Queen, supported on either side by figures 
representing Justice and Religion, which sit at her feet. The Queen 
is shown as holding in her hand a globe (representing the earth), the 
upper half of which is light colored (representing Christianity), and 
this surmounted by a cross which in symbol declares her to be the 
supporter or head of the church universal. 

This is the same exactly, as you see in the hands of the Popes in 
many pictures. It represents as a whole that this head of the church 
on earth, is the upholder, supporter of the truth. 

Now, I need not remark that Jesus never gave this office to any one, 
but claims it himself; and any others who claim it are usurpers. Paul 
said: "Christ is the head of the church; " and that we are to "grow up 
into him in all things, which is the head even Christ. "Again he 
repeats that God "gave Him to be the Head over all things to the 
church, which is His body. " (Eph. 1:22; and 4:15; and 5:23; and 
Col. 1:18. )It is the church on earth that Paul is speaking of, hence 
any Pope, Queen, Council, Assembly, Conference, or any other 
man or company of men, who claim or exercise the powers of the 
true HEAD-Jesus, are opposing him. And all who support such by 
influence, presence, or money, are abettors of evil, and supporters 
of false SYSTEMS. 

B. Now let us proceed— I am anxious to see whether this system 
(the English Church) fills the picture fully. The second BEAST had 
two horns; what two kingdoms (horns) supported this Church? 
Surely not Scotland; it has persistently refused its support and 
recognizes and supports the Presbyterian Church. 

A. Don't forget the distinction we noticed between a church 
supported by a government, as in Scotland, and 

R320 : page 8 

a church united in the government, as in England— we have seen 
that it is the latter relationship which constitutes a BEAST. 

Now let us see about the two horns: England of course was one of 
them, and I think I can give you satisfactory evidence that Ireland 
was the other. History says that in 1537 the Irish Parliament in 
Dublin "passed the act of supremacy, declaring Henry VIII. 



SUPREME HEAD OF THE CHURCH, prohibiting intercourse 
with the court of Rome, and making it treason to refuse the oath of 
supremacy. "Henry VIII. also took the title of King of Ireland. " 
Thus we see that the second horn came up within the brief space of 
five years after the first. 

B. That fits well, indeed. The fact that Ireland was not a powerful 
horn matters not, for it was stronger than some that supported the 
Papal beast. I never saw a better case; surely we have, beyond a 
question, the SECOND BEAST, which has so puzzled all the 
commentators, though they saw clearly that Papacy was the 
Leopard. What effect results, from the disestablishment of the 
Church in Ireland? 

A. From 1538 to 1871-333 years -the title of the church was "The 
Church of England and Ireland," thus recognizing both horns. " 

On January 1, 1871 (by action of parliament and the consent of the 
Queen, the head of the church) the Irish Church was disestablished, 
or that horn cast off. So, too, all of the horns which once supported 
Papacy have broken off from her; the difference being that in 
Papacy's case the horns have turned against her, and in the case of 
the second BEAST it casts off the Irish horn of itself, believing it to 
be a weakness rather than a strength. And it would not be at all 
remarkable if the second horn (England) would be separated from 
this beast (i. e. , it would not be surprising if soon the church were 
to be separated from the state in England.)The "two horns like a 
lamb," would seem to indicate that this BEAST would be peaceably 
inclined-not inclined to be aggressive, but merely using the horns 
for defense. 

B. I cannot see how the next part fits-He spake like the Dragon. 
This would seem to mark its utterances as being worse than 
Papacy's, which is not true. 

A. But notice that it does not say the, but a dragon. We understand 
this to mean simply that its utterances resembled those of a purely 
civil (dragon) power, and in its words there would be little, to 
denote that it is an ecclesiastical government. All know how true 
this is. 

"And all the authority of the first beast [Papacy] he executes in his 
presence [this shows that the second does not take the place of the 
first beast, but that they exist contemporaneously], and makes the 
earth and those who dwell in it to worship [respect] 

R321 : page 8 

the first beast whose mortal wound was healed. " 

B. I can see, I think, how that verse was fulfilled. The Church of 
England claimed all the powers and authority which Papacy 
claimed. It claimed to be THE church; it acknowledged and 
repudiated some of the corruptions complained of by the reformers, 
such as the sale of indulgences, transubstantiation, etc. , and 



abandoned those as well as the name Roman, for which they 
substituted the word HOLY, calling it the original "Holy Catholic 
Church. "It claims the same governmental authority and the same 
veneration for its decrees as Papacy. * 

And by establishing a similar system, devoid of some of the grosser 
Papal errors, it attracted attention of all to those errors, as being the 
only possible fault of Papacy. And when some of those errors were 
shortly after discarded by Papacy, the inference was that both 
BEAST systems were right. People at that day, as now, seemed to 
think those systems proper and right, if their powers, etc. , were 
properly exercised; but from God's standpoint the systems are 
abominations, and wrong from the very center. 

The systems are based upon errors, and, like a corrupt tree, "cannot 
bring forth good fruit. " 

B. Name the principal error. 

A. The very basis of both those systems, is their claim to be the 
"Kingdom of God" in reigning power. That idea once admitted 
justifies their persecution of individuals and nations, forcing them 
to submit and bow in obedience. Scripture accords those powers to 
the "kingdom of God"-when "the kingdom is the Lords, and he is 
the Governor among the nations; all the ends of the world shall 
remember and turn unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the 
nations shall worship before thee. " Psa. 22:27,28. He shall "dash 
them in pieces as a potter's vessel. " Psa. 2:9. Unto him every knee 
shall bow and every tongue confess. (Phil. 2:1 1.) And if their claim 
be GOOD, who can object to them for carrying out the scriptural 
statements? 

B. These Anti-christs, to make their claims of kingdom power 
appear true, had simply to take another step in compelling 
obedience, backing up their right to do so, by the Scriptures just 
quoted. And not only was this great evil sanctioned, but their claim 
once admitted, that the kingdom was established and the reign in 
progress, those who admitted it were hindered from looking for the 
true HEAD of the church; to set up the true kingdom under the 
whole heavens, which SHALL break in pieces present imperfect 
governments— establish righteousness in the earth and cause every 
knee to bow and every tongue to confess to the glory of God. 

A. Yes, I agree with you; the next verses say, "And he does great 
signs, so that even fire he makes to come down from heaven to the 
earth in presence of men. " (Vs. 13.)This government, like Papacy's 
claimed heavenly power, and its denunciations, were regarded as 
from heaven, judgments or fire being called down upon offenders. 

"And he deceives those who dwell on the earth by the signs which 
it was given him to do in the presence of the [first] BEAST. " (Vs. 
14.)We make a distinction between the earth and those who dwell 
on it. As the EARTH symbolizes those obedient to and supporting 
the BEAST, so "those dwelling on the earth," we understand to 



mean independent Christians who do not support either of these 
systems. 

THE IMAGE OF THE BEAST. 

"Saying to them that dwell on the earth [independent companies of 
Christians] that they should make an IMAGE TO THE BEAST 
[Papacy], which had the wound by a sword and did live. "She 
advised this by her example. From the year 1 800 to 1 846 was a 
time in which great numbers of new sects arose, whereas before 
that they were few and prominent. This gave rise to uneasiness 
among the various older denominations, who wondered whereunto 
this thing would lead. As the Bible came to be read more and more 
by the masses, occasional individuals would feel free to preach 
what they thought it taught, regardless of denominational creeds 
and the views of older sects. As a consequence Protestants were fast 
splitting up into fragments. They began to say, By what means shall 
we check and stop this disposition to individual thought and 
opinion relative to the teachings of Scripture? They wanted to stop 
the very thing God desired, viz. : that each individual should be free 
and independent of restraint, with his faith based, not on the views 
of others, not on the decisions of councils or presbyteries, nor in the 
decision of the Pope, nor in the things approved of the HEAD of the 
English Church, but in the WORD OF GOD. 

The question came— How can we restrain these preachers? This was 
a quandary to all except the Roman and Episcopal Churches, since 
these both claimed the "Apostolic Succession," and that this by 
ordination, conferred upon their ministers special power and 
authority to preach and to administer the "Sacraments"; hence that 
no others had a right to do so, but were clerical pretenders. Other 
denominations could not claim this continuation of apostolic power 
through their preachers, but simply set them apart by prayer, 
consequently those of one denomination could not object, that the 
preachers of other denominations, as well as all laymen, were not as 
truly authorized of God to expound the Scriptures as their own 
clergy. 

But the example of the church of England showed what a prestige 
she had by reason of the voice of authority with which she 
commanded a reverence for her clergy and her teachings. This 
teaching by example was not lost. The various denominations felt a 
necessity for some common STANDARD OF DOCTRINE which 
would be supported and upheld by all of them, and thus give 
prestige to their teachings, and bring the combined influence of all, 
AGAINST ANY FURTHER ADVANCE IN KNOWLEDGE or the 
development of any different phase of TRUTH. Thus they would 
protect themselves by being able to say-The combined opinion of 
all Protestants is against you; therefore you are HERETICS, and 
therefore we will shun you, and not call you brethren, but use all 
our influence against you. 



This was done by the formation in 1846, of the "Evangelical 
Alliance. " It was stated to be one of the objects of the Alliance 
(and we believe the principal one) to "Promote between the 
different EVANGELICAL denominations, an effective co- 
operation in the efforts to REPEL COMMON ENEMIES and 
DANGERS. " 

B. I do not understand you to oppose the Christians represented in 
that alliance, but their attempt to muzzle truth, and to prevent the 
opening up of any other truths buried by Papacy, than those which 
they had received. 

A. Quite right, it is far from my wish to say they purposely 
combined against the unfolding of truth, nor would I say this of 
Papists. But I do say, that by their action they were following 
Papacy's tactics, and that in that Alliance they did make, the- 
IMAGE OF THE BEAST. 

And they have been in great measure successful. Very few 
denominations have sprung up since that Alliance put its measuring 
line upon men's minds, to decide what was, and what was not 
Evangelical, regardless of whether it be Scriptural or not. It has 
tended to make a separation clear and distinct between Clergy and 
Laity, as though they were of different races. 

How much the IMAGE resembles the Papal BEAST may be judged 
from the fact that Papacy acknowledged the image— owned it as a 
creditable likeness-by the Pope's sending "GREETINGS" to the 
last meeting of the "Ev. Alliance"- 1879. Strange to say the 
delegates to the Alliance had so far lost sight of the principles and 
doctrines which led to the protests against the Papal church, (that it 
was the Harlot church- Anti-Christ and Man of sin, mentioned in 
Scripture) that they actually felt FLATTERED by the Pontiffs 
notice, instead of becoming alarmed and examining how and WHY 
he who is "THE (chief) Antichrist," should feel pleased to greet 
them as follows. A prominent Presbyterian minister present at the 
above named meeting, mentioned the "Pope's Greeting" with 
evident pleasure and satisfaction, to the writer. 

A prominent characteristic of the BEAST copied by the image is 
the honoring of the special class, the clergy, with special honors 
and titles. They are known as Revs. , Divines, etc. , but Jesus THE 
divine, said: "Ye call me Lord and Master, and ye say well, for so I 
am. ""Be not ye called Rabbi, neither be ye called Master, for one is 
your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren" (Matt. 23:8). 
These titles are assumptions fashioned after those of Papacy. 

When the various denominations began their existence, more full of 
the spirit of Christ they claimed no such high sounding titles. The 

Reformers were not known as Rev. , D. D. , &c. , but 

as John Knox, Martin Luther, John Wesley, &c. Unpretentious, like 
Jesus and the Apostles, they were intent upon serving God and 
therefore became the servants (ministers) of the church. These had 
marks of God's approval, and as a result, their ministry was 



wonderfully blest. But now the clergy are far from being servants, 
they are Lords. They have itching ears, loving the approval of men. 
As pride and worldliness have come in, vital godliness and power 
have gradually departed. 

For the very same reason, they are losing all power to expound the 
Word of God-the gift of teaching-because "God abhorreth the 
proud but giveth grace (favor) to the humble. "The early reformers 
were humble, and God led them into much knowledge of His Word, 
and although we are much farther along "the path of the just," and 
the servants should have 

R322 : page 8 

more light, yet we find ministers of all denominations ready to 
confess their ignorance of the Word. They appeal for their 
information, back to the early reformers, and thus confess that they 
have less light than they. Pride always has hindered growth in grace 
and does now. "How can ye believe who receive honor one of 
another, and seek not the honor which comes from God, only?" 
That their light should grow dim 

R322 : page 9 

and their spiritual life become dwarfed is the natural result of their 
joining the IMAGE and subscribing to creeds made in the fifteenth 
century, which, like the iron shoe of China, will not admit of any 
growth. It is a shoe a little larger than Papacy put upon its 
followers, but of the same sort. 

Papacy established the clerical hierarchy, who lord it over God's 
heritage instead of serving their brethren as Jesus explained- "One 
is your Master and all ye are brethren," and as Paul said- We are to 
speak the truth in love and "grow up into Him in all things who is 
the head, even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined 
together (not by creeds of men, but by love begotten by the one 
Spirit of truth) and compacted by that which every joint supplieth. " 
(Every joint is every member, not the clergy only.)"Maketh 
increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love. "Thus 
coming "to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son 
of God. "Eph 4:15,16. 

As Papacy established the priesthood over the church, so 
Protestantism has established almost the same, and there is no 
opportunity for the body to edify itself, every joint taking part. 
True, there is a seeming show of liberty at prayer-meetings, etc. , 
but it is only upon the surface, for the ordained pastor is to watch 
zealously lest anything contrary to the teachings of his church 
should be expressed, and if so to silence the audacious member at 
once, for the church creed is the rule, not the Word of God. If this is 
not sufficient, they must have a sort of church trial and 
excommunicate him ["kill him"]. The trial, by the way, gives 
evidence of another likeness to the beast, namely, the exaltation of 



the teachings of the organization above the Word of God, for all 
such are tried according to "the authorities" of their church. 

"And it was given him [the two horned beast] to give life to the 
image of the Beast. " (Vs. 15.) 

It may not be known to many how much stress was laid upon the 
"Apostolic succession," which was supposed to be a virtue 
transmitted through hundreds of years of Papal corruption, by the 
laying on of the hands of Bishops. This, of course, was vested in the 
Roman church and also in the English church, on account of its 
being at first, rather a secession from Papacy, than a reformation. 

To many minds, even among the clergy, there was a veneration for 
that ceremony, which neither Papacy nor the English Church were 
averse to promoting. 

In the introduction of Methodism in the United States much 
difficulty was experienced because of Mr. John Wesley's 
superstition on this subject. He would not sanction the giving of the 
"Sacrament" by any except those ordained by the holy hands of an 
Episcopal Bishop. Thus up to 1784, Methodists could only partake 
of the Sacraments from Episcopal ministers (ordained). The 
independence war tended to make the Methodist preachers 
independent, and the expediency of taking the authority was 
discussed. John Wesley heard of this, and applied to the English 
Church to have at least one Methodist minister ordained for the 
American Church. Finally, in despair, he did the best he knew how 
to patch up an "apostolic succession. "He with two other ministers 
(none of them bishops) ordained Thomas Coke to the office of 
Bishop, and from this sprang the office of Bishop in the M. E. 
Church. 

I relate this only to show the superstition of even so great and good 
men as the Wesleys, on this subject. 

Now, none of these allied sects had the succession except the 
Episcopal, and its recognition of the Alliance (Image) gave it 
vitality-breath- authority, "That the image of the beast should both 
speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the IMAGE 
OF THE BEAST, should be killed. " (Vs. 15.) 

The worship and the killing are symbolic as well as the Image, and 
this signifies that all who will not bow to the decrees of the 
Evangelical Alliance shall be esteemed as heretics, shunned and 
cast out by all who are ORTHODOX, (?) i. e. , all who worship its 
decrees and agree to believe neither more nor less than is stated in 
its nine articles of creed. Now the various sects have a sort of 
backing in this organization, and each may act as the mouthpiece of 
the Image, in denouncing as heresy, all matter not included in this 
general creed, and in cutting off or ecclesiastically beheading those 
who differ. (See Rev. 20:4.) 



B. I see, and to be cut off from any one church now, implies 
dismemberment from all orthodox churches; which implies of 
course, that you are a heretic, and not at all a son of God. 

A. Yes, to all who regard these earthly institutions as the real 
churches; but to those of us who regard only the heavenly 
organization, and who look for the smile of the true Head of the 
church only, and who accept His Word as the only limitation of 
faith and knowledge; such cannot worship either the BEAST or his 
IMAGE, after they come to realize it, but will "worship God" only. 

IMAGE worship is hindering hundreds from seeing the beauties of 
the Word of God. They may perhaps glance at it, and for a moment 
think for themselves, but that is all. The church discipline is so 
strict, and they reverence it so much, that a look or frown is 
sufficient to warn them that independent thought is a dangerous 
thing, and must not be indulged in, lest they be regarded as infidels. 
Would that all could see that these local organizations called 
churches are not THE CHURCH, but that the Church of God 
includes all Christians, all whose names are written in Heaven, and 
that when these local organizations attempt to come between them 
as children, and God their Father, or to put their creed instead of the 
Word of God, their assumed authority is not to be recognized, nor 
tolerated; and that it is our duty to rebuke it as sinful. 

"And he causes all, the little [humble] and the great, the rich and the 
poor, and the freemen and bondmen, that they should give 
themselves a mark on their right hand, or on their forehead; so that 
no one may be able to buy or sell unless he who has the MARK- 
the name of the beast or the number of his name. " (Vss. 16,17.) 

All classes of Christians must bow; all must, in some way, give 
evidence of their support of the Image and consecration to its 
interests and laws; either a public, open profession of being 
members of the alliance, and hence supporters (mark in forehead) 
or at least a giving of some assistance and influence to the 
principles of Image organization- (the right hand support). 

B. How about the buying and selling? 

A. That, like the other features, is symbolic: The buying and 
selling, refers to dealing in spiritual things. None may be 
recognized as having any right to teach or preach or baptize or 
administer the emblems of our Lord's death, except those 
LICENSED to do so by some orthodox member of the Image. And 
acts of such persons are not counted valid. 

B. Truly these things fit together wonderfully; nor should it surprise 
us that in giving an account of the church and its later times, all 
three of these great systems should be mentioned thus by our Lord. 
The English Church system is certainly a BEAST in the same sense 
as Papacy was, with the different characteristics noted; and the 
Evangelical Alliance is certainly a perfect IMAGE of it. It is what 
in politics or business would be termed a "ring "-a religious ring or 



monopoly, organized to hinder others from going into the work of 
truth seeking. 

A. You will notice that this 17th verse indicates that the name is the 
mark— the name of the Beast or the number of his name. "The next 
verse seems to indicate, that this name and number are, in some 
sense, a secret, and that it will indicate wisdom, or a correct 
knowledge of the foregoing symbols, if we are able to solve the 
mystery of the name which is symbolically given as 666. "Here is 
wisdom. Let him who has understanding [of the foregoing symbol, 
prove it by a proper application of the following number] compute 
the number of the Beast, for it is a man's number [or reckoned after 
a human manner]; and his number is 666. 

"THE NAME OF THE BEAST, 
OR THE NUMBER OF HIS NAME. " 

B. Have you been able to decipher the name and number? I have 
heard of many who have tried all sorts of names and applications, 
but none of them ever seemed reasonable to me. 

A. The same has been my difficulty. A little over a year ago I spoke 
on the subject of this same chapter to the name- less little company 
of "this way," in Lynn, Mass. , and concluded my remarks by 
telling them that I had never seen a satisfactory explanation of the 
666. And, though I thought I had given a correct analysis of the 
symbols of the chapter, yet I could not claim it to be wisdom, since 
I could not interpret the number. I suggested, however, that if ours 
be the correct understanding of the time in which we are living-the 
"harvest" of the age-and if our general application of these 
symbols be correct, the number should soon be understood. I urged 
examination on the subject by all, for the Lord is sometimes pleased 
to give wisdom through the weakest of his children. "Out of the 
mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast ordained praise. " 

R323 : page 9 

About three months after, I received a long letter from one of the 
thinking brethren of that place, saying that he thought he had the 
key; and I think he has; it certainly fits the lock in every particular. 
I will give it to you very much as he suggested it. His process of 
reasoning was as follows: 

Jesus, who gave this revelation to us (Rev. 1:1), well knew that this 
symbol could not be understood until about the present time, for the 
reason that the Image was only made in 1846. Jesus also knew, of 
course, that English would be the language used by probably four- 
fifths of his earnest truth-seeking children, in the "time of the end. 
"He knew, also, that not many wise, not many great, not many 
learned in all languages would be of the chosen "little flock. " 
Moreover, it was his custom to adapt his teachings to the "common 
people," and of this sort his Jewels have been from, the twelve 
disciples and since. 



Therefore it would appear that the number 666, should be open to 
the comprehension of us all— we being the ones told to count— as 
much so as were the other symbolic numbers of Danl. and Rev. Let 
us try, then, to apply these figures in English. *[This is the first 
application in English, known to the writer, but the reasonableness 
of it is obvious. ] 

First, then, the number is that of the [first] BEAST. Let us see 
whether it will apply to some of its names, That system which Paul 
calls the man of sin is the 

Roman Catholic power = 666. 

123456 123456 123456 
He is in Revelation called a BEAST 

Roman Catholic "Beast" = 666. 
The system is also called the "woman" (Rev. 17:18) 

Roman Catholic "woman" = 666. 
She calls herself the 

"Holy Catholic Church" = 666. 
She is really and truly (Rev. 17:5) 

"The Mother of Harlots" = 666. 

Thus we see that the number fits the BEAST well. 

The second BEAST was anxious to have exactly the same name, 
and in fact it claimed to have the pre-eminent right to the name- 

"Holy Catholic church," = 666. 

Other names by which it is often known, are- 

"English State Church," = 666. 

"The Episcopal Church," = 666. 

"Episcopalian Church," = 666. 

"The Church of England," = 666. 

This application of the number, will doubtless appear to some too 
simple to be accepted, but thus God ever deals with us-hiding truth 
under the vail of its own simplicity, so that it may appear to the 
Greek (worldly wise) foolishness, but unto them which believe (not 
to those who believe without evidence, but who believe on the 
strongest kind of evidence -the harmony of His Word) the power 
of God, and the wisdom of God. (1 Cor. 1:23.) 

The Image causes all who claim relationship, or whom it 
recognizes, as having a right to buy or sell— teach— to have as a 
creed, that which shall mark them as having either "the name" of 
the BEAST, or the "number" of his name— 666. Many take the name 
and in their creeds recite, "I believe in the 



"Holy Catholic Church" = 666. 

Among those who thus openly mark themselves in their forehead 
(by their creeds) are Episcopalians, Methodists, Presbyterians and 
others. But others give a seeming support (mark in their hand) to 
the general principal by organizing under various sectarian names. 
After these are blended in the IMAGE, (and no one would be 
admitted to membership in the Evangelical Alliance, unless he be a 
member of some such sect), they all are collectively known as the 

"Protestant Churches," = 666. Which we see contains the Beast's 
number. 

If we for instance were to organize, though we protest more than all 
others against the errors of Rome, and 

R323 : page 10 

also against the errors of the Image and second BEAST, yet we 
would not be reckoned one of the "Protestant churches," because 
we would not be recognized as orthodox— They would not count our 
organization a church. 

Should you inquire for our meetings and ask-Is that a protestant 
church which meets here? the answer would come— Oh, no; they are 
not Evangelical. They have no creed to mark them, so that the 
Alliance can decide whether they are an Evangelical Protestant 
Church or not. 

B. This does truly seem wonderful. I can see how some have it in 
their foreheads, making manifest by their creeds, forms, and titles, 
that which marks them as being partakers of some of the 
abominations of system and doctrine, which for centuries has been 
the mark of the Leopard BEAST. 

I can see, too, as I never saw before, that many of the mightiest 
WORKERS in the nominal church are working for their own 
section, arm or branch of this Image. I can see how much of what 
purports to be WORK FOR JESUS, may in reality, be devotion and 
sacrifice to the building up of a sect, or the carrying out of some 
humanly imposed burden. 

But I think we should always discriminate between the SYSTEMS, 
and those dear ones, some of whom seem to possess so much of the 
Spirit of Christ, who are bound by them. 

A. I fully agree with you; the distinction should be always 
remembered. But let me say that I think quite a good many, are still 
connected with and lending their names and influence to these 
organizations, which are BEAST marked, who are in heart out of 
all sympathy with them, and who hate as anti-Christ, every system 
which would in any sense take the place of the true HEAD of the 
church; and who will neither worship Conferences, Presbyteries, or 
Popes, but who "worship God. "These, however, are fast becoming 
aware that membership in the true church, (whose names are 
written in heaven,) is in no way affected by the disfellowship of the 



various human organizations, each calling itself the true church. 
They are learning too, that the true communion of saints and union 
of hearts, is dependent, not on creeds to bind together as members 
of ONE BODY, but on love and common interest in the HEAD and 
in each other, in whom we find the head's spirit of love and 
obedience to the Father's word. 

B. I know that you believe the Jewish Church to have been a picture 
or shadow of the nominal Gospel Church. Do you find any parallel 
to this Image worship in the shadow? 

A. Yes, Israel was carried captive to Babylon; there an Image was 
set up, and all were commanded to worship it. 

We have heretofore seen that Babylon, to be a type, or shadow of 
the nominal church. It is for this reason that the name Babylon is 
applied to it in Revelation. Papacy's was the greatest confusion or 
mixture of church and world, but all the reforms have been but 
partial, and the reformed churches are in much of the same 
confused (Babylon) condition. Papacy was "Babylon the GREAT" 
(Rev. 17:5), but in the time of "HARVEST" the Lord calls the 
entire system BABYLON. Here, as in the shadow, the command 
first comes for all to worship the HEAD of Babylon (Papacy), and 
afterward an IMAGE was made, and all were commanded to 
worship it. In the first type, Daniel alone refused to worship any but 
the true God. (Dan. 6:7. )In the second type there were more- the 
three "Israelites indeed," refused to worship the Image. (Dan. 3:18.) 
So, too, the number of true ones who are not worshiping the Image 
now, are probably three to one, who did not worship the Beast. For 
their refusal they were bound and cast into a fiery furnace. So here 
those who do not worship the IMAGE are bound, hindered, their 
influence circumscribed, and they are speedily in a "FIERY 
FURNACE"-of tribulation, either in their families or communities 
or in their business. In the words of Revelation— they are killed and 
hindered from buying and selling. But behold, they were unharmed 
by the fire; it will soon be manifest to all, that they are not bound, 
and furthermore that there is with them the form of the FOURTH. 
Yes, the HEAD-the TRUE HEAD is with those who will not bow 
when all others bow; who heed not the enchanting music of the 
hour; these are overcomers. (See Dan. 3:6.) 

As in the type deliverance came, so in the antitype, deliverance will 
fully come— the first resurrection glory-to those who have "not 
worshiped the BEAST, neither his IMAGE, neither had received 
his mark upon their foreheads or in their hands; and THEY lived 
and reigned with Christ a thousand years-this is the first 
resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that have part in the first 
resurrection. " Rev. 20:4-6. 

page 10 

B. O, my brother, I realize that the victor, in God's sight, is no half- 
hearted, no half-consecrated one, but one willing and glad to follow 
the Word of his God, and trust in it though opposed by all the 



Scribes, Pharisees, and hypocrites-those who will be tested in their 
love and respect for God by the strongest attachments, and yet 
prove themselves faithful by overcoming. 

A. Yes, brother- 

R323 : page 10 

Dare to be a Daniel, 

Dare to stand alone; 

Dare to have your purpose firm, 

And dare to make it known. " 



*This superstition as to the authority of the Church of England is 
seen to-day, even among intelligent persons— New translations of 
the Scriptures are refused, and the King James' Version preferred, 
because forsooth it was authorized to be read by the mighty King 
James, the HEAD OF "THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND AND 
IRELAND. " 



*In the common version and in the more modern Greek texts, this 
number is spelled out, six hundred and sixty-six; but in the ancient 
Greek MSS. the numerals are used, 666. 



R324 : page 10 

RANSOM OR PARDON--WHICH? 

The failure to discern the distinction between ransom and pardon, 
has led to much confession of faith. Christian people of general 
intelligence will quote texts relative to our being ransomed from the 
tomb, redeemed from death, bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Christ, etc. , and in the same breath they speak of the 
Father's gracious pardon of all offences. Seemingly few seem to 
think, for many must know, that pardon and ransom, express 
exactly opposite thoughts. 

Webster defines ransom, to mean— "to redeem from captivity, or to 
forfeit by paying an equivalent. " 

His definition of redeem, is- "to purchase back, to regain 
possession of by paying of a stipulated price. " 

His definition of Pardon is— "to remit the penalty" or "to suffer to 
pass without punishment" -"to refrain from exacting a penalty. " 

The most ordinary thinker must see, that these words are as 
opposite as could be; all can see that both could not be true of the 
same thing. If Jesus did redeem us— ransom us, by paying an 
equivalent, thus purchasing the release from death, then our Father 



did not PARDON us; that is, He did not suffer our sins "to pass 
without punishment," but "Laid upon Him (Jesus) the iniquity of us 
all. " (Isa. 53:6.)Then God did not (pardon), remit the penalty; for 
"Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures. " (1 Cor. 15:3.) 

The general difficulty seems to be, that people use the words, 
forgive and pardon, as though they were the same, whereas they are 
not so: Webster's primary definition of FORGIVE is—to give away, 
to make over, to resign, "to cease to feel resentment against," or, "to 
cease to impute" —to remit. Webster also gives, as a secondary 
meaning of forgiveness, the generally accepted sense— pardon. But 
note the difference in the primary meaning of the words: Pardon 
"refrains from exacting a penalty" while forgiveness signifies much 
less, viz. , that a claim is made over to some one else. Thus Jehovah 
sold or "made over" or resigned to Jesus, the claims of Justice on 
mankind; and thus Jesus bought us with his own precious blood. 
Thus we see, too, that when "we were reconciled to God by the 
death of his Son," it was because he forgave us, i. e. , "ceased to 
feel resentment against" us (Web. def.) because our ransom price 
had been paid as provided by himself, who so loved us that he gave 
His son to redeem us. Thus, too, "God was in Christ 
RECONCILING the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses 
unto them. " The sins had been imputed to mankind, until Jesus 
died, then God FORGAVE i. e. , "ceased to impute," (Webster's 
def.) to us, what had been paid by our RANSOM. 

Now mark clearly that God did not PARDON, i. e. , "refrain from 
exacting the penalty," but "Laid upon Him (Jesus) the iniquity of us 
all. " He bore our sins (penalty) in his own body on the tree. (1 Pet. 
2:24.) And now we see how God forgave us freely for CHRIST'S 
SAKE, i. e. , because He paid the penalty which was the full 
satisfaction of Justice. 

Not that God desired to destroy men and Jesus appeased his wrath; 
no, God's love for the world was the cause of the redemption or 
purchase. "God so loved the world that he sent his only begotten 
Son" to purchase -redeem them. Yes, the whole plan is of God. 
(Rom. 11:36.) 

But it should not be supposed, that God compelled the just one to 
die for the unjust. No, Justice could not inflict punishment upon one 
for another's sin. The Scriptures declare -He laid down his life, of 
himself; not for fear of Divine wrath; not because compelled; but 
for the joy that was set before him, (the Father's promises of high 
exaltation to glory, honor, and immortality: and for the joy of 
redeeming and restoring mankind and of bringing many sons to 
glory) HE ENDURED THE CROSS. Heb. 12:2. 

Now notice, the Greek words— Apoluo, Aphiemi, and Aphesis, 
translated -forgiveness, forgiven, and forgive, in the New 
Testament, have the same significance as the corresponding English 
words: or as given by Young- "To let go," or "to send away. "Mark 
well, it does not mean as some seem to infer— to send away without 



an equivalent. It does not mean that God will let go the sinner 
unconditionally. But God will let go the prisoners out of death, 
because he has found a RANSOM. (Job 33:24.) 

Yes, Jesus gave himself a RANSOM (an equivalent price) for all: 
(1 Tim. 2:6.) Therefore, "all that are in their graves (prisoners in the 
pit) shall hear his voice and come forth. 

Though the word pardon does not occur in the New Testament, a 
Greek word of nearly the same meaning does occur, viz: 
Karazomai- It signifies, to forgive freely. We will give some 
illustrations of the use of this word, from which you will see that it 
does not oppose but confirms our statements, that our Father does 
not pardon, or unconditionally set sinners free, from sin's penalty. 
(The words forgive and forgave as translated from this word 
Karazomai occur in all, only twelve times.) 

"Forgiving one another. . . even as Christ forgave you. " (Col. 
3:13.) "When they had nothing to pay he frankly forgave them both. 
""He to whom he forgave most. " (Luke 7:42, 43.) Here are four 
instances in which it is FREE forgiveness, or PARDON. But notice 
it is not Jehovah, but Christ and the disciples who do the free 
forgiving. Jesus was in the very act of paying the ransom price of 
both Simon, Mary, and others, and realizing that Justice would be 
satisfied by his act, he, as the purchaser, could freely forgive them. 

We wish that all our readers might hereafter be able to appreciate 
the difference between pardoned and forgiveness, or reconciliation 
toward us as based on our "redemption through his (Jesus') blood. " 
(Col. 1:14.) All will admit that God is JUST; and if so, he did not 
inflict too severe a sin penalty on man when he deprived him of 
life. Now, if that penalty was just, 6000 years ago, it is still a just 
penalty, and will be just for all coming time. If the penalty was too 
severe, and God pardons the sinner from further continuance of the 
penalty, it proves that God was then, or is now UNJUST. If it was 
right 6000 years ago to deprive mankind of life because of sin, it 
would be always wrong to restore the life, unless the sin were paid 
for-canceled. This could only be accomplished by another being of 
the same kind, whose right to life was unforfeited, giving himself as 
a substitute or ransom. 

It is written: "There is none righteous -no, not ONE. "Therefore 
none, in the sight of justice, have a right to life; and God could not 
justly give pardon and life to those whom his own Justice had 
already condemned; to do so, would be to make Mercy and Love 
over-ride Justice, and such a warfare is not supposable in God's 
attributes. No, if the Love and Mercy of God would benefit men, it 
must be done in harmony with Justice. And it was; LOVE provided 
the ransom (1 John 4:10.)And MERCY uses the same ONE [Christ, 
head and body] as its agent in blessing the world of men. 

"Forever firm Thy JUSTICE stands, 
As mountains their foundations keep. " 



This very principle of JUSTICE which underlies all of our Father's 
doings is the ground of our strong confidence in all his promises. 

Our Father declares that He is the same yesterday, to-day, and 
forever; with Him is no variableness at all, neither shadow of 
turning. (Jam. 1:17.) If He were so changeable as to condemn to a 
penalty in Adam's day, and 6000 years after to revoke and annul 
His own decision, what security could we have that in 6000 years, 
more or less, He might not change again, and remand us to the 
prison-house of death by REVOKING THE PARDON of some or 
of all. And we have no foundation for hope, except in the fact that 
Christ died for us. 



THE 

TABERNACLE 

AND 

ITS TEACHINGS 



WITH NOTES ON 

THE CLEANSING OF THE SANCTUARY 



"For there was a tabernacle 

made...which was a figure 

for the time then present." But Christ being come an 

High Priest of good things--to come by a greater and 

more perfect Tabernacle not made with bands...by his 

own blood he entered in once into the [antitypical] Holy 

Place [Tabernacle] have obtained eternal redemption for 



us." Heb. 9: 2, 9, 11, 12. 


SUPPLEMENT 


TO FEB. MO 


ON'S WATCH TOWER 


PITTSBURGH, PA., U.S.A. 


1882 



THE 

TABERNACLE 

AND 

ITS TEACHINGS 



WITH NOTES ON 

THE CLEANSING OF THE SANCTUARY 



"For there was a tabernacle 

made...which was a figure 

for the time then present." But Christ being come an 

High Priest of good things--to come by a greater and 

more perfect Tabernacle not made with bands...by his 

own blood he entered in once into the [antitypical] Holy 

Place [Tabernacle] have obtained eternal redemption for 

us." Heb. 9: 2, 9, 11, 12. 



SUPPLEMENT 

TO FEB. MO 

"ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

PITTSBURGH, PA., U.S.A. 
1882 



PREFACE 



THIS pamphlet is prepared for thinking Christians especially those, 
who "by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both 
good and evil." (Heb. 5: 11-14) 

The author has sought to present not so much the details of the 
Tabernacle structure and its furniture, as an explanation of the 
teachings, and of the significance of the typical sacrifices. The 
former have-been frequently described at length by other writers. 
In the interpretation of the types we accept as correct, only such 
interpretation, as is found in harmony with other features of the 
same type, and with the plan and Word of God in general. When 
we find this, and we believe it to be the case in those explanations 
offered in this little work, then we feel sure that we have the truth 
on the subject. 

As many of the thoughts are new, the readers will generally be 
more benefited by a second or third reading than by the first. 



This pamphlet is dedicated to the Priests and Levites of the Gospel 
Age-The body of Christ, and Household of Faith-praying the God 
of all grace that it may be blest to such as have an "ear to hear." 

The Author 

Pittsburgh, Pa., U.S.A., February 1, 1882 



THE TABERNACLE 

CHAPTER 1. 

A DESCRIPTION OF ITS FURNITURE 
ITS APARTMENTS-ITS PEOPLE. 



The Tabernacle which god commanded Israel to construct in 
the Wilderness, and in connection with which, all their religious 
services and ceremonies were instituted, is, as Paul assures us, a 
shadow of good things to come. (Heb. 8: 5; 10:1; Col. 2:17). In fact 
the whole nation of Israel, with their laws and their religious 
services and ceremonies, was typical of the spiritual Israel, with 
their higher privileges, developed during the Gospel Age. 

This being true, our understanding of the plan and work of 
salvation now in progress, as will as its future developments, 
cannot fail to be greatly increased and cleared by a careful study of 
that Jewish shadow, which they repeated year by year continually 
for our edification, who live in this Gospel Age. (1 Pet. 1:12) 

It is not simply to gain a historical knowledge of the Jewish 
forms, ceremonies, and worship, that we come to the investigation 
of this subject, but that we may be edified by understanding the 
substance from an examination of the shadow, as god designed in 
arranging it. 

We would fail to attach sufficient weight and importance to the 
shadow, unless we realize how carefully God guided and directed 
all of its details: First, taking Moses up into the mount and giving 
him an illustration of just how things were to be made; Secondly, 
charging him to be very careful-"See, saith He, that thou make all 
things after the pattern showed thee in the mount." (Heb. 8:5, Ex. 
25:40). So too, with all the minutia of the service; every jot and 
tittle must be performed in the type, because it illustrated 
something great and grand coming after. And in order that these 
shadows might all be exactly performed, and that the people might 
not become careless, the usual penalty for any violation was death: 



For instance-2 Sam. 6:6, 7; Lev. 10:2; Ex. 28:43; Num. 4:15, 20: 
17: 13. 

Realizing God's care in making the "shadow,'" should not only 
give us confidence in its correctness-that not one jot or tittle of it 
shall fail until all shall be fulfilled (Matt. 5:18)-But, it should also 
awaken in us so great an interest in god's plan, as would lead us to 
examine closely, and search carefully, for the meaning of those 
shadows: And this, with God's promised blessing we now propose 
to do, assured that among those who are truly God's consecrated 
ones-children begotten of the Spirit-"He that seeketh; and to him 
that knocketh, it shall be opened." 

The Tabernacle represented spiritual (heavenly) conditions; the 
furthest-Most Holy-representing the perfect spiritual condition in 
which Jehovah's glory is seen. The glory within testified to the 
majesty of his presence, while the cloud without was a continual 
reminder of their separation from him. 

The directions given to Moses for its construction may be 
found in Ex. 25 to 27, and the account of the performance of the 
work in Ex. 35 to 40. Briefly stated, the Tabernacle was 
constructed of a series of boards, "overlaid" or plated with gold 
and set on end into sockets of silver, and firmly fastened together 
by bars of the same wood (Shittim) also covered with gold. 

This structure was 15 feet wide, 15 feet high, and 45 feet long 
(Shittim) also covered with gold. It was covered by a large linen 
cloth, with figures of cherubic woven into it, in blue, purple and 
scarlet colors. The open end, or front of the structure was closed by 
a curtain of similar material to the covering cloth-called the door, 
or first vail. Another cloth of the same materials and colors, and 
similarly woven with figures of cherubs, call "the Vail" (or second 
vail) was hung under the taches, thus dividing he Tabernacle into 
two apartments. The first or larger apartment (15 feet wide and 30 
feet long) was called "The Holy."* 

The second apartment (15 feet wide and 15 feet long) was 
called "The Most Holy." Over this Tabernacle proper, was a tent to 
shelter it and protect it from the weather. It was made of a covering 
of goat's hair, another of ram skins dyed red, and another of badger 
skins-seal skins. 

The Tabernacle was surrounded by a yard or "court" toward the 
rear of which, it stood. This court 75 feet wide and 150 feet long 
was formed by linen curtains suspended from silver hooks, set in 
the tops of wooden posts 7-1/2 feet high, which were set in heavy 
sockets of brass (copper) and braced like the test with cords and 
pins. This enclosure was all holy ground, and was therefore called 
the "holy place"-also the "court of the Tabernacle." Its opening, 
like the door of the Tabernacle, was toward the east, and was called 



"the gate." It also was of linen embroidered with blue, purple and 
scarlet. It will be noticed that the three entrance passages, viz.: "the 
gate" to the court or "holy place"-"the door" to the "holy" and 
"the vail" to the "Most Holy" were of the same material and colors. 
*Frequently this in our translation is improperly called the "holy 
place;" and in such instances the word place will be found in 
italics, indicating that it has been supplied by the translators, as for 
instance in Ex. 26:33. This error is quite confusing as "the court" 
was properly called "the holy place." When place is not in italics, 
"the court" is always means. See Lev. 14:13 and 6:27. In some 
instances "The Holy is termed "The Tabernacle of the 
congregation" and called "the Holy place" (place in italics.) 
Instances, Lev. 16:17, 20, 33. In our description we will call those 
apartments severally, "The Camp," The Court," "The Holy" and 
"Most Holy." 

THE FURNITURE OF THE COURT 

consisted of but two pieces: the "Brazen Altar" and the "Laver." 

THE BRAZEN ALTAR 

First on entering the gate and immediately in front of it stood 
the Brazen Altar. This altar was made of woodland covered with 
copper, it was 7-1/2 feet square, 4-1/2 feet high. It had various 
utensils belonging to its service-fire plans, called censers, for 
carrying the fire to the Incense Altar; basins to receive the blood; 
flesh-hooks, shovels, etc. 

THE LAVER 

Next, between the Brazen Altar and the door of the Tabernacle, 
was the Laver. It was made of polished copper which served as a 
mirror, and was a receptacle for water for the washing of the priests 
before entering the Tabernacle. 

THE FURNITURE OF THE TABERNACLE 

consisted of a Table, a Candlestick and a Incense Altar in the holly, 
and the Ark of the Testimony in the Most Holy. 

THE TABLE OF SHEW BREAD 

Within the Tabernacle on the right (north) stood a wooden 
table overlaid with gold, and upon it were placed twelve cakes of 
unleavened bread in two rows or piles with frankincense on top of 
each pile. (Lev. 24:6) The bread was for the priests; it was holy, 
and was renewed every Sabbath day. 



THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK 

Opposite this table was the "candlestick" made of pure gold 
beaten work (hammered out) having seven branches and in each 
branch a lamp. It was the only light in "the holy," for as we have 
seen, the natural light was obscured by the walls and curtains- 
there were no windows. 

THE "GOLDEN INCENSE ALTAR" 

Further on, close up the "the Vail" stood a small altar of wood, 
covered with gold, called the "Golden Altar" or "Incense Altar." It 
had no fire upon it except as the priests brought it in the censers 
which they set in the top of this golden altar, and then crumbled the 
incense upon it, giving forth fragrant perfume. 

THE ARK OF THE TESTIMONY 

Beyond the vail, in the Most Holy, there was but one piece of 
furniture-the Ark. It was a rectangular box made of wood overlaid 
with gold, having a lid called the "Mercy Seat," which was of pure 
gold. Upon it (and of the same piece) were two cherubs of gold- 
beaten work. Within this ark (under the mercy seat) were placed 
the golden bowl of manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the 
two tables of the law. (Heb. 9:4) Upon the mercy seat, a 
supernatural light appeared shining out between the cherubim: This 
was the only light in the Most Holy. 

It is noticeable that everything inside the Tabernacle was of 
gold, while in the court everything was of copper. Wood, which 
was used as the basis, and was covered by these metals was used, 
we believe, simply to make the articles lighter of weight, than if of 
solid metal. This would be an important consideration where they 
traveled continually. (The vessels of the Temple were of solid 
metals. 1 Kings 7:23, 48) These two metals, gold and copper, were 
used, we think, to represent two different natures-copper 
representing the human nature (in its perfection); and gold 
representing the divine nature-much alike in their appearance, yet 
different in quality, as the human is an image of the Diving Being. 

It will be noticed that the arrangement of the structure formed 
three general parts-the 

CAMP, COURT AND TABERNACLE 

The Camp represented the condition of the world of mankind in 
sin, typified by all Israel. These were separated from all holy things 
by the curtains of white linen, which to those within represent a 
wall of unbelief which hinders their view of, and access to holy 
things within. The only view of, and access to holy things within. 
The only way to enter "the court" or "holy place" is to come 



through the gate-"I am the way... no man cometh unto the Father 
but by me." John 14:6. 

The Court represented the condition of justification entered by 
faith in Christ, the "gate." Into this court, only Levites (type of 
believers) were allowed to come. These have access to the brazen 
altar and laver, and do service in the court, but have no right as 
Levites (believers) to go into the Tabernacle; no, nor even to look 
into it. (Num. 4:19,20) Here all things are of copper representing 
the perfect human condition. 

The Tabernacle represented the condition of all who have 
changed their nature; that is, those who have consecrated their 
human nature to death, and have become partakers of the Divine 
nature by being begotten of the Spirit. And no human being, be he 
ever so full of faith, be he washed from every sin and in God's 
sight justified freely from all things-reckoned perfect, can have 
any place or privilege in Divine things; not even to look into them. 
("The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit... neither 
can he know them because they are spiritual discerned.)" 1 Cor. 
2:14 

All things in the Tabernacle are of gold representing the Divine 
nature. Only those of the Levites who were consecrated to the work 
of sacrifice (the Priests) had access to the Tabernacle. So only 
those of the household of faith, who are consecrated to sacrifice, 
enter the Divine condition represented by the Tabernacle. 

The court or justified human condition was entered by faith 
only; but while we must retain the faith that justifies, we must do 
more, if we would change our nature and become "new creatures"- 
-partakers of the Divine nature. If we would enter the Tabernacle or 
Divine condition, we must crucify the justified flesh, presenting 
our human wills and bodies a living sacrifice to God; no longer to 
seek for human pleasure, honors, praise, etc., but to be dead to 
these and alive to the heavenly ones. Yet we come into this 
condition also, through Christ Jesus our Lord. 

The two apartments of the Tabernacle, the Holy and the Most 
Holy, represented two phases of the Divine life. The Holy 
represented the present condition of those begotten of God through 
the Word. (Divine minded, "new creatures," dwelling this side of 
"the vail"-in the flesh.) The Most Holy represented our perfected 
condition as new creatures. When born from the dead in the 
resurrection. Then being beyond the vail-the flesh, we shall have 
our glorious spiritual bodies, as well as our spiritual minds. We 
shall be like our Leader, our forerunner beyond the vail, who, 
having entered, hath consecrated for us this new and living way (to 
the new life) beyond the vail, that is to say his flesh. The spiritual 
minded creature in the Holy, by faith looks forward through the 



rent vail into the Most Holy catching glimpses of the glory, honor 
and immortality beyond the vail. (Heb. 6:19; and 10:20) 

We see, then, that justification by faith, brings us into a 
condition of peace with God. Our sins being forgiven, we are a step 
nearer to God, but still human- -in the court. If we would attain to 
the prize of our high calling which is of God in Christ Jesus, 
entering in through the Holy to the Most Holy, we must follow in 

THE FOOTSTEPS OF JESUS 

our Leader and Head-the High Priest of our profession. By faith in 
his ransom we have entered the gate to the court-the vail of 
unbelief is passed. By renouncing our human will and all our 
human aspirations and hopes, we pass the second vail, or vail of 
human mindedness, counting our human will as dead; henceforth 
not consulting it, but the will of God only. 

We now find ourselves as "new creatures" in The Holy-in the 
first of the "the Heavenlies" or Holies (Eph. 2:6) E. Diaglott); and 
here we are enlightened by the Golden Candlestick, (God's Word) 
refreshed and strengthened daily with the truth as bread (lawful 
only for the Priests to eat). And thus enlightened and strengthened, 
we are daily offering up spiritual sacrifice at the Golden Altar, 
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ-a sweet perfume to our Father. 

Thus, all such are in a heavenly or holy condition now-seated 
at rest and communion) with Christ in the first of those heavenly 
places" seated at rest and communion) with Christ in the first of 
those heavenly places" but not yet in the Holiest of all. No, another 
vail must first be passed: As the passing of the proceeding vail was 
the death of the human will, so the passing of the second vail is the 
death of the human body; and it requires both to complete our 
sacrifice: Both fleshly mind and fleshly body must first be passed 
before we shall be in the "Holiest of all"-made perfect-born into 
the Divine condition. 

With these thoughts as to the three conditions represented by 
these three places-Camp, Court and Tabernacle, let us notice 
particularly the three classes occupying these conditions- viz., the 
World, Believers and Consecrated Believers; typified respectively 
by 

ISRAELITES, LEVITES AND THE PRIESTHOOD 

In understanding the significance of the Tabernacle service, it 
is necessary, not only to get a clear idea of the structure, its 
furniture, and their typical signification, but also of the actors and 
their significance, as types. 

Israel is used in many instances to typify the Gospel Church. 
For instance: When they left Egyptian bondage, they were a type of 



God's children who hear his call to come out from the world and 
engage in his worship. 

The wilderness journey represents the tedious pilgrimage 
through which many pass, seeking the promised Canaan-"Come 
unto me and I will give you rest." 

As in the type, so in reality, the promised Canaan of rest is not 
afar off, if they had faith enough to go up and take it. God has 
made abundant provision for them. Yet they journey through the 
wilderness of sin seeking rest, but finding none, because they lack 
faith in God's promises. Some wander thus a long time; some 
never enter the Canaan rest because of unbelief. 

But while Israel according to the flesh, is thus an in many other 
ways used to typify the spiritual Israel; yet, it is a totally different 
type, as we are now examining it, in its relations to the Tabernacle. 

Here, Israel unquestionably typifies the whole world of 
mankind. The sin offering sacrifices, atonement, etc. Made 
typically for them (and them only) were typical of better sacrifices 
and atonement, made o n behalf of the whole world: "For He is a 
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world." (1 John 2:2) 

In a word, Israel was a type, as well as the Tabernacle, Priests, 
Levites, and Sacrifices. And that which was there done in pictures, 
is, since the first coming of Christ, being carried out on a higher 
plane and on a larger scale. The latter the reality, of which that was 
the type or shadow. 

As Israel typified the world, so the tribe of Levites, we believe, 
typified the "Household of faith," or all believers in Jesus and his 
ransom. 

The Priesthood-one body under one chief of High Priest-was 
typical of the "little flock" who are to be-with their "Head" or 
"High Priest- Kings and Priests, to reign on the earth. (Rev. 5:10) 

But before these members of the body of Christ shall be united 
to their Head and begin their reign, they must first "suffer with 
Him" in making the sacrifices, as we will shortly see. (2 Tim. 2:12) 

Peter tells us who were typified by the priests, when addressing 
those who are sanctified, he says: (1 Peter 1:2 and 2:5,9) "Ye are 
...an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to 
God by Jesus Christ. "Ye are.. .a royal priesthood." 

That the head or chief of this priesthood-"little flock"-is 
Jesus, is repeatedly mentioned by the apostles. We give but one 
quotation: "Holy brethren (the Royal Priesthood) partakers of the 
Heavenly calling, consider the apostle and High Priest of our 
profession, Christ Jesus. (Heb. 3:1) 

As we now pass to the consideration of the inauguration of the 
typical priesthood, we notice that the tribe of Levites (typical of 



believers, or those on the justified plane) existed for a long time 
before the priesthood was instituted. So in the antitype, the royal 
priesthood began with the anointing of Jesus (at baptism, Luke 
3:22, Acts 10:38) but believers, justified by faith in Christ, had 
lived long before that. For instance-Abraham who believed God 
and was justified by his faith. (Rom. 4:2,3 ) Though even the type 
had not yet come in his day, yet Abraham as a justified believer 
was a member of the "household of faith," typified by the Levites- 
though not of the "royal priesthood." 

CHAPTER n 
ANOINTING THE PRIESTHOOD 



In this ceremony as in every other, relating to the ordination 
and work of the priesthood, it will be well to notice that Jesus was 
the first-the leader, Captain, Forerunner-teaching clearly that 
none preceded him, hence that none of the Patriarchs or Prophets 
are of the "little flock"-"the royal priesthood"-the Bride, the 
Lamb's wife." Though they will be greatly blessed as the Lord's 
ministers-Levites, it will not be so grandly high as the position of 
priests. "The narrow way to life "(Immortality) was not opened up 
until Jesus came. He was the first to walk on it. He "brought life 
and immortality to light." (2 Tim. 1:10) And though all believers 
(Levites) shall become possessors of everlasting life, [and the 
world (Israel) also, if they will accept it-during the Millennial age] 
yet, only the priesthood, who overcome and follow their Leader in 
the narrow way to life- sacrificing the human-thus seeking glory, 
Honor and Immortality, will ever become the possessors of that 
unlimited degree of life called Immortality, as yet possessed only 
by Jehovah and our Lord Jesus. (See "Food for Thinking 
Christians," page 134, or "Zion's Watch Tower," Sept. 1881, page 
7-"The narrow way to life.") 

Under the Law the anointing was the ceremony by which the 
Priests were installed in God's service. The Priests were anointed 
to their office with a peculiar ointment, called the holy anointing 
oil, used upon none but the Priests, and unlawful for any one else 
to have or to make under penalty of death. Ex. 30:25-33 This oil 
typified the Holy Spirit of adoption whereby we are sealed. Only 
the consecrated ones are ever to be anointed thus. Aaron, the 
typical High Priest, represented Jesus the head, and the church as 
members of the body of the great High Priest. Being but a sinful 
man he had to be washed in order to fitly represent the purity of the 
antitype. Aaron was then clothed with the holy garments of "glory 
and of beauty," (Ex. 28) and then the anointing oil was poured on 



his head. Each article of the glorious apparel was typical of 
qualities and powers of the Great Deliverer-head and body, which 
Jehovah discerned looking down to "the magnification of the Sons 
of God," and the fulfillment in them of his promises. 

THE HIGH PRIEST IN GARMENTS 
OF "GLORY AND BEAUTY" 

And these are the garments ...a breastplate, and an ephod, and 
an upper robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre and a girdle. (Ex. 28: 
4) 

The linen coat represents the High Priest's purity, while its 
embroidery showed the outgrowth of that character in works. The 
mitre, a strip of fine linen, worn around the forehead, to which was 
fastened with a blue lacer, the golden plate or crown, shows that 
the crown is righteously his. Upon the golden plate was inscribed, 
"Holiness to the Lord," thus proclaiming: This great High Priest is 
entirely devoted to the accomplishment of Jehovah's purposes. The 
golden crown proclaims his royalty: He is to be "a priest upon his 
throne"-a priest forever (for the age) after the order of 
Melchizedek. (Psa. 110:4) The linen girdle indicates a righteous 
servant; linen-righteousness; girdle- servitude. 

The upper robe, made of blue represents his faithfulness. The 
fringe of it was made of golden bells and pomegranates. The 
pomegranate, being a choice fruit, showed that his faithfulness 
bore fruit; the gold bells, that God witnessed to his faithfulness. 

The ephod was made of a cloth of purple, blue, scarlet, white 
and gold threads; interwoven skillfully and beautifully. It was of 
two parts, one hanging in front and the other over the back. These 
two parts were fastened together by two gold clasps which rested 
on the shoulders. This ephod, we believe, typified two covenants: 
the Abrahamic represented by the front part, and the New 
Covenant represented by the back part, both of which are thus 
shown to be dependent on this High Priest. 

They are laid on him; if he fails to support them, they must fall 
to the ground. But thank god, they are firmly clasped on him by the 
Gold clasps, (Divine power) as well as bound to him by the 
"Curious girdle"-a cord made of the same materials as the ephod. 
This girdle seems to say, this is a servant; and as this is the girdle 
of the ephod it tells us that this one is-The messenger (servant) of 
the Covenant whom ye delight in." (Mai 3:1) 

The Abrahamic Covenant truly, is partly fulfilled in the person 
of the High Priest- who is the Seed, the spiritual seed, which is to 
bless all. But we have seen that the Abrahamic covenant has two 
phases: the Heavenly, spiritual seed, and the fleshly seed, the literal 
descendants of Abraham; the latter the only one recognized by 



Abraham, the spiritual being hid in the natural. During the Gospel 
Age the spiritual seed develops and becomes members of the body 
of the High Priest growing up into the head. But after this spiritual 
seed has been developed, that phase of the covenant, understood by 
Abraham and all his descendants to this day, will be fulfilled. So 
say Paul: "As concerning the Gospel (the spiritual part of the 
covenant) they are enemies for your sakes; but as touching the 
election they are (still) beloved for the father's sake. For the gifts 
and callings of God are not things he will repent of. For this is my 
covenant to them. There shall come out of Zion (the spiritual 
church) the delivered, [this great High Priest,* the servant of the 
covenant-- Jesus the head and the "little flock" his body] and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob. Rom. 11:26-29 

So then, after the body of Christ, the spiritual seed is complete, 
the Abrahamic covenant must have a fulfillment to the fleshly 
seed; that fleshly seed must become great "as the sand by the 
seashore" as the heavenly seed is likened to the "the stars of 
heaven." They must first be turned to righteousness and truth, and 
then become an agency through which the spiritual seed will 
operate to bless all mankind with truth and knowledge. 

Thus the earthly phase of the Abrahamic covenant is seen still 
to depend on and to be upheld by the Great High Priest, who is also 
the mediator of the "New Covenant which God promises to make 
when the Day of Atonement is ended and he has taken away their 
sins. (Jer. 31:31, Ezk. 11:19 and 36:24), Rom. 11:27) This new 
covenant is typified by the back part of the ephod. 

The scarlet, blue purple, etc., which composed the ephod, 
indicated the conditions of the covenant; the scarlet shows how 
god provides redemption from the Adamic curse through the blood 
of the ransom; the white linen indicated the restoration of man to 
his original purity; the blue vouchsafes to him the ability to 
faithfully maintain his righteous character; the purple proclaims the 
restoration of the royalty of earth as possessed by Adam, earth's 
first monarch. All of these blessings are woven together-made 
sure, by the Divine power of the anointed Priest, as shown by the 
interwoven golden thread. That part of the Abrahamic covenant 
referring to the spiritual seed, is represented as complete in God's 
sight. They all as Good sees them, are born of the spirit to t he 
completeness of the Divine nature, represented by the gold, and in 
the person of the Priest. 

Thus Jehovah has laid all these covenants upon one who is 
both mighty and willing to execute these glorious covenanted 
blessings-"in due time." 

The Breastplate of Judgment was placed on the front of the 
ephod. 



It was suspended by a gold chain from the clasps on the 
shoulders, and was fastened to the ephod by a lacer, through golden 
rings-this fastening being so concealed underneath, that to the 
casual observer it might appear to be a part of the ephod. (Exo. 
28:26-28) This breastplate represents beautifully the Law. It was 
not a part of the Abrahamic covenant but "It was added" to it. (Gal. 
3:19) As the Israelite regarded them, not seeing the hidden 
connection, the covenant to Abraham and "the law which was 430 
years after," were all one: but Paul shows us that there are two 
parts-two seeds-to this covenant: the spiritual, and the natural. 
The covenant and the Law were distinct "to the end that the 
promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of 
the Law, but to that also which is of the faith. " Rom. 4: 16 

This Law emblem (the breastplate) was one of the most 
beautiful of the High Priest's garments; it was made of the same 
materials as the ephod. It had in it, set in gold, twelve precious 
jewels, in which were engraved the names of the twelve tribes. It 
was bound on his heart, indicating that it was his delight to keep it. 
As a "breastplate" of righteousness" it was covered him. That 
which condemned all imperfect ones was his pleasure-"I delight to 
do thy will O my god; yea, thy law is within my heart." (Psa. 40:8) 

The breastplate was two spans long and one wide, folded in the 
middle, i.e., a span long and a span wide double. The size, a span, 
indicates that the Law of God is the full measure of a perfect man's 
ability-- Jesus, being perfect, was the only one who ever kept it 
literally, while his body has his righteousness imputed. 

Its being double of the same size and measure represents the 
letter and the spirit of the law. The front part contained the jewels 
and was hung by the gold chain to the gold clasps of the ephod; the 
under part was fastened to the ephod. This latter, tied to the ephod 
(covenant) seems to represent the law in letter as presented to 
fleshly Israel. The former, or front part seems to illustrate the spirit 
of the law as kept by the true Israel-or overcomers-- ,, the 
righteousness of the law fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh 
but after the spirit." (Rom. 8:4) The law of love. Pure gold being a 
symbol of divine things, the dependence of this part of the Law by 
a gold chain, from the gold clasps, seems to teach that the Law is 
kept by divine power; and so we know, it is by divine strength that 
we walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. It is this phase of 
the Law which bears the "jewels" set in gold representative of the 
true Israel. "They shall be mine in the day that I come to make up 
my jewels." Thus embedded in gold (the divine nature) and upheld 
by the golden chain of divine promises, what wonder that "the 
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us." 



The equality of size, of the two parts of the breastplate seems to 
illustrate what we have seen to be frequently taught elsewhere in 
Scripture, viz.: that the Jewish and Gospel ages are of equal size 
and measure; the Jewish a type or picture of this age. 

As Aaron stood there clothed in these typically glorious and 
beautiful robes and anointed with the holy oil, his head 
representing Jesus-the head of the priesthood, and his body 
representing the church complete in him, how impressive his 
significance, as a type of the World's High Priest, undefiled, and 
clothed with power and authority to carry out Jehovah's covenants. 
We see the body again typified individually by the under priests 
who wore bonnets covering their own heads to indicate that they 
were not the head of the Priesthood, but members of his body. God 
gave Jesus "to be the head over all things to the church which is 
his body." (Eph. 1:22,23) 

It is for this reason that Paul insists that a woman's head should 
be covered as indicating that she is not the head; the husband and 
wife being typical of Jesus and his Bride-the church of the first- 
born. These under priests were robed in linen garments, the 
imputed righteousness of Jesus, and girdled, showing that they 
were servants under their head. 

As Aaron had the holy oil poured upon his head, so our head, 
Jesus was anointed with the antitypical oil-the Holy Spirit-when 
he was thirty years of age, on the banks of Jordan, at the time of 
this consecration. There He was "anointed with the oil of gladness 
above his fellows"-as head over all the joint heirs. A measure of 
the Spirit is given to every man who thus consecrates; but Jehovah 
gave "not the Spirit by measure unto Him." (John 3:34) John saw 
and bore record that our High Priest was thus anointed (John 1:32; 
Luke 4:1), and Peter adds his testimony (Acts 10:38) "How God 
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power." 

The anointing oil was poured only upon the head. The under 
priests were not anointed individually. Since they were recognized 
as members of the High Priest' s body, they received their anointing 
through the head. 

The oil "ran down even unto the skirts of his garments" (Psa 
133:2) thus representing how the members of his body, are all to be 
partakers of the same anointing after their head. "T anointing 
which ye have received of him abideth in you." 1 John 2:27) This 
oil began to reach the body on the day of Pentecost and flows on 
down through this Gospel Age, anointing all who are truly baptized 
into Christ, to be with their head, Kings and Priests unto God; to 
reign a thousand years. (Rev. 20:6) 

We thus see that Aaron robed and anointed represented the 
entire Christ (anointed one)-"The seed" in which God is about to 



bless all the families of the earth. But let us not forget that we have 
been viewing the Great Deliverer from God's standpoint, and with 
Him looking down to the time of his manifestation-the dawn of 
the Millennial day— when all the members have come into the body 
and when the "holy oil" has run down "even to the skirts of his 
garments" anointing every member. Then he will begin the work of 
blessing mankind. For the glorious reign of this Kingly Priest, we 
constantly pray-'Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth." 

CHAPTER IK. 
CONSECRATING THE PRIESTHOOD 



Lev. 8:14, 33 

This requirement of the Law was typical of the entire 
consecration of the human nature of Jesus and his body, to the will 
of Jehovah-his obedience even unto death; and the obedience of 
the members of his body suffering the same with him. All the body 
represented by Aaron's sons, as well as the Head, represented by 
Aaron, are by the sacrifices now being made, consecrated for their 
future work as kings and priests, to restore and rule and bless 
mankind. When this consecration is made, they have given ALL 
they had. But their extremity is Jehovah's opportunity, and when 
they have consecrated all they had to destruction, they are begotten 
of God to a new nature-the spiritual; and not only so, but to the 
highest order of the spiritual-the Divine nature; and as such they 
are owned as sons of God. (Gal 4: 4,7 and 2 Pet. 1:4) 

The type now shows these two natures: the higher is 
represented by Aaron and his sons, while the human is represented 
by a bullock. The bullock for the sin offering was brought "and 
Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of it, thus 
saying, this sacrifice represents our human nature. From that 
moment, all that happened to the bullock, represents what was to 
be done to Jesus and his body-the church-as human beings. The 
bullock is delivered up to "the Law" -(represented by Moses) to 
meet its demands. To thus meet the demands of the law, it must be 
slain-" And Moses slew it." Then he applies the blood to the horns 
of the altar. The "finger'" of the "Law" thus pointed out that the 
altar of earthly sacrifices was acceptable to God by reason of the 
shed blood (the life given), and that all who realize the power of 
the altar (Horns are symbols of power) must recognize first the 
blood which sanctified it. The blood poured at the bottom of the 
altar, shows that through the blood of the sacrifice (life given) even 
the earth was purchased back from the curse which sin brought 



upon it. See Eph. 114: "Unto the redemption of the purchased 
possession.") 

And Moses took the bullock, his hide, flesh, etc. And burned 
them with fire without the camp. (Vs. 17) Thus the humanity of 
the Christ complete-head and body-is made a sin offering, 
suffering the destruction to which the world was doomed, and from 
which, through the sacrifice, they shall ultimately be delivered. But 
while the human existence is destroyed, as represented by the 
burning of the bullock without the camp, God accepts the loving 
zeal which says, Lo, I come to do thy will O God." "I delight to do 
thy will O my God"-as represented by the offering on the altar, of 
the fat and parts of the inward life-producing organism, as a sweet 
savor unto the Lord. 

Other features of the same consecration are shown by the two 
rams mentioned in verses 18 and 22. The first mentioned is the ram 
for burn offering. Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon its 
head, thus indicating that it represented them. It was killed; its 
blood sprinkled the altar; and Moses "cut the ram into pieces and 
wash the inwards and legs in water" and "burnt the head and 
pieces, and the fat.," Thus Jesus and his body, the church are being 
presented before God on the altar, during the entire Gospel Age. 
The head was laid there first, and since, all who are "dead with 
him," cleansed, as in the type, by the washing of water through the 
word. Its burning on the altar shows how God accepts this "as a 
sweet smelling savor." 

The second ram, "the ram of consecration," shows what effect 
the sacrifice will have upon us, as the first showed how God 
received it. Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon its head-it 
represented them. And Moses slew it and took its blood- 
(consecrated life and put it upon each separately -(Consecration is 
an individual work). And he put it upon the tip of the right ear, 
thumb of right hand and great toe of the right foot. Thus, by our 
consecration, we are enabled to have the "hearing of faith" and to 
appreciate God's promises as none but the consecrated can. Our 
hands are consecrated, so that whatsoever our hands find to do, we 
do it with our might as unto the Lord. Our feet are consecrated so 
that henceforth we "walk not as other Gentiles," but "walk in 
newness of life," walk by faith," "walk in the spirit," "walk in the 
light," and even "as ye received Christ, so walk in him." 

The choice portions of the ram, inwards and fat, representing 
our best powers, were taken in t heir hands, and waved, passed to 
and fro, before the Lord representing the fact that a consecrated 
offering is not given the Lord for the moment, or day, or year, but 
continually we keep our affections and powers uplifted before our 



Father, never ceasing until accepted of him as having finished our 
course. And Moses took them off their hands, God's acceptance 
shown by fire. When the love (fat) of our inmost being is laid upon 
the altar, it helps to increase the fire of God's acceptance. The 
more love there is connected with our consecration to God, the 
more quickly will it be accepted by Him as entire consecration. 

Upon this wave offering, while in their hands, were laid three 
cakes from a basketful. This offering was laid by Moses upon the 
hands of both high and under priests. 

The first unleavened cake, represented the actual purity of 
Jesus as a man, and the imputed purity of the church as men, as 
attested by the Law (Moses). The second unleavened cake mingled 
with oil, represented the indwelling spirit of God-Sanctification. 
The third wafer, mingled with honey represented our faith in the 
exceeding great and precious promises of Glory, Honor and 
Immortality. Honey, a type of the bliss of paradise, was never 
allowed to be burned in sacrifice; so it is earthly bless and pleasure 
only which we consecrate. 

Without these three elements, it is impossible for our 
consecration to be acceptable, viz: Justification (purity) 
Sanctification by the Spirit through the belief of the truth and faith 
in the promised Glorification. 

This consecration is in progress during the entire gospel Age; 
even when as individuals our offering has been waved and 
accepted, we are to abide in the Tabernacle, eating of the cakes, 
growing in grace and knowledge continually, by partaking of the 
assurances and promises of God's Word- for we shall live by the 
words (promises) which proceed from the mouth of God. 

The boiling of the flesh of consecration [vs. 31] was no part of 
the sacrifice; it was merely the preparing of the portion which they 
ate. It was all to be disposed of [ver. 32], showing how we are to be 
entirely consecrated and none of our time or powers wasted. 

The seven days of consecration [vss. 33 and 35] show again 
that we are consecrated to God's service not a part of our time 
only, but all of it, for seven is the complete number in Scripture 
and signifies all or the whole of whatever it is applied to. ("Seven 
Seals," "Trumpets," "Plagues," etc.) Ver. 36 shows the completion 
of the work of consecration. 



There never was a time when it was more necessary than now, 
to see to it that we "be dead with him," and our every ability waved 
before God, that he may accept and make use of our talents to his 
glory. Especially is it of interest to those who believe that very 
soon all the members of the body will be accepted with the head-a 
sweet savor to God, and the work finished. And if we fail to be 
among the priests now during the time of consecration, we cannot 
expect to be one of them when they begin their service for the 
people in the "ages to come-when these same priests (now 
despised of men, but a "sweet savor to God," shall have the tile of 
King added, and with their head- Jesus, rule and bless all nations. 
Do we wish to be among those who will sing to the praise of our 
great High Priest, "Thou hast made us unto our God, Kings and 
Priests and we shall reign on the earth?" If so, let us be fully 
consecrated now, for "If we suffer with him we shall also reign 
with him." (2 Tim. 2:12) 



CHAPTER IV 



THE GREAT DAY OF ATONEMENT 



Lev. 16:3-33 

In considering this type we must, to appreciate it, remember 
that it is a picture by itself, of one particular part, of the work of 
the World's High Priest, yet in the more full and complete sense he 
is the head and we the members of the body of the World's High 
Priest, just as Aaron was high priest or chief of the under priests, 
while in a general sense, the whole priesthood was one, designed to 
minister for Israel who typified the world. These Levitical pictures 
primarily referring to the Head, when fully considered refer to the 
body complete. For instance, the ceremony of anointing 
commenced with the "Head,'" but the anointing applied to all the 
body during the entire age as we have seen. As the consecrating of 
the priesthood includes all the members of his body, and requires 
all the Gospel Age to complete it, so also with the sin offering or 
the sacrifice of atonement: it commenced with the Head and we 
"fill up the measure of the sufferings of Christ which are behind," 
and therefore this suffering requires all of the Gospel Age. The 



atonement day, which in the type, was but a twenty-four hour day, 
we see then in the antitype, to be the whole Gospel Age. 

So we see that all of these pictures are separate and distinct, 
and will all be complete at the end of the Gospel Age. And then 
shall the Great High Priest of the world (Jesus and His bride, made 
ONE, Head and members complete) stand forth crowned a King 
and Priest after the Melchizedek order. 

There he will stand before the world (manifest, recognized but 
unseen) not only as King and Priest, but also as the Great Prophet- 
"A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren, like unto me, (Moses)... and it shall come to pass that the 
soul that shall not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among 
the people." When brought to a perfect knowledge and ability, 
perfect obedience will be required, and all who will not render it 
will be cut off from rife-the second death. (Acts 3:22,23) 

There he will stand, Priest of the Most High God and King of 
Salem, i.e., "King of Peace"-"A Priest upon His throne.." 

He came typically to the Jews in the end of their age as prophet, 
(teacher) as priest ("when he offered up Himself," Heb. 7:27) and 
as King (when he rode into their city at the close of his ministry). 
But they did not receive him in any of these offices. During the 
Gospel Age, his church or body has acknowledged him as "a 
teacher sent from God"-the great Prophet; as their High Priest and 
as their King or ruler. The word teaches however, that is not by the 
church only that he is to be accepted, but He (together with us as 
his body) shall be the Prophet for the people, the Priest for all the 
people, and the King over all people, nations and languages; Lord 
of all," Priest of all, Prophet or teacher of all. 

In the type of the Priests' consecration, we saw Aaron and his 
sons representing Jesus and his body as "new creatures," and a 
bullock representing their humanity; but in the type now to be 
considered, we find Aaron representing the entire anointed one 
(head and body), and the two sacrifices, a bullock and a goat, 
representing the separateness, yet similarity in suffering of their 
humanity, as the sin offering. The bullock represents Jesus at the 
age of thirty years-the perfect man who died on our behalf. The 
High Priest as we have already seen represents Jesus, anointed to 
be the head, and also all whom God foreknew as members of his 
body. The distinction which is here made between the human and 
the "new creature," should be clearly understood. We understand 
that Jesus, the man at thirty years, was he who was previously rich 



(of a higher nature), but who for our sakes became poor; that is, 
became a man that he might give the ransom for men-a man's life. 
(1 Cor. 15:21) 

Since the penalty of man's sin was death, he must become a 
man or he never could redeem man. A man had sinned and the 
penalty was death of man, and if Jesus would pay t he penalty he 
must be of the same nature, (but undefiled, separate from sin,) and 
die, that man might in due time be liberated from death. To do this 
Jesus made sacrifice of all that was human-glory as a perfect man, 
honor as a perfect man could claim it, comfort and ease as a perfect 
man could enjoy it, and finally life as a man. And this life, was all 
he had, having exchanged his life as a spiritual being, for the 
human, which he now makes "a sin offering" as typified by the 
bullock. 

Such was the promise of Jehovah to him, viz: that he would 
highly exalt him above the human plane, and above his pre-human 
condition; above all angels, principalities and powers, to his own 
right hand, (condition of chief favor, next to Jehovah a partaker of 
immortality-the Divine nature. For these and other joys set before 
him, Jesus endured the cross, despising the shame and is set down 
at the right hand of the Majesty on high. (Heb. 1:3) 

The new nature which was received instead of the human, and 
as a reward for its crucifixion, is what we understand to be here 
typified by the priest. While it is true that the sacrifice of the 
human was not finished until the cross, and that the Divine nature 
was not fully received until the resurrection, three days later, yet, in 
God's reckoning-and as shown in this type, the death of the 
human (the bullock) was complete when Jesus presented himself a 
living sacrifice at baptism-the type of his covenant of death. There 
he reckoned himself dead-dead to all human aims or hopes of 
human glory, honor or life, in the same sense that we are exhorted 
to reckon ourselves dead indeed to the world, but alive as new 
creatures unto God. Rom 6:11 

This acceptance of Jesus by Jehovah as though dead indeed, 
was indicated by the anointing with the Holy Spirit-the earnest or 
guarantee of what he should receive when death had actually taken 
place. 

Thus considered, we see that the death of the bullock typifies 
the offering by Jesus of himself when he consecrated himself. This 
is in harmony with Paul's statement, that when Jesus consecrated- 
saying, Lo I come (as in the volume of the Scriptures it is written 
of me) to do thy will O god-to die. There he took away the first, or 
set aside the typical sacrifices that he might establish or fulfill the 
real sacrifices for sin. (Heb. 10:9, 14) Yes, there the slaying of the 



bullock occurred, and t he three years of Jesus' ministry showed 
that all human will was dead, and the body reckoned so from the 
moment of consecration. 

The anointed Jesus-filled with the Spirit; was the new divine 
creature (though not perfected as divine-until the resurrection) and 
that relationship he always claimed, saying-the works that I do are 
not mine [as a man] but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth 
the works-the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's 
which sent me. (John 14:10, 24) Not my will [as a man] but thine 
[Father-the divine] be done [in and to this earthen vessel 
consecrated to death]. (Mark 15:36) 

When the bullock was slain-when Jesus was consecrated, the 
work was done in "the Court" which we have seen typified the plan 
of human justification or perfection-the condition of faith in and 
harmony with God as men-a sinless condition-the highest 
attainment of the flesh. Jesus was in this condition, as a perfect 
man when he offered himself (the bullock in type) to God. 

Bearing in mind these distinctions, let us examine the work of 
the typical Atonement Day, that we may more clearly understand 
the reality. Aaron was washed, in order to fitly represent the 
sinlessness of the "new creature" (no one who has been begotten of 
God practices sin; because his seed abides in him and he cannot 
sin, because he has been begotten by God." 1 John 3:9, Em. 
Diaglott) The new nature cannot sin, and it keeps a constant watch 
over the old nature reckoned dead lest it come to life again. He was 
clothed with the linen garments, emblems of purity-the 
righteousness of saints. The robe of linen was an earnest of the 
glorious robe to follow; the linen girdle represented him as a 
servant through not so powerful as when girdled with the curious 
girdle of the ephod; the mitre of linen being the same as that 
belonging to the glorious apparel, proclaims his perfect 
righteousness now as then. 

So the High Priest-the Divine minded- spiritually begotten one, 
though not yet born of the Spirit, is able to accomplish the sacrifice 
of atonement. Aaron now brings his typical sacrifice as we read: 
"Thus shall Aaron come into the Holy Place (The Most Holy) with 
a young bullock for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering." 
And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering which is for 
(represents) himself, and make an atonement for himself (the 
members of his body-the under priests) and for his house" (all 
believers, the entire "household of faith"-the Levites. And he shall 
kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for (represents) himself: 
"And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off 
the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten 
small [powdered] and bring it within the vail [the first vail "or 



door"]. And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord." 
[The censer of coals of fire was set into the top of the golden altar 
in the "Holy" and the incense crumbled over it, gradually yielding 
a sweet perfume and smoke] that the cloud of the incense 
[penetrating beyond the second vail] may cover the mercy seat that 
is upon the testimony [or which covers the Law] that he die not." 
(Ver. 3, 6, 11-13) 

Looking through the type to the antitype, let us now, step by 
step, compare the doings of Jesus with the prophetic picture. When 
Jesus had consecrated, he immediately took the human life (blood 
of the bullock) to present it before God as the ransom for ours. But 
first before entering the "Most Holy" he must tarry in the "Holy' 
and make a sweet perfume before Jehovah. He therefore took with 
him along with the blood, fire from off the altar, and his two hands 
full of sweet incense which he crumbled over the fire to cause the 
perfume. 

This illustrates how Jesus' life, after consecration was a sweet 
and acceptable perfume to the Father, attesting at once to the 
completeness of the consecration and the perfection of the 
sacrifice. The sweet incense beaten small, represents the refined 
perfection of the man Jesus. The fire from the Brazen Altar 
represents the trials to which humanity is subject; and when the 
perfections of his being (incense came in contact with the trials of 
life, he yielded perfect obedience to the Divine will-a sweet 
perfume. Thus is shown his temptation in all points, yet without 
sin. It was all consumed in the fire; so he yielded all in obedience. 
It was his two hands full which he offered thus representing his full 
capacity and ability as being tested and required. 

But while Jesus as a "new creature" was thus within the 
"Holy," enjoying the light of the golden candlestick, fed by the 
bread of truth, and offering acceptable incense fed by the bread of 
truth, and offering acceptable incense to Jehovah, let us look out 
into the Court and yet further out, beyond the Camp and see 
another work progressing simultaneously. We last saw the bullock 
dead in the Court; now the fat of it has been placed upon the 
Brazen Altar and with it the kidneys and various life-producing 
organs. They are burning furiously, for a bullock has much fat. A 
cloud of smoke called "a sweet savor to God" rises, in the sight of 
all who are in the Court-Levites-believers. 

This represents how Jesus' sacrifice appeared to believing men. 
They saw the devotion, the self-sacrifice, the loving zeal (fat) 
ascending to God as a sweet and acceptable sacrifice. They all 
knew well that with him, God was ever well pleased. They knew 
from what they saw in the Court (in the flesh) that he was 



acceptable, though they could not see the sacrifice in its full 
grandeur and perfection as it appeared in Jehovah's sight- in the 
"Holy"— a sweet incense on the Golden Altar. 

But while these two fires are burning, in the Court and the 
Holy, and their perfumes ascending at the same time, there is 
another fire outside "the camp." There the body of flesh is being 
destroyed. (Ver. 27) This represents how Jesus' work was viewed 
by the world; to them it seem foolish to spend his life in sacrifice. 
They saw not the spirit of obedience which prompted, as the Father 
saw it; they saw not the loving perfections as the believers (in the 
court condition) saw them. No, nor did they see in him their ideal 
hero and leader; they saw only those elements of his character 
which condemned them, not being in condition to love and admire 
him. To them he was odious-and outcast-despised and rejected; 
they hid their faces from him. 

Do we see then how Jesus' life for three and a half years fills 
all three of these pictures: His sacrifice of perfect manhood-in the 
sight of believers, a sacrifice acceptable to God; in the sight of 
Jehovah, "a sweet incense;"? Was entirely disposed of when Jesus 
cried, "It is finished-and died. Thus the man, Christ Jesus, gave 
himself. 

The incense from the golden altar having preceded him and 
been satisfactory, the High Priest passed under the second vail into 
the "Most Holy." So with Jesus; having for three and a half years 
offered acceptable incense, he passed beyond "the vail, that is to 
say, his flesh." For three days he was under the vail-in death-but 
then arose in the perfection of the Divine nature and the "express 
image of the Father's person:" "Put to death in the flesh, but 
quickened (made alive) in Spirit" "sown a natural (human) body, 
raised a spiritual body." He was then in the "Most Holy," or 
perfection of spiritual being. 

The next step was to present the blood (ver. 14)-The evidence 
of the redemption-for "yet were redeemed... with the precious 
blood (life) of Christ. (1 Pet. 1:19) This going into the presence of 
the Mercy Seat and sprinkling, or presenting the blood was 
evidently fulfilled by Jesus, when he, after forty days, ascended up 
on high, there to appear in the presence of God for us. 

We now leave the High Priest before the "Mercy Seat" while 
we go out to "the court" to witness another work. We quote: "And 
he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids 
of the goats for a sin offering. And he shall take the two goats and 
present them before the Lord at the door of the Tabernacle. And 
Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord and 
the other lot for the scapegoat. And Aaron shall bring the goat 
upon which the Lord's lot fell and offer him for a sin offering. But 



the goat on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall be presented 
alive before the Lord to make an atonement with him, or let him go 
for the scapegoat into the wilderness." (Ver. 5, 6-10) 

The two goats taken from Israel and brought into the "Court," 
represent true Christians: First, taken from the world condition, 
they are brought into the Court or justified condition. There they 
present themselves before the Lord-desiring to become dead with 
Christ as human beings, and to enter the heavenly or spiritual 
conditions as Jesus did-first, the spiritual mind, and secondly, the 
spiritual body. 

But as all who say: "Lord! Lord!" shall not enter the kingdom, 
so too, of those who say, "Lord, here I give myself away." They 
know not what they ask, or what it costs or denial of self, to take 
up the cross daily and follow the bullock- -to "go to him without the 
camp (to the utter disregard and destruction of the human hopes, 
etc.,) bearing the reproach with Him." (Heb. 13:13) So, we find in 
this type both classes of those who covenant to become dead with 
Christ-those who do really follow in his footsteps as he hath set us 
an example, and those who through fear o/(this) death, are all their 
lifetime subject to bondage. (Heb. 2:15) The first is the Lord's 
goat; the second the scapegoat. Both of these classes (goats) as we 
shall see, will have a part in the atonement work-bringing the 
world into complete harmony with God and his Law, when this 
"Day of atonement sacrifice (the Gospel Age) is ended. But only 
the first class (the Lord's goat) who follow the Leader, are the first 
class (the Lord's goat) who follow the Leader, are a part of the sin 
offering. (Ver. 9) "If we suffer with Him, we shall also reign with 
Him." (2 Tim. 2:12) 

The casting of lots to see which goat would be the "Lord's" and 
which the "scapegoat," indicates that God has no choice as to 
which of them shall win the prize. It shows that God does not 
arbitrarily select which shall become partakers of the divine nature 
and joint heirs with Christ our Lord. Whichever believer presents 
himself is acceptable, and he that keeps the covenant shall have the 
reward promised. 

To return to the High Priest: He having sprinkled the Mercy 
Seat with the blood of the bullock seven times (perfectly) "Then 
shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the people, and 
bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as he did 
with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the Mercy Seat." 
(Vss. 14-15) In a word, that which was done with the bullock was 
repeated with the blood sprinkled just the same; its fat, etc., burned 
on the altar in the Court also. [It is worthy of notice that a prime 
bullock is always very fat, while a goat is a very lean animal.] Its 



body, was burned in like manner as that only those animals which 
were sin offerings were burned without (outside) the "Camp" (Heb. 
13:11) and then he tells us to go to him without the camp bearing 
the reproach with him. (Heb. 13: 12), "The reproaches of them that 
reproached thee, are fallen upon me." Psa. 69:9. 

The Lord's goat represented all of the "little flock," they are all 
alike-they all came by the same "narrow way; " so what is true of 
the company as a whole, is true of each one in it; therefore the 
Lord's goat typifies each one and his sacrifice, except that all must 
be complete and the sacrifice of each ended before the "blood" of 
the goat (representative of all the body will be presented on the 
Mercy Seat. 

The blood sprinkled upon and before the Mercy Seat was in the 
design of a cross, with the top or head of the cross on the Mercy 
Seat. This is shown by the description: "He shall sprinkle it with 
his finger upon the Mercy Seat eastward (toward the "door") and 
before (across, in front of) the Mercy Seat." This is the full end of 
the sin offerings for the sins of the world. The bullock, as we have 
seen, was a sin offering for the "Household of faith" the under 
priests and Levites), and the goat, was the sin offering "for the 
people"-Israel-type of the (at present) unbelieving world. 

Thus we see that this entire Gospel Age is an age of suffering 
and death, to those who crucify the human nature, to become 
partakers of the divine. Just as soon as the sacrifice of Jesus on 
behalf of his body and house was complete and presented before 
the Father, then came the evidence of its acceptance in the 
Pentecostal baptism. And this anointing (symbolized by the oil) 
which came upon the church, and continues ever since on all the 
living members of the High Priest's body- this imparting of the 
divine mine to those consecrated ones, was the energy in them 
which killed each, as the "Lord's goat." Just as the Spirit of the 
Father enabled Jesus to kill the bullock, so it was the same spirit— 
the spirit of God and of Christ in the Lord's goat company, which 
enabled them to crucify themselves as men-to kill the goat-in 
hope of the promised Glory, Honor and Immortality of the divine 
nature. 

It was thus that Paul when possessed of the spirit of his Leader 
and Head, could reckon all things but loss and dross that he might 
win (a membership in) Christ, and be found in Him. Inspired by 
this hope and spirit, he could say: "I (the new creature) live, yet not 
F' (the old creature-the goat;) it is being burned with reproach and 
contempt of the world outside the camp. My earthly affections and 
powers have all been presented an offering to God-a living 



sacrifice; now it is Christ living in me, the hope of glory-- Christ's 
mind in me-crucifying and keeping under the human nature. 

While actually in the world, he was not of it. To such an extent 
was this true that he could say-"The life which I now live, I live by 
faith in the Son of God." Yes, by faith he had become a partaker of 
the Divine nature, and was in the "Holy," feeding by faith on the 
"holy bread," enlightened daily by the light from the Golden 
Candlestick. 

Thus furnished with knowledge and strength, he was able to 
offer incense acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, and to keep the 
goat nature always sacrifice. So, too, the same thing has been done 
by the other members of this "Lord's goat" company since, though 
none have been so generally known-his sacrifice sent up a very 
rich perfume. 

As the goat filled up that which was behind of the Sin offering 
after the bullock, so do we "fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24 



The moment must sometime come when the last member of 
this "Lord's goat" shall have consecrated. [We believe that we are 
at just this point now, 1881-the door of opportunity to consecrate 
closed, though there is still time to carry out the consecration 
already made.] Then, soon after, when their sacrifice is consumed, 
as members of His body they shall pass beyond the second vail- 
beyond the flesh, in the perfection of the Divine nature already 
commenced in this mortal body-this earthly house. That passing of 
the second vail means to the body what it meant to the head-that 
we shall be made like unto Christ's glorious body, which is the 
express image of the Father's person. Oh! Blessed hope-"I shall be 
satisfied when I awake in Thy likeness," was spoken prophetically 
for Jesus; and how sublime the promise that "we shall be like Him- 
-like unto Christ's glorious body." Ji I may but win this prize for 
which I run- 

Perish, every earth ambition, 

All I've sought or hoped or known; 

Yet how rich is my condition, 

If winning Christ, I'm found in him. 

The Most Holy reached, we there present the evidence of the 
sacrificed life as typified by the blood of the goat sprinkled on the 
Mercy Seat. 



It will be accepted, as was that of our glorious Leader, and then 
the 

WORK OF RECONCILIATION 

will commence. Sacrifice- -the sin offering-was the basis of 
reconciliation and at-one-ment between Jehovah and the world of 
sinners. Now, the blood of the sin offering being sprinkled on the 
Mercy Seat covering the Testimony, (the Law, it was satisfied. The 
ransom paid to Justice was abundant, and now reconciliation will 
proceed-of which more again. 

"And when he had made an end of reconciling the "Holy" 
["Most Holy"] and the Altar [in the "Court"] he shall bring the live 
goat: and Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live 
goat [scapegoat} and confess over him all the iniquities of the 
children of Israel [typical of the world], and all their transgressions 
in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall 
send him away by the hand of a fit man [anyone convenient] into 
the wilderness." (Vs. 20-22) 

As before expressed, we understand this "scapegoat" which 
presented itself for sacrifice with the other, but failed to perform it, 
and to walk in the steps of the bullock, to represent a very large 
class of God's children who have made the same covenant as the 
others, viz: to become dead to the world, and to crucify their 
justified human nature, but have failed. 

While this scapegoat class has existed throughout this Gospel 
Age, the one goat and the work done with it, at the close of the age 
is representative in a general sense of the dealing with each 
individual goat [person] of that company during the age. 

Let us look first at the dealing with members of this company 
who will be living when the work of sin offering is complete-the 
last members of the scapegoat company-and then see how it will 
apply to the preceding members of the same class. 

But let us first remind you that we are now dealing with things 
future: after the sin offering. The Lord's goat is not yet wholly 
consumer, consequently the "little flock," represented by the body 
of the priests, has not yet gone beyond the second vail into the 
perfect spiritual condition; and the work with living "scapegoat" is 
after all this. 



Other scriptures show us (Rev. 7:9, 13-17 and 1 Cor. 3:15) that 
there will be a "great company" who during this age have entered 
the race for the grand prize of joint-heir ship with Jesus, who do not 
"so run" as to obtain it; and that they, though "castaways" as 
regards the prize (1 Cor. 9:27), are nevertheless objects of the 
Lord's affection and love, who, by his providences through the 
circumstances of life will cause them to come through "great 
tribulations," thus accomplishing for them, "the destruction of the 
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." (1 
Cor. 5:5) Notice, they consecrated their justified human life, and 
God accepted of the consecration and reckoned them, according to 
their covenant, dead as human beings and alive as new-spiritual- 
creatures. But, by their failure to carry out the contract, they are cut 
off from the priesthood, from membership in the body of Christ- 
Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away." (John 
15:2) 

These are in a pitiable condition; they have failed to win the 
prize, therefore cannot have the divine nature, nor can they have 
restitution to perfect humanity with the world, for in their 
consecration, they gave that up for the opportunity to run for the 
divine nature. But the Lord loves them, and will deliver those who 
through fear of death, (fear of contempt-fear of the reproach borne 
by the bullock and goat, beyond the Camp-in the Wilderness, or 
separated, dead condition) were all their lifetime subject to 
bondage-bondage of fear of men and men's traditions and 
opinions which always brings a snare, and keeps back from 
obedience to God-even unto death. 

Through the favor of the High Priest, this great company are to 
go into "great tribulations" and have the flesh destroyed. This will 
not place them as overcomers-the bride-the body of Christ-ew 
the throne as Kings and Priests, but in a position "before the 
throne," as perfect spiritual beings (though not of the highest order 
of the spiritual-the Divine)-not possessed of the Crown of life, 
Immortality). They shall be like unto the angels. "These shall serve 
God in His Temple" though not members of that symbolic Temple 
which is the Christ. (Rev. 7:14,15) 

Now however this class will be sent to the Wilderness 
condition of separation from the world, forced thither by "the man 
of opportunity"-adverse circumstances-there to be buffeted by 
adversity until shown the vanity, deceitfulness and utter 
worthlessness of the World's approval and until all human hopes 
and ambitions die; and they are ready to say-God's will, not mine, 
be done. The world is every ready to scorn and cast out the 



chastened and afflicted ones, though they so earnestly coveted it 
deceiving smile and its empty honors. The body of the scapegoat 
was not burned in the wilderness; only the sin offerings (bullock 
and Lord's goat) were burned. (Heb. 13:11) The burning of the sin 
offering represented the steady continuous submission of that class 
to the fiery ordeal of suffering-"faithful (willing sacrifices) unto 
death." Both classes suffer even unto death of the human will and 
body; but the first class die willingly, destroyed by continual 
crucifying of the flesh as shown by the symbol-fire, which burns 
continuously until thee is nothing more to burn. The second class is 
simply taken out to the wilderness and there left to die. Their love 
of the world's approval perishes with the world's neglect and scorn 
and reproach and their spiritual nature ripens and blooms into life. 
Both these classes have been developing side by side throughout 
the age. 

While thus in process of fulfillment throughout the entire age, 
yet it will be most marked in the case of the last of that scapegoat 
class. When the "little flock" have all gone beyond the vail, the 
hand of the Lord will set free those bound ones "who, through fear 
of death (to the world), are all their lifetime subject to bondage," 
by the overthrow of the many false theories, creeds, traditions of 
men, and great nominal Church organizations, in and to and by 
which, they are held and hindered from hearing and obeying the 
Lord's voice. 

Thus forced loose by "Babylon's" fall, while realizing that the 
great prize has been lost, they will then hear the High Priest's 
voice and find themselves forced into the Wilderness condition. 

At no other time perhaps have there been so many consecrated 
ones bound as at present; but through all the age, there have been 
some. 

Going back to Paul's day we find that there were some then, 
who had consecrated but did not perform their covenant, and 
speaking of them he says: "I verily as absent in body, but present in 
spirit judged already— to delivery such an one unto Satan, for the 
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day 
of the Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 5: 3,5) 

This one we may reasonably presume passed through severe 
afflictions-"great tribulations" in having the flesh destroyed. 

Thus we see that both classes of {goats) consecrated ones pass 
through great trials and afflictions, yet to one class they are 
esteemed light afflictions, taken joyfully, which they rejoice to be 



accounted worthy to suffer. It is a willing sacrifice, like that of the 
Head. To the other class, they are burdensome, great afflictions, 
almost without joy-an enforced destruction of the flesh. And 
proportionately different are their positions and rewards at the end 
of life's race. 

"And Aaron shall come into the Tabernacle of the congregation 
("the Holy") and shall put off the linen garments which he put on 
when he went into the Holy place ("Most Holy") and he shall leave 
them there; and he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place 
("the Court") and put on his [usual] garments [the garments of 
glory and beauty] and come forth and offer his burnt offering and 
the burn offering of the people, and make [having made] an 
atonement for himself [the body-the church-the "little flock"] and 
for the people." (Vss. 23 and 24) 

These burn offerings were two rams (Vss 3 and 5,): one 
representing the Bullock and the other the Lord' s goat. These being 
alike, show the harmony and oneness of the sacrifices made by 
Jesus and his footstep followers, that in God's sight they are all one 
sacrifice. "For both he that sanctifieth (Jesus) and they who are 
sanctified (the little flock) are all of one; for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call them brethren." (Heb. 2:11) 

This is further shown in the treatment of each of these 
sacrifices. The rams of "burnt offering" were cut in pieces and 
washed and the pieces laid unto the head upon the altar and burned, 
making sweet perfume-a burn offering of sweet savor unto 
Jehovah. Since both rams were thus treated, it shows that in 
Jehovah's estimation, they are all parts of one sacrifice; the 
members joined to the head, acceptable as a whole, as the 
atonement for the sins of the World-thus satisfying the claims of 
justice and purchasing the whole world of sinners. 

As the sin offerings illustrate the necessary crucifixion and 
death of the redeemer, so the burn offering illustrates God's 
manifested acceptances of the same sacrifice. Let us not forget that 
God does not manifest his acceptance of the "better sacrifices" 
than bulls and goats, until that sin offering is complete and the 
High Priest is robed in the honor and glory of his office. 

It will be burned on the Altar in "the Court," thus teaching that 
God will manifest His acceptances of the sacrifice of the whole 
body (head and pieces) in the sight of all in "the Court" condition, 
viz: all believers. But before this manifestation to believers, of 
God's acceptance of the work, the "scapegoat company" are sent 
away, and the robes of the Priest changed. As the white robes worn 
throughout the work of sacrifice— which covered the body— 
represented the justification of the body-their purity in God's sight 



as new creatures, so now the glorious garments of glory and beauty 
represent the glories of position and work in the future, after the 
new creatures have been perfected-gone beyond the vail. The 
washing with water seems to show that though the white garments 
are laid aside-the body now clothed in majesty of power is still 
pure. 

Thus ends this type of the development of the Priesthood and 
satisfaction of the world's sins. 

We tarry to glance at a few verses of this chapter (Lev. 16) not 
directly connected with the narrative. 

Vs. 17, "There shall b no man in the tabernacle of the 
congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy 
place (sanctuary "Most Holy") until he come out, and have made 
an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the 
congregation of Israel." The Apostle Paul says-"The priests went 
always into the first tabernacle (the "Holy") accomplishing the 
service, but into the second (tabernacle-the "Most Holy") went the 
high priest alone, once very year" (on the "Day of Atonement," 
which was repeated annually). 

The privileges of the tabernacle are only for those who are 
priests-members of the body of the Head Priest-so that whether 
we be now in the first of these heavenly conditions (spiritual- 
minded, new creatures in Christ Jesus), or whether we hope to 
enter into the second or perfected spiritual condition, it will in 
either or both cases be because we are in Christ Jesus, new 
creatures-no longer men. ""For yet are not in the flesh (human), 
but in the spirit (spiritual, new creatures), if so be that the Spirit of 
God dwell in you." (Rom. 8:9) 

Vs. 28, "And he that burnetii them [the bullock and goat of sin 
offering] shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and 
afterward he shall come into the camp." This seems to teach that 
those who were principally instrumental in reproaching, reviling, 
and destroying the humanity both of Jesus (bullock) and his "little 
flock" (goat) will have no special punishment for it, as they did it 
ignorantly-at the same time accomplishing God's plan. "Father, 
forgive them, they know not what they do." They wash and cleanse 
and come into the camp-i.e., come into the same condition as the 
balance of the world, all of whom are sinners, and all of whom are 
ransomed from that Adamic depravity and sin. 



Vs. 26, "And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat, shall 
wash his clothes and bathe his flesh in water, and afterwards come 
into the camp." This teaches the same lesson relative to those who 
shall be instrumental in bringing the trouble, and consequent 
destruction of the flesh, upon the great company of those 
represented by the scapegoat. 

In the type, the Day of Atonement thus ended; and all Israel are 
reckoned no longer defiled and separate from God, but all are now 
made at one with God. Justice no longer condemns, but bids them 
realize god's reconciled presence in their midst, to bless and 
protect and direct into the Canaan of rest and peace. 

In the antitype, the day of atonement is this Gospel Age, during 
which, Jesus and his body, the Church, make sacrifices to Justice, 
in full satisfaction of the Adamic sin, thus purchasing the race of 
sinners. Because no longer condemned of justice, God will then 
recognize mankind condemned of justice, God will then recognize 
mankind and place his sanctuary among men. Then, will be 
fulfilled that which was written: "The Tabernacle of God (the 
glorified church) is with men, and he will dwell with them, and 
they shall be [become] his people, and God himself shall be with 
them and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from 
their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor 
crying, neither shall there by any more pain, for the former things 
[reign of Satan sin and death] are passed away. And he that sat 
upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new." Rev. 21:3-5 

But while all these blessings shall result from the establishment 
of God's residence, or sanctuary among men ["I will make the 
place of my feet glorious"-"Earth is my footstool,"] yet its 
blessing will be a gradual work requiring the Millennial age for its 
full accomplishment; i.e., death, pain, and tears will be in process 
of destruction (wiping away), but not completed until the end of 
the Millennial Age. 

The gradual process by which man will be brought into 
perfection of being and fullness of harmony with Jehovah, is well 
illustrated in the typical sacrifices of Israel, made after the day of 
atonement, the antitypes of which will be fulfilled during the next 
age. 

To rightly divide and understand these typical sacrifices, it 
must be recognized, that the present Gospel Age is the day of 
atonement toward God for the general sin of mankind; and that all 
sacrifices coming after the day of atonement in the type, represent 



fulfillments or antitypes due after the Gospel Age is ended-during 
the Millennial Age-when the world of sinners may become 
reconciled to, or at one with God. 

Thus we may see that at-one-ment has two parts— first, Justice 
at one with, and not any longer condemning and killing Adam and 
his children on account of his sin; and secondly, the sinner being 
brought to at-one-ment or reconciliation is brought about entirely 
by the Priest's sacrifice or what we shall term the "Day of 
Atonement sacrifices. " * 



*The sacrifices relative to the consecration of the priests and parts 
of two types yet to be considered, we regard of course, as being the 
same sacrifices as those above mentioned as taking place on the 
Day of Atonement- they being merely different views or pictures 
of the same sacrifices. 

The other-The reconciling of the World to God or the bringing 
of them into full at-one-ment and harmony with God, will be 
accomplished during the next age by the "Royal Priesthood" who, 
typified by Moses will be the Great Prophet whom the Lord will 
raise up to teach the people, to whom if they will not give heed, 
they shall be cut off from life-die the second death. (Acts 3:23) 

This Priesthood is also typified by Melchizedek, King and 
Priest. These shall rule over to bless and represent before the Lord, 
all the families of the earth. 



CHAPTER V 



THE OTHER SACRIFICES 



Those sacrifices which do not belong to the class we 
denominate the "Day of Atonement sacrifices," illustrate offerings 
and sacrifices which belong to the Millennial Age. 

As in the type, the day of atonement sacrifices preceded all 
others, and were a basis of general forgiveness and acceptance with 
God for all Israel, but were followed by sacrifices after that day, for 



individual sins, termed "Sin offerings," "Trespass offerings," etc., 
so in the antitype. After this day of atonement has brought the 
world into a justified condition, there will still be sins and 
trespasses committed, which will require confession and 
reconciliation of such transgressions afresh. 

As in the basis of all forgiveness of sins in the next age, will be 
the "Day of Atonement sacrifices," it would be appropriate for the 
sinner to bring some sacrifice, which would indicate a recognition 
of those sacrifices, as the ground for forgiveness anew. And so we 
find, that all offerings of the people after the Day of Atonement 
were of a kind which pointed back to, or recognized the sacrifices 
of that day. These offerings might be of cattle, or sheep, or fowl 
(turtle doves or young pigeons) or of fine flour, the article offered, 
depending on the ability of the offerer. But they all seem to be 
remembrancers of the atonement sacrifices. 

During the Millennial age all men "will come to a knowledge 
of the truth" and be saved from the curse of Adamic death. (1 Tim. 

2:4) 

When we remember that this death includes all the sickness, 
pain, and imperfection to which humanity is now subject, we see 
that God's plan includes a full restoration to human perfection; but 
perfection comes gradually and it will require the cooperation of 
the sinner' s will to ever reach it. He must do what he can to climb 
up again to perfection, and will have all the assistance necessary. 
This is shown by these sacrifices in general. They are to be 
according to every man's ability. If very much degraded by sin and 
very imperfect, he must when he comes to a knowledge of the 
truth, present himself to God. If thus poor and degraded he may 
bring a dove or pigeon, if less degraded he is represented by a kid; 
if less degraded still, by a goat; and when perfect as a man his 
offering may be a bullock; just as a bullock was used to typify the 
perfect humanity (much fat) of Jesus' sacrifice and as a goat 
(wayward and lean) was used to represent our imperfect human 
nature in the sacrifices of this atonement day, so those animals 
similarly represent the offerers (Israel-the world) in their sacrifices 
and consecrations. 

When the whole world has been brought to perfection there 
will be no longer any who are poor in this sense-all will be perfect 
men and their offerings antitypical bullocks. 

David speaking of this says: "Then shalt thou be pleased with 
the sacrifices of righteousness (of right doing), with burnt offering 



and whole burnt offering; then shall they offer bullocks (perfect 
sacrifice) upon thine altar." (Psa. 51:19) Yet that David's language 
should not be understood to teach the restoration of the literal 
bloody, typical sacrifices, is evident, for in the same connection he 
says, "Thou desirest not sacrifice," (the typical). ..The sacrifices of 
God are a broken spirit; and a contrite heart O God, thou wilt not 
despise." (Psa 51:16-19) But all these sacrifices must be of the free 
will and desire of the offerer. (Lev. 1:3) 

The entire consecration is shown by the death of the animal; 
that is each member of the race must consecrate his will; but it will 
neither be followed by the destruction of the human nature 
(burning of the flesh outside the camp) nor by taking of the life into 
a new nature,-shown in the case of the atonement sacrifices. No, 
when consecrated, they are accepted as human beings, their right to 
life as such, having been purchased by the Priesthood. 

THEIR BURNT OFFERINGS 

The burnt offering of the Priests was to be kept up continually 
on the Altar, and the fire never suffered to die out. "This is the law 
of the burn offering; it is (called) the burnt offering because of the 
burning upon the Altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of 
the Altar shall be burning in it... It shall not be put out, and the 
Priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt 
offering in order upon it... The fire shall ever be burning upon the 
Altar; it shall never go out." Lev. 6:9, 12, 13. 

THEIR TRESPASS OR SIN OFFERING 

"If a soul (being) commit a trespass and sin through ignorance 
in the holy things of the Lord;... if he sin and commit any of these 
things which are forbidden to be done by the Commandments of 
the Lord, though he wist it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his 
iniquity." "And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the 
flock," and money according to the priest's estimation of the 
trespass, with a fifth more, and this shall be their offering. And the 
priest shall make an atonement for him. And if any sin knowingly 
and damage or defraud his neighbor, he shall restore it in the 
principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto (twenty per cent 
interest) and give it to the wronged one. And he shall bring a ram 
for the trespass offering unto the Lord. (Lev. 5: 115-19; and 6: 1-7) 

This teaches that for every wrong, restoration must be made 
with interest, and a repentance or asking forgiveness of the Lord 
through the Church; their recognition of their own imperfection 
and the value of their ransom, being shown by the ram presented. 



Now notice the difference between the treatment of this sin 
offering and the sin offerings of the day of atonement: Those were 
offered to God (Justice) as the ransom or purchase price of sinners; 
these are offered to the Priests who purchased the people, their 
acknowledgments being to their Redeemer; while the Priest takes a 
part and offers it to the Lord as a memorial, or a recognition that 
the whole plan of redemption as executed on the Atonement Day 
[Gospel Age] was His. 

The Atonement Day offerings, we have seen, were always 
burned, (Lev. 6:30, Heb. 13:11,) but these sin offerings are not to 
be burned, but eaten by the priests. --"This is the law of the sin 
offering:... The priests that offereth it for sin shall eat it:... All the 
males among the priests shall eat thereof." (Lev. 6: 25-29) 

So the whole world, having been purchased with the precious 
blood (human life) of Christ (the anointed), will present 
themselves, for forgiveness of trespass, to the Royal Priesthood 
who paid their ransom price; and their acceptance of it will be the 
forgiveness. To this agree Jesus' words to his disciples: "He 
breathed on them and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit. 
Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and 
whosoever sins yet retain (to them) they are retained." John 20:23 

While this "ministry of reconciliation" belongs in its fullest 
sense in the next age- when all the sacrifices of atonement will be 
complete-yet even now, any member of the "Royal Priesthood" 
may say to those who believe: (the household of faith) "Thy sins 
are forgiven thee"-just as our Head said, by faith, looking forward 
to the completion of the sacrifices for sins, which sacrifice he had 
begun. 

THEIR PEACE OFFERINGS 

This offering must be of the herd or flock, and it might be made 
in fulfillment either of a vow (covenant) or as a willing "thank 
offering." Part of it was to be brought to Jehovah by the offerer- 
"His own hands shall bring the offerings of the Lord made by fire; 
the fat with the beast; it shall he bring," and the priest shall burn 
the fat on the altar, and wave the breast before the Lord. But the 
breast shall be the priest's, also the shoulder. The offerer must eat 
the sacrifice. (Lev. 3 and 7: 11-18, 30-34) 

This seems to show, that if any would come into a condition of 
full peace and harmony (as all are to do or be cut off-the second 
death), they must eat or fulfill a covenant before God, of entire 



consecration to him. If, after being thus perfected, they again 
become defiled with sin, they must die, (second death) as shown by 
the touching of unclean things. (Lev. 7: 19-21) 

With this sacrifice there was presented an offering of 
unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and anointed wafers, 
representing the offerer's faith in Christ's character, which he will 
copy; and leavened bread indicating his acknowledgment of his 
own present imperfection at time of consecration-leaven being a 
type of sin. Lev. 7: 11-13. 

THE MEAT OFFERINGS, 

composed of fine flour, unleavened cakes, with oil, etc., were 
presented to the Lord through the priest. They probably represent 
praises and worship offered to the Lord by the world, through his 
church-"Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus 
throughout all ages." (Eph. 3:21) These were accepted by the 
priests; a sample being offered on the altar shows that it is 
acceptable to Jehovah. 



CHAPTER VI 



ANOTHER TYPE OF CHRIST'S SACRIFICES 



LEVITICUS 9 

This chapter seems to give a more condensed picture of the 
work and sacrifices of the Day of Atonement than the one already 
examined (sixteenth) and in addition, it furnishes certain features 
which, after the consideration of the sixteenth, will be of interest to 
us. It is another picture. 

And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commanded 
that ye should do: and the glory of the Lord shall appear unto you. 
And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the Altar and offer thy sin 
offering and thy burnt offering and make an atonement for thyself 
[the members of his body required it] and for the people" [The 
World.] 

This shows how Jesus [the bullock sacrifice for sins] was 
sufficient both to redeem his body, the "little flock," and also the 



whole world of mankind. Our share in the sin offering could have 
been dispensed with entirely, and we might have been saved from 
death just as all mankind will be-- with perfect human being 
restored. But it pleased Jehovah not only to choose Jesus to this 
great work of sacrifice, but also to make him the Captain or Head 
of His church which is His body, who, as well as their Captain, 
should be made perfect as spiritual beings, by suffering as sin 
offerings in the flesh. 

Paul, referring to our intimate relationship to our Head, says: 
"Blessed by the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath 
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places [the 
"Holy" and "Most Holy"] in Christ; according as he hath chosen us 
in him before the foundation of the world... to the praise of the glory 
of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved." 
(Eph. 1:4, 6) God "called you by our gospel to the obtaining of the 
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ," (2 Thes. 2:14,) 

To continue- After offering his own once for all, he was to 
"offer the offering of the people [the goat], and make an atonement 
for them as the Lord [Jehovah] commanded. " /The arrangement 
for our having part in the sacrifice of atonement, was a part of our 
Father's original plan as Paul also attests.] 

"Aaron therefore went unto the altar and slew the calf of the sin 
offering which was for himself. And the sons of Aaron brought the 
blood unto him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on 
the horns of the altar; but the fat etc.... he burnt upon the altar,... and 
the flesh and the hid he burnt with fire without the camp. And he 
slew the burn offering (a ram), and Aaron's sons presented unto 
him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar. And 
they presented the burnt offering unto him; and he did wash the 
inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the burnt offering on the 
altar, with the pieces thereof and the head." [Much the same as the 
account in the sixteenth chapter, and having the same significance.] 

Thus the burnt offering of Jesus has been burning all through 
the Gospel Age, evidence to all in the "court" God's acceptance of 
him and the acceptance of all the members of the body-laid to the 
head, on the altar. 

"And he brought the people's offering, and took the goat which 
was the sin offering for the people (only) and slew it and offered it 
for sin as the first," i.e., treated it exactly as he treated the bullock. 
This goat is the same as the "Lord's goat" in the other picture, the 
scapegoat and other features being omitted in this more general 



view. It is, however, confirmatory of the teaching, that only those 
who follow the Lord's footsteps are participants in the sin offering. 
Who could take exceptions to this? 

"And he brought the burnt offering and offered it according to 
the (usual) manner. And he brought the meat offering, and took a 
handful of it and offered it upon the altar beside the burnt sacrifice 
of the morning. 

He also slew the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice or peace 
offering which was for the people." The peace offering, as already 
described, represents a vow of covenant. By this peace offering, 
made in connection with the sin offering of the High Priest, is 
signified the covenants and promises based on that sin offering. In 
the type, the peace was established between Jehovah and Israel on t 
his wise: The sin offering having been made, and the burnt offering 
showing the acceptableness of it to God, there was peace between 
Jehovah and Israel because their former original sin was typically 
removed; and they were obligated to now live obedient to a 
covenant based on their forgiveness-i.e., they were to keep the 
Law-that he that doeth those things should live by (or as a reward 
for keeping) them. But as our sin sacrifices are better than the 
typical ones, so with the peace offering or covenant established by 
those sacrifices; it is a better covenant. Thus in this sacrifice of 
peace or covenant offering, the Priest is seen to serve unto the 
example and shadow of spiritual things-the mediator of a better 
covenant. Heb. 8: 6-13. 

"And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people and blessed 
them and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the 
burnt offering and peace offerings." 

Thus in the type we see illustrated the fact that though the 
blessing is not fully due to come upon the people until all sacrifices 
are finished, yet a measure of blessing comes upon mankind from 
the members of the Priest, even now during the age of sacrifice, 
before we all go into the "Most Holly" or perfected spiritual 
condition. 

"And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and came out and blessed the people." 

This shows how, when this age of sacrifice is over, the Priest 
(head and body) appears before God, giving evidence of having 
met all the claims of the Law against the people (world). Moses' 
going in also, seems to say, the Law will be fully satisfied and its 



righteousness vindicated; and the Law (Moses) will testify on 
behalf of the world that it is justified to life through the sacrifices. 

When presented, the sacrifices are "holy, acceptable to God"; 
and Moses and Aaron come out, and together they bless the 
people. So in the incoming age, the Christ will bless all the 
families of the earth (Gal. 3:8, 16, 29, Gen. 12:3); yet not by setting 
aside the Law of God and excusing sin, but by restoring men to the 
perfection of humanity, in which condition they will be able to 
keep the perfect Law of God, and be blessed by it. Now, by reason 
of our inherited imperfection, though the Law says-"He that doeth 
these things (obeys) shall live by them," (shall have a right to 
continuous life)-yet none of the imperfect race can now have this 
everlasting life, because of inability to keep the Law. But, then, 
being made perfect and able to keep it, its conditions of "do and 
live" will be great blessings to all men, for whosoever will, may 
then obey and live forever in harmony and happiness and 
communion with Jehovah. 

"And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people." As 
the blessing progresses (restoring and elevating the race mentally 
and physically) the results will become manifest. The people-the 
world in general-will recognize God's gracious love, more and 
more each day. Thus it will be that "the GLORY of the Lord will 
be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together." (Isa 40:5) They will 
come to see gradually, the length and breadth and height and depth 
of the love of God which surpasses all understanding. 

It is worthy of note that the blessing here mentioned was not a 
blessing to the under priests; no, they were represented in the 
blesser. The blessing came on all the people, who, as we have 
seen, represented the world. It is this blessing of the world by the 
one seed-the entire Christ, after all the afflictions are filled up by 
the body, (Col. 1:24) that Paul refers to, saying, that "The whole 
creation (all humanity) groaneth and travaileth in pain together- 
waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of God" before they can 
experience deliverance from the bondage of corruption and 
restoration to the liberty of sons of God, as enjoyed by God's first 
human son, Adam. (Luke 3:38) 

It is doubtless this same blessing of all the people-salvation 
from death and its sting, sin-that Paul refers to, saying: "unto 

THEM THAT LOOK FOR HIM SHALL HE APPEAR THE SECOND TIME 

without (a sin offering), unto salvation." (Heb 9:28) The world 
has seen the Priest-head and body-suffer as a sin offering during 
the age. Jesus was manifested to the Jews in the flesh (as a sin 



offering); and, as Paul could say, so can all the followers in his 
footsteps, viz.: Christ is manifest in our mortal flesh. (2 Cor. 4:11) 

As the whole Christ has thus been manifest and suffered in the 
flesh, so they shall also be "glorified together" before the world; 
for the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it 
together." ["Ye are not in the flesh." Rom. 8:9] When he shall 
appear, we also shall appear with him in glory. Col. 3:4. 

But this great High Priest of the world, will be recognized only 
by them that look for him. If he were to appear in the flesh-or 
appear in the sky, it would be an appearance to all, whether looking 
for him or not but we have already seen that the Scriptures teach 
that the head has been perfected as a spiritual being, and that his 
"little flock" shall be "made like unto his glorious body. " We have 
seen that the way in which the world will see the glorified church 
will be by mental perception in the same sense that a blind person 
may properly be said to see. In the same sense we see the prize, the 
"crown of life," while we look not at the things which are seen, but 
at the things which are unseen (by organic sight); for the things 
which are seen (thus) are temporal, but the things which are not 
seen (thus) are eternal. (2 Cor. 4:18) It is in this way that the entire 
church of this age has been "looking unto Jesus"-thus "we see 
Jesus." (Heb. 2:9 and 12:2) 

This is the only way in which the human can see or recognize 
things on the spiritual plane. Jesus expresses this same idea to the 
disciples-They who recognized his spirit or mind and thus knew 
him, would be acquainted with the Father also in the same way. "If 
ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also; and from 
henceforth ye know him and have seen him." This is the only sense 
in which the world will ever see God, for "no man hath seen God 
at any time." ("Whom no man hath seen, nor can see")-the only 
begotten Son he hath DECLARED him." (1 Tim. 6:16; John 1:18) 
Jesus revealed or caused the disciples to see him by making known 
his character-revealing him as a God of Love. 

It was in this same way that the Papal system was shown by 
Luther and others, and seen by many as the ANTI-CHRIST, or as 
Paul had foretold, that wicked system-the man of sin, was 
revealed. 

Thus it is, that Jesus the head (now present to gather the 
Jewels) is being now revealed to the living of the "little flock," 
though all others continue to plant, build, etc. And know not of his 
presence. (Luke 17: 26-30) 



And thus also it will be in the Millennial day, when the 
complete Christ-the Priest-is revealed, it will be only to those that 
look for him-only those shall see him. They will see him, not by 
organic sight, but as we now see all spiritual things-Jesus, the 
Father, the prize, etc. -by faith. Man will never see the CHRIST by 
organic sight, for the same reason that they will never see Jehovah- 
-because on a different plan of being-one spirit, the other flesh. 
But we (the little flock) shall see him as he is, for we shall be like 
him- like unto Christ's glorious spiritual body, which is the 
express image of the Father's person. (1 John 3:2; Phil. 3:21; Heb. 
1:3) 

But though only those who look shall be able to recognize the 
Christ, as the deliverer who will save them from the dominion of 
death; yet this will embrace all the world, for the manner of 
revelation will be such that ultimately all must see. Every eye shall 
see him; and all in their graves, being raised to life-they that 
pierced him will realize that they crucified the Lord of Glory. He 
shall be revealed (in the sky? No) in flaming fire, (judgments) 
taking vengeance on those that know (recognize not God, and obey 
not (accept no) the gospel (good news-the deliverance). It will not 
take long for all mankind to recognize him under such 
circumstances. Now the good suffer; then shall ye discern between 
him that serveth the Lord, and him that serveth him not, for in that 
day a distinction will be manifested. (Mai. 3: 15-18) Then all, 
seeing clearly, may accept of him and have everlasting life; for 
"We trust in the Living God, who is the Savior of all men, 
specially of those that believe." (1 Tim. 4:10) 

This the types illustrate-" And as it is appointed unto men 
(Aaron and his successors who were only types of the High Priest 
of the new creation) once to die (typically, as represented in the 
animals slain) and after that, (following as a result of those 
sacrifices) in the judgment (of God was manifested, as accepting 
the offering-the priest coming out to bless, for all whom he made 
atonement-all the people.) So Christ (head and body) was once 
offered (never will it be repeated) to bear the sins of many ("every 
man") and unto them that look for him, he shall appear the second 
time, without sin unto salvation." (Not again to be sacrificed for 
the sins of the people, but to bless them.) Heb. 9:27,28. 

Many have been looking in an indefinite way for a good time to 
come, and the removal in some way of the curse, speaking of 
whom, Paul says: "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in 
pain together until now, waiting for the manifestation of the 



SONS OF GOD "--Jesus the Head or Chief, and all the body complete 
in him. (Rom. 8: 19,22) 

"And there came a fire out from before the Lord, and consumed 
upon the altar the burn offering and the fat, which, when all the 
people saw, they shouted and fell on their faces"-worshipped. This 
is the same thought expressed in another form. The fire symbolizes 
God's acceptance; its being recognized by the people, shows that 
the world will realize the sacrifice and its value in God's 
estimation as the price of their liberty from death and the grave; 
and when they realize it, they will worship Jehovah and his 
representatives-the Priest. 

How beautifully these types teach of a restitution, and a full 
ransom for all the people, and a blessing coming upon all. Nothing 
in the types seems to make a distinction between the living and the 
dead, and some may be inclined to say, well, perhaps when the 
sacrifices of the High Priest are over and the blessing commences, 
those who are then living will be greatly benefited. Nay, but we 
answer, in God's estimation the living and dead are alike-he 
speaks of them all as dead-all died in Adam, and all the little 
spark of life which any man possesses is really but one stage of 
dying. It is a dead race because of the sin of Adam (and Eve), and 
it will be a race justified to the same life then enjoyed and 
forfeited; and all who will, may have it back, whether they have 
gone all the way down into death, or whether they still linger on the 
brink-in "the valley of the shadow of death. 

This is the object of the sin offerings-to release mankind from 
the dominion of death, to the perfection of being which is essential 
to perfect happiness and at-one-ment with his Creator. This is the 
blessing which comes to all the families of the earth through "The 
Seed of Abraham. This is the good news which was preached to 
Abraham, as we read: God foreseeing that he would justify the 
heathen (all mankind-Gentiles) through faith, preached before the 
gospel (good news) to Abraham, saying, In thee, and in thy seed 
shall all nations be blessed-(justified)... which seed is Christ- 
primarily the head, and secondarily the body— fox if ye be Christ's 
(members) then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the 
promises (above referred to-viz.: that we may bless all the families 
of the earth.) But the Seed must be complete before the blessing 
comes, as shown in the type just considered: The sin offerings must 
be ended before all the blessings resulting can flow out. 

While the sacrifices of the people (Israel-the world) belong to 
the next age and will then be presented to the priests, yet in a 



certain sense this has a very slight beginning now. Thus it is, that 
the worldly man who possesses wealth, and is in that sense a 
steward of God's things, can use that "mammon" and with it make 
for himself friends. That when this age of Satan's rule is no longer 
be the Steward, then, those whom he thus favored will bless him 
and minister to his necessities. If the worldly Stewards of wealth 
(the mammon or God of this age) were wise, they would use their 
means thus. For whosoever shall give a cup of cold water even, 
unto his reward when the kingdom of Christ is organized and rules. 
(Luke 16: 1-8 and Matt. 10:42) 

On the contrary, the High Priest went in there often in after 
days. It was into the Most Holy that the High Priest went whenever 
he would inquire for Israel, using the breast-plate of Judgment and 
Urim and Thumim. Again, whenever they broke camp, which was 
often, the Priest went in and took down the Vails and wrapped up 
the "Ark" and all the holy vessels, before the Levites could carry 
them. (Num. 4: 5-16) 

Again, whenever an Israelite offered a sin offering unto the 
priests (after the "Day of Atonement" sacrifices were over) they all 
ate it in the Most Holy. (Num. 18: 10) So with the antitype, after 
the present "Day of Atonement" is over we shall be in the Most 
Holy or perfect spiritual condition and there accept (eat) the 
sacrifices for sin, brought by the world, for all their own 
transgressions-not the Adamic sins which were canceled on the 
Day of Atonement. There in the perfect spiritual condition, the 
priesthood shall instruct as to all matters. (Urim and Thumin) 



CHAPTER VII 



OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES 



In the preceding description we have purposely omitted an 
explanation of some interesting details which can be better 
understood by those who have, through careful study, obtained a 
clear understanding of the general plan of the Tabernacle, its 
service, and their typical signification. 

The posts which stood in the court and held up the white 
curtains, represent justified believers. They are in the "Court," the 



proper place for such, as we have already seen. They are of wood, a 
corruptible material. This shows that they are not actually perfect 
as human beings; for since human perfection is represented by 
copper, those posts should be either made of copper, or covered 
with copper to represent actually perfect human beings. They were 
made of wood, but were set into sockets of copper, which teaches 
us that, though actually imperfect, their standing is that of perfect 
human beings. It would be impossible to more clearly represent 
Justification by faith. 

The white curtain, well illustrates the same justification or 
purity. These justified ones should continually hold up the view of 
the world (the camp)-Christ's righteousness as their covering. 

The silver hook, by which the posts hold up the curtain, are 
symbolic of truth; they can really and truthfully claim that Christ's 
righteousness covers all their imperfection. Lev. 27: 11-17. 

The Posts at the entrance of the Tabernacle-at the door of the 
Holy- -were covered by the first vail. They were totally different 
from the posts in the court, and represent the difference between 
the justified and consecrated, or sanctified conditions. The 
consecration to death of a justified man, we have seen to be the 
way into the "Holy." The way into the new nature is by passing 
through, the death of the human will-the fleshly mind-the first 
vail. Hence these posts should illustrate this change; and so they 
do: they were covered with gold, symbol of the divine nature. 
Being set in sockets of copper, represents how "we have this 
treasure (divine nature in earthen vessels" (2 Cor. 4:7)— I.e., our 
new nature is based upon and rests in, our justified humanity. This, 
it will be remembered, corresponds exactly with what we found the 
"Holy" to symbolize, viz: our place or standing as new creatures, 
not yet perfected. (Exod. 26:37) 

The Posts in the "Most Holy" were just inside the second vail, 
and represent those who pass beyond the flesh (vail) entirely, into 
the perfection of the spiritual condition. These posts were so 
constructed as to fully illustrate this-covered with gold, 
representing divine nature, but no longer set in sockets of brass-no 
longer dependent on any human condition; they were set in sockets 
of silver (reality-truth) which seems to say to us: When you come 
inside this vail you will be perfect-really and fully new creatures. 
(Exod. 26: 32) 

"Finish then thy new creation" 



The Golden Candlestick was all of one piece, hammered out; 
there was one central shaft with a lamp on top, and three branches 
on each side of it, each bearing a lamp, making seven lamps in all— 
a perfect or complete number. Does not this represent the complete 
church from the Head, Jesus, to and including the last member of 
the "little flock." He is taking out from among men, to be partakers 
of the (gold) divine nature? Jesus says, "The seven candlesticks 
which thou sawest are the seven churches." Rev. 1: 20. Yes, that 
candlestick represents the entire church of the first born. Not the 
nominal, but the true church is here meant however-the royal 
priests-wholly consecrated. 

The form of workmanship was beautiful-a fruit and a flower, a 
fruit and a flower following successively, shows us that the true 
church ("whose names are written in heaven") is both beautiful and 
fruitful from first to last. The lamp part on top of each branch was 
shaped like an almond, the significance of which, we will see when 
considering Aaron's rod. 

The oil for this lamp was the olive oil-beaten-refined; and the 
lamps were kept lighted always. It was for the benefit of the priest 
class only, and represents the deeper spiritual truths of God's 
Word, which are entirely hidden from the natural man (1 Cor. 2: 
14), even though he be a belie ver-a justified man (a Levite). None 
are permitted to go or even to see, into this deeper royal priesthood. 
These always had access to the "Holy"; it was their right and 
privilege; it was intended for them. (Heb. 9: 6) The Levites could 
not see in because of the vail of human-mindedness which came 
between them and the Sacred things; and the only way to set it 
aside was to consecrate and sacrifice wholly the human nature. The 
lights were to be trimmed and replenished every morning and 
evening, by the High Priest-Aaron and his sons who succeeded 
him in office. (Exod. 27: 20-21; and 30: 8) So our High Priest is 
daily filling us more and more with the mind of Christ, and 
trimming off the dross of the old nature. 

Are we sometimes puzzled to know why some who are in the 
church cannot see any but natural things-cannot discern the deeper 
spiritual truths of the Word? They can see Restitution for natural 
men, but cannot see our heavenly calling. These Tabernacle lessons 
show us why this is: "They are brethren, of the household of faith," 
but Levites-in the Court; they never consecrated as priests, 
consequently cannot enter the "Holy," nor see the things that were 
prepared for the priests only. The natural "eye hath not seen, or ear 
heard-neither have entered into the heart of man the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love Him. But God hath revealed 



them unto us by His Spirit [light of the Lamp], for the Spirit 
searcheth [revealeth] all things-yea, the deep [hidden] things of 
God." (1 Cor. 2:9) 

The church nominal has always included both the justified and 
sanctified classes-Levites and Priests. In Paul's day certain parts 
of his letters were addressed to the justified class (Levites), who 
had not consecrated. Thus, after exhorting in Gal. 5, he winds up 
by assuring them, that the things he complains of, are evidences 
that they do not belong to the body of Christ (Priesthood); for, he 
says, "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the 
affections and lusts." Verse 24. 

In the same way he addresses the Romans (Ch. 12: 1): "I 
beseech you therefore, brethren [believers-justified by faith in 
Christ-Levites], by the mercies of God [manifest through Christ in 
our justification], that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice; 
[that you consecrate wholly thus becoming priests] holy, 
acceptable unto God." Being justified freely by faith in Jesus, God 
reckons you as sinless-holy-and has agreed to accept every such 
sacrifice-"With such sacrifices he is ever well pleased." By so 
doing you become priests-members in particular of the High 
Priest's body. 

The succeeding verse tells them what will result from so 
consecrating— viz.: The transformation of their minds. Their wills 
being renewed, they will be priests-new creatures, possessing the 
spirit of Christ. The fact that at this time they have not the spirit of 
sacrifice-glad obedience to God's will, is an evidence that they are 
not members of Christ, he is none of His." (Rom. 8: 9) And it 
seems evident to us, that by far the larger proportion of the early 
churches (much more so of the modern worldly mixture- 
confusion-Babylon, of the present day) were merely Levites, doing 
the service of the Sanctuary, but not sacrificing. 

Looking back at the type in the Law, we find that there were 
17,160 Levites appointed in the shadowy service, while only five 
Priests were appointed for the shadowy sacrificing. (Num. 4: 36, 
40, 44, 48; Ex. 28:1) It may be that this, as much as the other 
features of that shadow, was designed to illustrate the proportion of 
justified believers to self-sacrificing consecrated ones. Though now 
the nominal church numbers millions, yet when a fair allowance is 
made for hypocrites, and one in every three thousand of the balance 
supposed to be living sacrifices, (a correct proportion according to 
the type,) it seems quite evident that the Lord did not make a 
misstatement when He said, that they who would receive the 



kingdom (the Royal Priesthood) would be a "little flock." (Luke 
12:32) 

The fact that we see believers who are trying to put away their 
sins, is not of itself evidence of their being Priests, for Levites, as 
well as Priests, should practice circumcision of the heart-"putting 
away the filth (sins) of the flesh." Nor is a spirit of meekness, 
gentleness, benevolence, and morality, always a result of 
consecration to God. These qualities belong to a perfect natural 
man-(the image of God), and in occasional instances partially 
survive the wreck of the fall. These, when in the nominal church, 
not infrequently pass for the cream of Christianity. 

Nor yet, when we see believers practicing self-denial in some 
good work of political or moral reform, is that an evidence of 
consecration to God, though it is an evidence of consecration to a 
work. Consecration to God says, any work, any where; Lo, "I 
delight to do Thy will, O God-Thy will in Thy way be done. 

CONSECRATION TO God, THEN, WILL INSURE A SEARCHING OF HIS 

revealed plan IN his word, that we maybe able to spend and be 
spent, for Him and in His service. 

Marvel not, then, that so few have ever seen the glorious 
beauties within the Tabernacle; only Priests can see them. The 
Levites may know of them only as they hear them described. They 
have never seen the hidden light and beauty; never eaten of the 
hidden bread; never offered the acceptable incense at the Golden 
Altar. No, for these they must pass the vail-in entire consecration 
to God. 

The Golden Table bearing the shew bread, represents the 
church as a whole, including Jesus and the apostles-all "Holding 
forth the word of life." (Phil. 2: 16) The great work of the true 
church during this age, is to feed and strengthen and enlighten all 
who enter the covenant- spiritual condition-The Bride of Christ is 
to make herself ready. (Rev. 19:7) 

The Golden Altar seems also to represent the entire 
(consecrated) church in the present sacrificing condition. From this 
altar ascends the sweet incense, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 
Here is offered to God the priest's willing services-owr praises, 
our willing obedience, all things whatsoever we do, to the glory of 
God. Those who thus offer incense acceptable to God by Jesus 
Christ our head (1 Pet. 2: 5), come very close to their Father-close 
up to the vail; and if they have requests to make they may be 
presented with the incense "much incense with the prayers of the 



saints." (Rev. 8:3) The prayers of such priests of God are 
effectual. Jesus kept the incense continually burning and could say, 
"I knew that thou hearest me always." (John 11: 42) So we will be 
heard always, if we continually expect to have requests recognized 
who do not thus keep their covenant-"!f ye abide in me and my 
words [teachings] abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it 
shall be done unto you." (John 15:7) 

We have learned through types previously considered, 
something of the glory of the Most Holy (the perfect, divine 
condition) which no man can approach in Christ Jesus-partaker of 
the Divine nature, will finally come. We would now endeavor to 
learn what God has designed to symbolize by the "Ark of the 
Testimony," its only article of furniture. Its name suggests that it 
illustrates the embodiment of Jehovah's plan, which he had 
purposed in himself, before the lapse of ages had developed even 
the head of the Christ, or the minutest beginning of his plan. It 
represented the purpose of God to develop a little flock, to be 
partakers of the Divine nature. It contained the Law showing how 
the Christ should meet in full, all the requirements of God's perfect 
Law, and also that legal authority should be vested in him as the 
Law-giver. 

The righteousness of the Law was actually fulfilled in our head, 
and it is also fulfilled actually in us as new creatures who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit; that is, who walk in obedience to 
the new mind. The infirmities of the old nature which we are daily 
crucifying, are not charged to us as new creatures. 

When it is written that "the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled 
in us"-the end of our race-perfection is reckoned to us, because 
we are walking toward, or after the spiritual perfection, which, 
when we reach the Most Holy (Ark condition) will be completed. 

Aaron's Rod that budded, shows the select character of all the 
body of Christ, as members of the royal priesthood. By reading 
Num. 17, the meaning of the budded rod will be seen to be, 
Jehovah's acceptance of Aaron and his sons-the head and under 
priests-as the only ones who might perform the priest's office of 
Mediator. That rod, therefore represents the acceptableness of the 
"royal priesthood"-the Christ, Head and body. 

It budded and brought forth almonds. A peculiarity about the 
almond tree, is, that the fruit comes before any leaves appear; so 
with the "royal priesthood;" they sacrifice or bring forth fruit, 
before the leaves, or professions are made. 

The Golden Pot of Manna represents Immortality as being one 
of the possessions of the Christ of God. Jesus doubtless refers to 
this, when he says: "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of 



the hidden manna." (Rev. 2:17) Manna was the bread which came 
down from heaven-a life sustainer; so God provides life for all 
Israel (the world) that they may live forever-continually eating of 
it; but he offers to those who become joint heirs-members of the 
anointed boy (all overcomes) that they shall have a peculiar sort of 
manna, or life principal, the "hidden manna." One peculiarity of 
this pot of manna was, that it was incorruptible; hence it well 
illustrates the immortal and incorruptible condition promised to all 
members of the seed- which is Christ. 

Here then in the golden Ark, is represented the glory 
to be revealed in the Divine Christ; in the budding of the rod, 
God's chosen priesthood; in the tables of the Law, the righteous 
law-giver; in the golden bowl of incorruptible manna, immortality 
in divinity. 

Above this Ark, and constituting a lid, or head of it, was the 
Mercy Seat-a slab of solid gold, on the two ends of which, and of 
the same piece of metal were formed two cherubim, with winds 
uplifted as if ready to fly-their faces looking inward toward the 
center of the plate on which they stood. Here, between the 
cherubim on the Mercy seat, a bright light appeared, indicating 
Jehovah's presence. 

To our understanding that Mercy Seat, glory light, and 
cherubim, all together, represented Jehovah God. As with the 
Christ, so with Jehovah-He is here represented by things which 
illustrate attributes of His character. The light reminds us of Paul' s 
word: (1 Tim. 6: 16) God "only hath immortality, dwelling in light, 
which no man can approach unto." Humanity cannot enter his 
presence; hence, the priesthood, head and body, represented by 
Aaron, must become new creatures, "partakers of the divine nature 
(having crucified and buried the human) before they can appear 
before that excellent glory. 

The slab of gold or Mercy seat, we believe represents the 
underlying principle of Jehovah's character- JUSTICE. His throne 
or mercy seat is based upon justice. "Judgment and justice are the 
habitation of thy throne." (Psa 89: 14; Rev. 15:3; Job 36: 17 and 
37:23;Isa. 56:1) 

The two cherubim represent two elements of our Father's 
character as revealed in his Word-viz: mercy and love. These 
attributes-Mercy, Love and Justice, are in perfect harmony with 
each other. They are all made of one piece; they are thoroughly 
one: Neither Mercy nor Love can be exercised, until Justice is fully 
satisfied: Then they fly to help, to lift up and to bless-They were 



on the wing but waiting, looking inward toward the mercy seat- 
Justice, to know when to act. 

Now, see the High Priest as he approaches with the blood of 
the atonement sacrifices; will he put it upon the cherubiml No, 
neither the Mercy nor the Love of God require the sacrifice; he 
need not, therefore, sprinkle the cherubim. It is the Justice of God 
that will by no means clear the guilty- It was Justice that said that 
the wages of sin is death. When, therefore, the High Priest would 
give a ransom for sinners, it is to Justice that it must be paid. 
Therefore, we see why he sprinkled the blood upon the Mercy Seat. 

Love, led to the whole redemptive plan. It was because God so 
loved the world that he sent his only begotten Son to redeem it, by 
paying to Justice the ransom. So Love has been active, preparing 
for the redemption ever since sin entered-yet "from before the 
foundation of the world." (1 Pet. 1: 20) 

"Love first contrived the way 
To save rebellious man." 

When the sacrifices (bullock and goat) are complete, Love 
tarries to see the results of its plan. As the blood is sprinkled, 
Justice cries, it is enough. Then must come Mercy's time to work 
for those whom God so loved; and Love and Mercy wing their 
flight to bless the ransomed race through the Redeemer-the 
"Lord's anointed." When Justice is satisfied, Mercy starts out upon 
her errand which is co-extensive with that of Love, and uses the 
same agency-the Christ. 

The relationship and oneness of all of that divine family 
[Father, Son and his bride], represented by the Ark and its cover is 
shown in the fact that the Mercy Seat was the lid of the Ark, and 
hence a part-the top or head of it. As the head of the church is 
Christ Jesus, so the head of the entire Christ is God. (1 Cor. 11:3) 
This is the oneness for which Jesus prayed, saying: Father "I pray 
not for the world, but for those thou has given me"-"that they all 
may be one; as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also 
may be one in us-that the world may [then] believe." (John 17: 9, 
21) 

It is significant also, 

that any member of the priesthood that had a blemish of eye, hand, 
nose, foot, or in any way, could not fill the office of Priest (High 
Priest); neither any man having any superfluity, such as an extra 
finger, or toe. This seems to each us all of the perfection of every 



member of that body-they are all "overcomers:" and furthermore, 
that when the body of Christ is complete, there will be no additions 
permitted-no superfluity. If then, we are not called; if we have 
heard the invitation to become members in particular of his body, 
and have accepted it, let us seek to make our calling and our 
election (as members of that "little flock") sure, by so running to 
obtain the prize. If we miss the prize, some one else will win in our 
place, for the body must be complete; not one member lacking, no 
one superfluous. Take heed "that no man take thy crown." Rev. 
3:11. 

It has been a matter of surprise to some, that the glories and 
beauties of the Tabernacle-its golden walls, its golden and 
beautifully engraved furniture, and vails of curious work- were so 
completely covered and hidden from view of the people; no 
sunlight from without even to illuminate its glorious beauty. But 
this is all in keeping with the lessons we have received from its 
services. As God covered the type and hid its beauty under skins 
and curtains, so the glories and beauties of spiritual things are seen 
only when within by those who enter-the Royal Priesthood. These, 
too, enter a hidden glory which the world and all outside fail to 
appreciate. Their glory also and their standing as new creatures are 
hidden from their fellow men. 

"Ah; these are of a royal line, 
All children of a King, 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 
And lo, for joy they sing! 

Why do they, then, appear so mean ? 
And why so much despised? 
Because of their rich robes unseen 
The world is not apprised. " 



CHAPTER VHI 



THE CLEANSING OF THE SANCTUARY 



THE ABOMINATION OF DESOLATION IN THE HOLY PLACE 

"When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation 
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place," etc. 
Matt. 24: 15; Mark 13: 14. 

In relating to his disciples the things which should come to pass 
before his presence, and before the end (harvest) of the Gospel Age 
(vss. 3-14), Jesus told them there would be many wars and 
commotions, etc., and that this Gospel must first be preached for a 
witness unto all nations. Then, calling their minds backward on the 
streams of time, he tells them of the great abomination of 
desolation, and indicates that it will be something very marked. 

The words holy place in this text, and sanctuary in the 
corresponding passage in Daniel, signify sacred place. We believe 
that Jesus made a twofold use of it, referring to the desecration of 
the Holy Land and its desolation, and the giving over of that people 
(the typical sanctuary and the host) to their enemies. But we 
believe that the prophecy of Daniel, and also Jesus' reference to it, 
apply really and with tenfold emphasis, to things typified by that 
people and holy land, viz: a desolating abomination which would 
gain control over the Christian "host"-believers-and tread them 
down, while defiling their dwelling place-the Sanctuary of truth. 
We have seen that what to the Israelite was a holy place, is to the 
Gospel Church a holy condition; place being used to typify 
condition. Our condition is sanctification in the truth, and when the 
truth was corrupted by the introduction of errors which made void 
the Word of God, it was an abominable pollution of our 
"Sanctuary"— a. desolating abomination which caused the 
overthrow of the Lord's people (the "hosf'-believers). 

This double significance, we think, is true of very much of 
Jesus' teachings-as well as of the prophecies. The desolating 
abomination to the Holly Land was the Roman army under Titus, 
who destroyed and made it desolate literally; and the abomination 
which desecrated the Sanctuary of truth was Papacy, (the "Man of 
Sin"-the world united to the degenerated church, thy twain 



becoming one) which trampled the truth of God into the dust, and 
exalted the traditions of men. She, the harlot church, was made 
drunk with the blood of the saints and the martyrs of Jesus, and 
deceived all nations, and has so impregnated them with her false 
doctrines, that they must, with her, drink of the wine of wrath of 
God ere they will be prepared for the blessings of his kingdom. The 
latter is the real abomination in the real holy place, while the 
former is its shadow. 

Jesus referred us to Daniel, therefore let us examine his works: 
Out of the Grecian Empire came forth (or after it) "a little horn" 
(Rome-pagan), and "it waxed great even unto the host of heaven; 
and it cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground, 
and stamped upon them." (Dan. 8: ). 

Rome, became great and strong, and persecuted the true saints 
and cast down and abused some of them; both of the (stars) 
teachers and of the (host) believers. 

"Yea, he magnified himself even unto the prince of the host" 
(vs. 11), i.e., Rome became Papal-the prince or head of the 
church. In the union of empire and church, the church (women) lost 
her personal identity and was recognized as part of the "Man of 
Sin." 

"And by him the continual sacrifice (Young's translation) was 
taken away, and the base of his sanctuary was cast down." (Vs. 1 1) 
By the influence of the empire the "Mass" --or missa was 
introduced in the fifth century. The significance of the mass is not 
generally understood by Protestants. Roman Catholics regard it as a 
real sacrifice of Christ. In what is called the doctrine of 
"Transubstantiation," the Roman church teaches us that in the 
wafer and wine, Jesus' body and blood are actually present, and 
that when broken and poured, the sacrifice of Jesus is 
accomplished afresh. They believe that only through the repetition 
of this sacrifice can the sinner approach God. 

By the introduction of the "mass" or special sacrifices, they set 
aside the one real sacrifice which should be esteemed a 
CONTINUAL SACRIFICE. And thus the influence of the "horn" 
(empire) took away the "continual sacrifice'" by introducing the 
"mass"; thus the base of his sanctuary (or fundamental underlying 
principle of truth) was cast down." "And the host (nominal church) 
was given over (to this deplorable condition) for (or because of) 
the transgression against the "continual sacrifice." (Vs. 12, Margin- 
-Young's trans.) 



"And it (the Roman horn or power) cast down the truth to the 
ground, and it practiced and prospered." It had great success (Vs. 
12). Thus, this Roman power by overcoming the church, has 
defiled God's sanctuary. This is that of which Paul speaks, 
concerning this same horn power, or "man of sin": That he would 
oppose and exalt himself above all that is called (after the name of) 
God (God's sons) so that he as God (the chief- instead of their 
head-or as Christ's vicar) sitteth in the temple (church- sanctuary) 
showing himself that he is God (the ruler or head of the temple or 
church). (2 Thess. 2:3) 

Then Daniel heard one inquire of another how long this 
abomination of error would continue to desolate and desecrate the 
sanctuary-"the holy" and the host, the nominal church. And he 
heard the answer: "Until 2300 days, then is the holy place declared 
right." (Vss. 13, 14, Young's trans.) 

Since we are interested in ascertaining when the Sanctuary will 
be cleaned of defilement, we would count the number here given. 
Daniel did not understand, and made the vision a subject of prayer, 
in answer to which Gabriel is sent to give him a partial explanation 
(for our sakes) which is recorded in chapter (: 22-27. Seventy 
weeks (490 days) of this 2300 days would be of special interest to 
Daniel, as that part of it measured Israel's favor. Sixty-nine of 
these weeks were to reach unto Messiah the Prince (Jesus' baptism 
and anointing), and one to follow. 

These were not literal days or weeks, but were fulfilled as 
symbolic time -each day a year: the 69 weeks reaching to the 
anointing; the 70th week reaching 3-1/2 years beyond the cross, 
October A.D. 36. Messiah was cut off-died-in the midst of the 
70th week. All must be symbolic time, if a part was. If, then, 490 
years of this 2300 years ended in A.D. 36, we can ascertain readily 
where the whole number will end. Deducting from A.D. 36, which, 
added, shows us that the 2300 days were full in October, 1846; and 
there the Sanctuary or "holy" should be "cleansed" or "made 
right," or purified from the abominations and errors brought into it 
by the influence of the Roman Empire ("horn".) 

But the inquiry comes: In what sense was this cleansing from 
those errors accomplished in 1846? We look backward and see 
how the sanctuary of truth was defiled. The church, as established 
in the truth of God, was all wheat, but soon the enemy brought in 
false doctrines developing tares. This evil, Paul said, already began 
to foment and defile in his day, and would increase unto the more 
ungodliness, ultimately resulting in the harlotry of the church-her 



union with the world, etc., and the development thus, of the "man 
of sin" in the control of the Sanctuary, or holy things of the Lord. 
Paul also tells of the Reformation, when the power of this man of 
sin and his erroneous teachings would begin to consume- -"Whom 
the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth." (2 Thess. 
2:8) This-the Spirit of Christ's mouth-the truth-has been doing 
the cleansing work. 

When Luther began to question the teachings of Papacy on 
various subjects, venerable with age, and respectable because of 
their almost universal acceptance among the people, and hallowed 
because of the superstitious reverence for the clergy of the Church 
of Rome, who advocated them-then the cleansing commenced. 

We repeat that when Luther and others-as member of the 
"royal priesthood" began to see in God's holy place— Sanctuary- 
such abominations as the selling of "indulgences"-absolution of 
sins past or future for money; the doctrine of Transubstantiation or 
the actual presence and repeated sacrifice of Jesus in the Mass; the 
doctrine of the infallibility of the church and its creeds as the 
exponents of truth; the claim that the Pope is the head of the 
church, or Vicar of Christ, etc., they saw the defilement, and 
forthwith commenced its removal. 

Luther claimed justification by faith and not by works; that 
Christ was the only head and all truly his are his members, and are 
brethren; that the Word of God in the only rule of faith and 
practice; and that any doctrine unsupported by it is unworthy of 
acceptance, though it be hoary with age. He pointed to Papacy as 
the "man of sin," or as shown in another symbol (Rev. 17) the 
woman seated o n, (controlling) the beast (empire), drunken with 
the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus; having a golden cup in 
her hand full of filthiness, the abominable errors of doctrine and 
practice) having in her forehead the name written MYSTERY (of 
iniquity)-BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF 
HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH- the 
abomination that defiled and made desolate, the holy place. And he 
began to overturn those filthy traditions and to cleanse the 
Sanctuary. 

He did, perhaps, his share of the great work, but soon 
reformation ceased in the church he established. It rested from its 
labors self satisfied, that it had obtained all the truth, and got rid of 
all the abominable error. But still the work went on; one truth after 
another being discovered hidden under Papal error, and brought to 
light by new reformers, each in turn, however following the same 



course-organizing a sect contented and satisfied that they had all 
truth and no error. 

Among the more prominent of these later reformations, which 
after developing a neglected truth, were themselves laid aside, 
because they became proud and sectarian and ceased to carry on 
reform, we might cite the following: Presbyterians and 
Congregationalists as among the most prominent exponents of the 
doctrines of Calvin. The principal value of the doctrines of Calvin 
as off-setting Papal errors, were we believe, the teaching of the 
necessity of applying rules of holy living to the people, as well as 
to the priests; the accountability of each to God direct, and the 
greatness, omnipotence and foreknowledge of God, and the 
immutability of his promises and plans. 

The Baptists represented another long lost sight of doctrine, 
and called the attention of the world to how Papacy had changed 
the outward form of baptism, from immersion to sprinkling. 

A later reform was instituted by a people calling themselves 
"Disciples" or "The Christian Church," organized in 1827. The 
leader was Alex. Campbell, and the reform advocated was in 
respect to church organization, discipline, creeds, and the 
abrogation of all titles for its ministers, etc. Its aim was to be as 
much as possible like the Apostolic arrangement, embodying 
simplicity and liberty. Its design was good and to some extent 
successful, but it ceased to carry forward the reform to liberty of 
teaching, and study of the word. Though bound by no written 
creed, yet respecting traditions and honors of men, it has also 
become a fixed sect which no longer leads in the search for truth, 
and the cleansing of the sanctuary from Papal errors, but is like 
others, self-satisfied. 

While we mention only a few of these reform movements, let 
no one understand us as ignoring others; the reform has been 
general, and all earnest true Christians have participated in it to 
some extent. 

But while all these reforms had been for good, and each had 
removed some of the musty and worshipped error, yet some 
remained until about 1846. Do not misunderstand us; much still 
exists, and is still worshipped by God's children; but there we 
think for the first time for nearly 1300 years, a little company of 
people got free from all of Papacy's snares of entangling error- The 
sanctuary of truth was cleansed. 



This last reform received its first impulse from William Miller, 
in America, who having for some years studied the Prophetic 
Scriptures, and having convinced himself and some friends, that 
the Lord would come and the world would be destroyed by fire in 
1843 or 1844, began to preach it. He attracted the independent 
thinking Christians from all denominations, and by his preaching 
greatly stirred them up to the private study of the Scriptures, and 
developed, and made strong, the right of private judgment, as to 
what are the teachings of Scripture. "The Bridegroom tarried"- 
their expectations were not realized; but that movement had a 
widespread influence nevertheless. The "wheat" among the 
disappointed ones had obtained some new ideas. They had learned 
that doctrines they had supposed fixed by the World of God, had 
no better basis than the decrees of a corrupt church which God 
called an "abomination" They had learned that the reformers had 
only uncovered a part of the truth; that truth had not all been 
revealed in past ages, but, that God had declared to the Prophets 
that some truths were "sealed" up and closed "until the time of the 
end," when knowledge should increase, and the (heavenly) wise 
should understand things "which from the beginning of the world 
hath been hid in God:" "even the mystery which hath been hid 
from [former] ages and generations." (Dan. 12: 4, 9, to; Eph. 3:9; 
Col. 1:26.) 

This was a valuable lesson, as it led them the more to study 
God's Word, rather than follow the example of others, in studying 
the traditions and creeds of past ages. They had been freed from 
servility to honor and respect in the various denominations from 
which they had been cut loose by their obedience to their 
convictions, in regard to Mr. Miller's teachings. Honesty to 
convictions of duty, always brings some blessing: even as Paul 
going to Damascus, we meet the Lord on the way. 

Hence, though disappointed in the Bridegroom's tarrying, they 
had been greatly blessed, and were prepared for any truth which 
could be found in Scripture, no matter how unpopular with men; or 
the rejection of any doctrine found unscriptural, however popular- 
a very necessary position to be in, to be taught of God. 

Consequently we find them, or among them, some who took a 
more advanced stand than any who preceded them in the 
Reformation work, or cleansing of the Sanctuary of truth. Thus, 
1846-the end of the 2300 days-found a company who not only 
agreed with "The Disciples" in simplicity of church government 
and abolition of all titles; with the Baptists relative to the outward 
form of baptism-immersion; and with Luther in his teachings that 



the Papal system was the "Man of Sin," and the degenerate church, 
the "mother of harlots and abominations;" showing also the 
daughters which had engaged in their mother's crime-adultery 
with the world; but also while recognizing Jesus as both Lord and 
Head over all, and a partaker of the divine nature, proved that the 
incomprehensible doctrine of Trinity, was of Papal decree, and 
without any foundation in Scripture save a part of a paragraph 
interpolated to prove the doctrine-so acknowledged by all 
students. (1 John 5: 7, 8) See New Translation. 

But still another item of the abominable, sanctuary-defiling 
error, did they boldly cast out, viz.: the teaching of Papacy- 
without the slightest Bible proof-that man is by nature immortal. 
That is to say, that, though God can create a man (or an angel), 
when once created, he can never destroy him. Absurd as this 
doctrine may seem, that He who has power to create, cannot 
destroy, it is nevertheless accepted, by nearly all of the church 
nominal, as well as by the world who disbelieve the Bible entirely. 
In fact, it should be easier to believe it, while denying the Bible, 
because it distinctly affirms that God "only hath Immortality," (1 
Tim. 6: 16,) and holds it up as a reward to all who follow Jesus in 
self-sacrifice. (2 Pet. 1:4) 

The wide influence of this last named abomination of error 
cannot be fully appreciated, until we remember that it is the very 
foundation of Papacy's purgatory, and of Protestantism's eternal 
torment; neither of which, find support in Scripture, though the 
translators of the Bible being believers in these doctrines, have 
done what they could to have it support this, the most awful, most 
abominable, most God-dishonoring doctrine, of all which defiled 
the Sanctuary of truth. It contradicted Jehovah exactly; for when 
His Word declared that God "only hath Immortality," it cast the lie 
in his face, and declared that all men possessed it. When he 
declared: "The soul (being) that sinneth, it shall die," the reply of 
this abomination was a repetition of Satan's words, "Ye shall not 
surely die" (Gen. 3:4), but ye must live forever in torment for ye 
are immortal. When Jehovah declared that the broad road leads to 
destruction, this error told God's children: nay, God cannot destroy 
man-it must be understood to mean preserve in torment. 

Jehovah says: "All the wicked (willful transgressors) will He 
destroy" (Psa. 145: 20), but the Devil delights to malign the 
character of God, and deceive "the host" into believing that such 
will be tortured, either by mental or physical pain, endlessly, 
hopelessly, forever and forever; with the heart of the Eternal so 



cold that he enjoys their misery, or the arm of the Omnipotent so 
weak that he cannot destroy them. 

Oh yet, this was the greatest and most abominable of all the 
defilements of the Sanctuary of truth; and since its falsity and its 
lack of Scriptural support have been discovered, it lifts the vail 
which once shrouded so much of God's plan. We see now, that 
death-destruction-was the punishment for sin-eternal, everlasting 
punishment-and it shows us the necessity of the "sin offering' and 
"Day of Atonement" to redeem all mankind from destruction. We 
can now see the great justice of God, and the inflexibility of his 
law, which was executed against the race, not withstanding. He "so 
loved the world." It shows us, too, His love and mercy in making 
ample provision for the recovery and restitution of all who will 
receive it, to perfection and to his fellowship-in this "at-one-menf 
sacrifice, which He provided, "Who redeemeth thy life from 
DESTRUCTION." (Psa. 103: 4) "For ye were redeemed not with 
corruptible things... but with the precious blood (human life) of 
Christ." (1 Pet. 1: 18) 

As the teachings of Luther had been uttered before his day, but 
never amounted to much, so the subject of man's non-immortality 
had been advocated by a few before this cleansing of 1846. One of 
the charges against the reformers of Luther's day, was, that they 
stated that "All which had been said about the immortality of the 
soul was invented by Anti-Christ for the purpose of making the 
Pope's pot boil." The writings of Wm. Tyndale (translator of the 
first Bible published in the English language) show clearly that he 
believed the Bible statement-that God "only hath immortality." 

Of the 95 theses, or propositions of dissent, from the teachings 
of Papacy nailed on the door of the church at Wittenburg, October 
31, 1517-the starting of the Reformation fires-the 27th objection 
was to this doctrine of man's inherent immortality. Those 
propositions having been denounced as heresy by Pope Leo X., 
Luther in his reply (1520) denounces the teachings of 
transubstantiation, man's immortality, and the Pope's claim to be 
the Emperor of the world, king of heaven, and God upon earth, as 
monstrous opinions to be found in the Roman dunghill of 
decretals. 

But nevertheless this item from the Papal dunghill was thought 
too precious to be discarded, and even those called Lutherans 
carefully avoid all reference to his 27th Thesis, and still hold to 
Papacy's teachings, rather than the teachings of God's Word. And 
thus does this like the other daughters, resemble the mother church. 



The Evangelical Alliance of 1846, the exact ending of the 2300 
days, composed of representatives from all the sects, clearly 
defining their belief in man's immortality and adding it as the ninth 
article to the common creed, thus shut out from fellowship all who 
do not hold to this Papal dogma. Thus were separated from others, 
a people who rejected even this last and strongest abominable 
desolating error, which defiled the sanctuary of truth. 

The sanctuary of truth being thus totally cleared of papal and 
pagan rubbish, and cleansed from the defilements which desolated 
it, a way was opened for the replacing of many glorious truths 
which had been misplaced by those errors. 

But strange to say, this last mentioned reformation, seems to 
have closely followed the example of its predecessors. Becoming 
somewhat numerous and seeking less odium, they have settled 
down to the believe that what they first learned was all that could 
be learned. They have rested and have made no progress since. 

But if the rubbish was all cleared out in 1846, the time since 
should be a time for unfolding and developing the glorious plan of 
God, in place of the abominations removed. This work of opening 
up truth and seeing its beauty, is legitimately due now, and is being 
accomplished. We thank God for the privilege, of being engaged 
with others in this blessed work of bringing the golden vessels 
(truths) of the Lord, back from the captivity of "Babylon the 
Great," and replacing them in the Sanctuary; and we offer fraternal 
greetings to all co-laborers in the mine of truth, and members of 
the anointed body. Blessed those servants whom their Lord, when 
he has come, shall find giving meat in due season to the household. 
(Matt. 24: 45, 46 Let scholars critically note Greek text.) 



"We are watching, we are waiting, 
For the bright, prophetic day; 
When the shadows, weary shadows, 
From the world shall roll away. 

"We are watching, we are waiting, 
For the beauteous king of day; 
For the chief est often thousand, 
For the Light, the Truth, the Way. 

"We are waking, for 'tis morning, 
And this beauteous day is dawning, 
We are happy, for 'tis morning, 
See! The shadows flee away. 

Lot He comes! See the King draw near! 
Zion, shout, the Lord is here. " 



CHAPTER IX 



ANOTHER DESCRIPTION OF THE 
DESOLATING OF THE SANCTUARY 



Daniel ii: 31 - 12: 13 

Here the same things already referred to are described in other 
language. Verses 1 to 31 seem to correspond with verses 3 to 8 of 
chapter 8, in describing the changes preceding Papacy. 

Daniel 11: 31-(Young's translation) reads: "And strong ones 
out of him stand up and have polluted the Sanctuary-the 
stronghold- and have turned aside the continual sacrifice and 
appointed the desolating abomination"-the system of Papal error. 
The strong ones here answer to the "horn" or Roman Empire of 
Daniel 8: 9. 

"And such as do wickedly against the covenant [covenant 
breakers] shall he cause to dissemble." [Margin} That is, those 
who were anxious to unite with the world and get Imperial favor, 
did so in opposition to their covenant, which was, in effect, that 



they were to be dead to the world-"love not the world," etc. This 
class was ready to dissemble, or tied to serve both God and 
Mammon, and such were led astray, and became subject to the 
"abomination that made desolate," and defiled the Sanctuary of 
truth. 

"But the people that do know their God shall be strong and do 
exploits; and they that have understanding shall instruct many: yet 
they shall fall by the sword and by flame and by captivity many 
days." (Vss. 32 and 33) 

This shows that through those long years of persecution of 
truth, God never left himself without a witness, and many of them 
sealed their testimony for truth with their lives, for the "harlot" was 
"made drunk with the blood of the saints and the martyrs of Jesus." 
(Rev. 17:6) 

"Now, when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little 
help." The Reformation was a little help which kept the truth from 
becoming totally choked out. 

"But many shall cleave to them with flatteries [dissemblingly] 
and some of them of understanding [teachers] shall fall to [thus] try 
them, and to purge, and to make them white." Thus was foretold 
that even when the Reformation movement would commence, 
many would cleave to the old abominations-dissemblingly-and 
would fear to make a bold stand against all of those abominable 
errors-fail to cleanse the sanctuary of truth of all those 
defilements. And further, the trial would be increase by many of 
the great teachers thus falling back into a partial acknowledgment 
of those errors. But the effect of all this is, to make truth all the 
more valuable, that it might be hid from the worldly wise and 
prudent, and revealed unto the babes-the simple-hearted children 
of God. Thus God was separating, purging, and making white, a 
"little flock," while the multitude of His children wee still suffered 
to be deceived because not faithful to their covenant of entire 
consecration. 

The spoiling many days (years) was to continue "till the end of 
the time-for it is yet for an appointed time." Vs. 35, Young) This 
"time appointed," is mentioned repeatedly-It is the 3-1/2 times 
(three and a half symbolic years=1260 years) of Daniel 12: 7, and 
of Rev. 12: 14. The same is referred to as 42 months and "1260 
days" of Rev. 12: 6; and 13: 5; and 11: 3, all of which symbolize 
the period of time (1260 years) during which Papacy had 
persecuting power, and which ended in 1798, when Pope Pius VI, 



was taken a prisoner to Paris (where he died, and a Republic was 
established in Rome-the first government opposed to Papacy 
which was recognized by the people, from the time of Papacy's 
exaltation- -or, when it was "set up." This is confirmed by the 36th 
and succeeding verses: We believe this describes Napoleon's 
career-he who overthrew Papacy (and subsequently restored it 
with some authority, as his agent). Napoleon disregarded the Pope 
(who claimed and was recognized by the people as being "Emperor 
of the world, king of heaven, and God upon earth." He magnified 
himself, and spake, by both word and act, marvelous things against 
this so-called God, or Mighty one of mighty ones-so much so, that 
when he crossed his will, he imprisoned him. (Pope Pius VII was 
also imprisoned by him, for disobedience.) 

Neither did he regard "the desire of women:" At that time many 
sects (churches-women), had been born, and while they were glad 
of his treatment of their Mother-the Church of Rome-and would 
have desired so mighty a one to espouse their respective causes, yet 
he would not; he disregarded the desire of women; nor did he 
regard any God (ruler); he exalted himself as ruler of the world, 
and commanded obedience of all. The only God he recognized was 
the "God protectors" [marginal reading] -the army. He 
acknowledged it, and bestowed many favors upon it and his under 
generals. "Thus he did-in the strong holds-In the countries he 
conquered, he caused his generals to rule. Thus he "divided the 
land for gain"-or made a division of the honor, that was profitable 
to himself. In his conquests he went into Egypt, conquered it, and 
advanced into Palestine, and pitched his palatial tent among those 
time-honored mountains, one battle being fought at Mt. Tabor, 
supposed to be the Mount of the transfiguration o f Jesus. But 
Turkey (king of the south) and England (of the north) pushed at, or 
opposed him- 1798. Finally, he returned to Europe, where his 
career ended and none helped him. (Dan. 11: 45) 

Thus we see that the chain of prophecy reaches down to the 
year 1798-the year of the virtual canceling of Papal power, and 
describes minutely the career of the man who did it—the most 
notable character known to the pages of history. 

THE 1260, 1290, AND 1335 PROPHETIC DAYS 



Daniel heard further that it would be 3-1/2 times (years)=1260 
symbolic days, to the end of these wonders. (Symbolic time allows 
360 days to a year) Then all those things would be finished. It 



would be after Daniel's people the Jews, had been completely 
scattered-tang after, we now know. Dan. 12: 6, 7. This 1260 
reaches back from the end, to 538 A.D., as the time when the 
abomination was "set up"-or brought into power; which agrees 
well with history. 

Thus the 1260 of Daniel and Revelation becomes the key to 
these other mentioned prophetic periods, 1290 and 1335. They 
evidently have a common starting point. 

The 1290 years, from 538, end in 1828. There, we believe, we 
entered what is scripturally termed, "The time of the end"-or the 
period until which, the vision was sealed and hidden, and since 
which, those led of the Spirit are coming to more and more clear 
understanding of these matters. So we read that Daniel inquired, 
"O my Lord, what is the latter end of these?" The angel said "Go, 
Daniel, for hidden and sealed are the things till THE TIME OF 
THE END"... "From the time of the turning aside of the perpetual 
sacrifice, and the giving out of the desolating abomination, are 
days a thousand two hundred and ninety." (Vss. 9, 11) (Until the 
time of the end when the wise shall be able to understand. The 
wicked-those consecrated ones who do not keep their covenant- 
"wicked and slothful servants"-- shall not be able to understand; but 
the wise shall understand. The wicked-those consecrated ones 
who do not keep their covenant-'wicked and slothful servants"- 
shall not be able to understand these things, even in "the time of 
the end." The wise-those keeping their covenant of entire 
consecration-shall understand. [These wise virgins will all 
recognize the Bridegroom's presence, and will go in to the 
marriage, while the foolish virgins will know not of his presence.] 

Verse 22-"0 the blessedness of him who is waiting earnestly 
[watching], and doth come to the days a thousand three hundred 
thirty and five!" [Young's translation] 

The 1335 days, by the same measure, would date from the 
same point, 538, and end with the year 1874. How many of us can 
exclaim in the words of the Angel: "O the blessedness" of those 
living since 1874, who are waiting earnestly- watching- who are 
keeping their consecration covenant, and who may all have 
understanding of the vision? 

Other prophecies and New Testament utterances, show us that 
in 1874 the Lord Jesus became present to gather his jewels, and 
that the time since is called the "Harvest" which 
"is the end of the age" (Matt. 13:39) 



Yes, the light of truth has shown out wonderfully since 1874, 
and is still shining and still there's more to follow. How glad we 
are that we are free from all bondage to human creeds and isms, so 
that we can receive and enjoy the "meat in due season." And we 
would love to see all of God's dear children rejoicing in these 
revelations of his glorious plan, who are yet hindered from seeing 
light in his light, because they are committed solely and only to a 
creed, made from 50 to 1300 years ago; who consequently cannot 
"grow in grace and knowledge," beyond those who formed the 
creeds. 

We walk in the light when we follow our guide, but we only 
truly follow him when walking in the light of his Word. There is no 
other sure, safe light, to follow-'The true light." 

But, not only was a blessing to be upon some of the living, 
when this "harvest" or end of the age should come, in 1874, but 
Daniel was told that his hope lay here. Sometime during this 
"harvest," (which commenced at the end of the 1335 days, and 
which from other prophecies, we learn will last for 40 years, or 
until 1914,) Daniel was to have a resurrection-"Go thou thy way 
till the end [harvest] be, for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at 
the end of the days." (Verse 13) 



CHAPTER X 



THE SANCTUARY TRODDEN DOWN 



REV. 11: 1-2 

Here we have another picture of the same, defiling of the 
citadel of truth, or Holy City. "And there was given to me a reed 
like to a rod [a straight measuring stick], and the messenger stood 
saying, 'Rise and measure the sanctuary of God and the altar, and 
those worshipping in it; and the court that is without the sanctuary 
leave out-and thou mayest not measure it, because it was given to 
the nations, and the holy city [citadel of holy truth] shall they tread 
forty-two months.'" (Rev. 11: 1,2 Young's translation) 

For 42 symbolic months (1260 years), the desolating 
abomination of error, had not only "made void" the word of God 



by false traditions, but by claiming the decrees of the church to be 
infallible, they had measurably abandoned the Bible. Very few 
Bibles were written, and then only in dead languages, vailed- 
hidden from the people. As the next verse pictures it, the two 
witnesses-the Old and New Testaments-were clothed in sackcloth 
(a dead language) for 1260 years. 

This continued in great measure until the end of those 1260 
years- 1798-when the treading down of the word of truth by 
tradition ceased, and there began the organization of almost all the 
Bible Societies, which since then have scattered Bibles like autumn 
leaves, in every land gauge. In that Word of God, thus set free and 
"exalted up to heaven" (Compare Matt. 11:23 and Rev. 11: 12)-to 
the adoration and esteem of all Christians, we believe we have the 
straight measuring rod by which, in this day, we are to measure 
all creeds and doctrines and teachings. This measure is given to 
John, the representative of the last phase of the little flock who will 
be alive in the day of our Lord's presence:— "If I will that he (the 
John class, antitypical) tarry till I come"- John 21: 22. 

The revelation of God's Word, as now made to the John class, 
is a more perfect measure than it ever was before: We have many 
excellent translations, some of them from very ancient 
manuscripts. (The writer has eight translations, which are valuable 
assistants.) And by these, as well as by numbers of valuable helps, 
such as English, Greek and Hebrew Concordances, a more perfect 
understanding of the text can be had, as well as of correlative 
passages, than was ever before possible to either learned or 
unlearned. The injunction to the John class is, "Rise (arouse 
yourselves to an important work, requiring all your effort), 
measure the Sanctuary. Test, try, prove, by the rule given you, the 
sanctuary of truth-the position you occupy as the Lord's "royal 
priesthood." Prove all things, "hold fast that which is good," and 
reject all not up to the measure of your "rod. " 

Not only measure the doctrines in which the church are 
standing, but measure those who worship therein. Let this Word, 
these two witness which the church is now worshipping, be heard. 
Let the Word of God be the only rule of faith, doctrine, teaching 
and also the rule of practice. Oh, how many worship these two 
witnesses in word, and worship in heart the degrees of councils 
and assemblies-the creeds and commandments of men. Whoever 
is on the Lord's side; whoever is on the truth's side; whoever is of 
the John class; to you, the word comes- Arise and shake thyself 
from the dust of the traditions of men. Rise, measure the Sanctuary 



of truth; and every worshipper, let him, measure himself with the 
Golden rod of Divine truth. 

But he was also to measure the ALTAR-and, beloved, we have 
in this little work, been endeavoring to measure it. To the surprise 
of many (joyfully, we hope) we have seen the size of the Altar to 
be a hundred fold longer and broader than we had before supposed. 
Yes, the Altar is so large that on it is being laid during this 
Gospel Age, the burn offering acceptable to Jehovah as the 
RANSOM of the whole world. Yes, once we supposed that Jesus 
had provided only for the "little flock"; but now we find, since the 
golden rod is put into our hands, that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of 
God, tasted death for every man-to be testified in due time," and 
to prove of practical value and benefit to all. Once in our 
ignorance, misguided by the creeds of men, framed in the dark 
ages, we supposed that all probation would cease with this Gospel 
Age-that the "little flock" only would be saved. But now we 
measure it by our Rod, and learn that while yet sinners, God so 
loved the world as to give his only begotten Son to die on their 
behalf 'and as their ransom . 

And by means of the knowledge afforded in measuring the 
Sanctuary and Altar, we have come to "Trust in the living God, 
who is the Savior of all men --especially of them that believe." 
And now, while seeking the great, grand prize of our (believers) 
high calling to the Diving nature, we can rejoice in the love of 
God in the general salvation of mankind, and their restoration to 
the perfection of humanity- -in due time. Oh, the length and 
breadth, the height and depth of the love of God which passeth all 
understanding. 

Again, it was while we were engaged in measuring the Altar, 
that we came to see more fully, what sacrifice is expected of those 
who have consecrated to become followers in the footsteps of 
Jesus. We have covenanted to become dead with Him-living 
sacrifices-if we might be of the Royal Priesthood and reign with 
him, in the Millennial Age of glory to the church and blessing to 
the world. 

"And the court that is without (outside) the Sanctuary leave 
out; and thou mayest not measure it, because it was given to the 
nations." The court class includes believers in general-the nominal 
church; it is not essential that these be measured by this rod. No, 
the nominal church is so wedded to the world-given up to worldly 
ideas, that the measuring rod of God's Word would be foolishness 
to them. When the "Gentile times" are ended, this class will be 



measured, as well as all mankind. (Luke 21: 24) Now, the work is 
to measure the Sanctuary and Altar, and the truly SANCTiFiED-the 
worshippers of truth. Amen. 

"Now the world is full of suffering, 
Sounds of woe fall on my ears, 
Slights of wretchedness and sorrow, 
Fill my eyes with pitying tears. 

"Tis the earth's dark night of weeping, 
Wrong and evil triumph now; 
I can wait, for just before me 
Beams the morning 's roseate glow. 

"I am waiting, hoping, praying 
For Messiah 's glorious reign, 
For I know He '11 rule in justice, 
Right and truth will triumph then, 

Worldly pleasures cannot win me, 
While I wait for that bright day, 
Worldly splendor cannot charm me, 
While its light beams on my way. " 



ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 



-AND- 



HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE, 



The above is the title of an Eight Page Monthly Paper, devoted 
to sacred literature and current events relating to the coming and 
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and kindred topics; designed for the 
unfolding and dissemination of the truth, as taught in the Holy 
Scriptures. It is independent of sect or party, yet strictly under law 
to Christ, the only Lord and Master; and controlled by a spirit of 
charity toward the entire household of faith. 



TERMS 

Fifty cents a year, In the U.S. 

Sixty-five cents a year In Great Britain, 

Free to the Lord's Poor who are unable to pay, and will ask for it. 
Subscriptions should be sent by Money Order, Check or Draft. 



ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

101 FIFTH AVENUE, 
PITTSBURGH, PA., U.S.A. 



R324 : page 1 

VOL. III. 
PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1882. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R324 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The interest still continues over the entire Zion. Letters expressive 
of very deep interest come in daily in great numbers, and show that 
the people are being stirred to an examination of the Scripture as 
never before. We append a few letters for your benefit. Many of the 
best are too personal to admit of publication. 

These expressions of gratitude to God for heavenly food and 
spiritual strength, received through a discernment of his plan and 
better understanding of His Word, are from consecrated children of 
God in various social stations, but not many, though some from the 
ministers of churches. It is strange indeed, that the ministers and 
people do not seize the joyful tidings and carry it with one glad 
shout of praise to God, o'er all the earth- wherever Christians dwell. 

But while they are well aware that the various sectarian creeds 
contradict each other, and that many parts of Scripture are not in 
harmony with any of them, yet they are unwilling to examine these 
things which God is now opening up— because it is now due time 
for his plan to be understood by his children-and shun them as 
though they were poison instead of FOOD. 

R325 : page 1 

Poor things, they are afraid to read lest they should be unsettled; 
but the whole difficulty is, that they are already unsettled and their 
faith being built on the sandy foundations of human traditions 
instead of on the rock, they are in constant danger of the floods of 
skepticism and infidelity sweeping their little all, away. 

Meanwhile, ministers seem to become alarmed, because the best 
elements in their flocks, give heed to and relish the "Food" now 
being provided the sheep by the chief Shepherd. Many of these 
ministers seeking "honor one of another" and the approbation of the 
worldly element of their churches, are far less prepared for this 
"meat in due season" than some— more humble— of their flocks. 
Even some good men in the ministry feel so confident that the 
Great "Babylon" that they have builded is all right, that they, 
without giving the subject study, join with others in saying: "Stop 
thinking," "Don't read it," ("Food for Thinking Christians,") "Burn 
the book. " How strange-how pitiable, that men-Christian men- 
ministers of the Word of God, should treat thus, anything based 
solely on the Word of God and manifesting only the spirit of Christ. 

Those who read and think are convinced, not by any confidence in 
the teachers of the "TOWER," but by the Word of God; and when 
such meet the Doctors of Divinity, their Scriptural knowledge is 
more than a match for the earthly learning of the latter. And thus "a 
little one may chase a thousand." See how fully Isa. 29:9,14, is 
being fulfilled in this, our day. 



How much the present methods remind us of the way in which 
Papacy treated all Protestants and their writings. As the priests once 
claimed that none should have the Bible, because only the priests 
could understand or expound it; so Protestants now say: yes, read 
the Bible but you can understand only such small parts as we can 
expound. And even that small part each denomination construes 
differently, to the amusement of infidels and dismay of all thinking 
Christians. Yet so great is the reverence for CREEDS and traditions 
of men, that each party would prefer to see an opposing creed 
succeed rather than that truth should step in and furnish the 
connecting link, which would not only harmonize the creeds with 
each other, but also with the Bible. 

Why this opposition? As seen from the TOWER, it appears to be 
because of a love of sectarianism. All are sectarian who love a 
Christian specially or more, because a member of their sect or 
division of the church, and whose time and interest is in the 
upbuilding of their division and not in the cause of truth. Such 
oppose our teachings because they realize that it opposes some 
features of their creed. And it is for this cause that we are hated of 
all men, (not new creatures) for Christ's sake, because our teachings 
are in opposition to some features of every sect. The world also 
hates us, because we are still more separate from it than the 
nominal church. But this is our work -"To bear witness to the 
truth. " And blessed are those who are beheaded for the witness of 
Jesus and the Word of God, and who worship not the BEAST 
neither his IMAGE, but God only. 

Another laborer goes into the vineyard this month, a Bro. 
Tackabury, of Ohio, a member until now of the M.E. Conference. 
Should he come your way bid him God-speed. God grant to use 
him much in his service and for the blessing of the household. We 
may expect occasional notes from his pen in the TOWER. 

Favorable reports come from Lynn, Mass., and Ft. Edward, N.Y., 
where Bro. Keith has been preaching during the last month. 

Bro. Sunderlin is nearly well again. (He has been laid up for nearly 
five months, by reason of over-exertion, incident to the 
arrangements for the distribution of the "Food" in Great Britain and 
Ireland.) He is busy in the vicinity of his home, to the extent of his 
present ability. 

page 1 



KEOKUK, Feb. 20th, '82. 

"ZION'S WATCH TOWER"-Dear Friends :-Sample copies of the 
"TOWER" received, together with the "Tabernacle," and I assure 
you their contents pondered over and over, each time with 
increasing zest and delight. I cannot find language to express my 
thanks to the gentleman who, apparently in an accidental way, met 
and handed me a copy of "Food for Thinking Christians," at the 



same time asking me if I would read it if he gave it me, thereby 
exciting my curiosity to know its contents. May God bless him and 
all of you in the holy work of Love. To me it has been a feast— 
"Food" indeed. So much Bible truth, so many of its precious 
promises and utterances have been explained and brought into 
requisition that I never before had any use for, or appreciation of. 
Enclosed find "TOWER" subscription. 

Yours truly, 



NOTTINGHAM, ENGLAND 

ZION'S W.T. TRACT SOC'Y-Brethren: -I have read with much 
pleasure the little book, "Food for Thinking Christians." I am 
indeed grateful to you for the manner in which you have explained 
several of the most difficult points in theology. God in His infinite 
goodness must have opened your eyes to see these wonders of His 
divine plan, and I am thankful that I have lived to see this day. I 
may say that I fully indorse a great deal of the new teaching, and 
shall adopt it for the future. I pray God to abundantly bless you for 
your great philanthropic resolve to bless the world by giving away 
these pamphlets. 

I always reverenced the Bible as the Word of God-but since I have 
read your publications, I look upon it as my most PRECIOUS 
POSSESSION. 

Yours most sincerely, . 



MANCHESTER, KY., Feb. 20th, '82. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER-Dear Brethren:-I received the 
September No. "Food for Thinking Christians," and read it through 
four times and loaned it. I am much pleased with it and think the 
views correct as far as I am capable of judging. Recently, by 
request, you sent me the same in pamphlet form, which I keep 
loaned out. I also received a copy of the "Tabernacle and its 
Teachings," which I have read through three times, and can truly 
say, that I am more than pleased with it; also WATCH TOWER, for 
which I subscribe —am waiting to see if I can't get others to send 
with me. Please send me three copies more of "Food"; I will see 
that they are placed with those who will read them, and give the 
contents serious consideration. 

Geo. O. Barnes, the Kentucky evangelist, held a series of meetings 
here last spring; he preached in part your views- "Love of God," 
first and all the time, and perhaps the mind of this community is 
better prepared to accept this Food than it otherwise would have 
been. May the Master speed and help in your work. 

Yours, etc., . 



CHARLESTON, S.C., Feb. 20, 1882. 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER:- 

I wish to express my appreciation, of the value of the two tracts— 
both of which I have perused with no little interest and pleasure. 
Their broad views and clearness on these glorious themes are 
equally as clear to the simplest understanding, as to the most 
metaphysical mind. 

The "second coming of our Lord," has been a subject of the deepest 
interest to me for a long time; and the pamphlets (in their humble 
guise) contain to me the most Godly and enlightened views I have 
yet met with. 

With the earnest wish that they might fall into the hands of all 
Christians, who may be walking in the narrow way, yet who may be 
like myself, often in the darkness, and longing for more light-to 
such I would say, "read, and ye shall find that for which ye seek. " 

Enclosed please find a contribution of two dollars for the Z.W.T. 
Society. Please send me two copies of "Food," and two of the 
"Tabernacle. " 

Respectfully, 
R325 : page 2 

THE PASSOVER. 

"Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore, let us keep the 
feast." 1 Cor. 5:7. 

From the account of the instituting of the Lord's supper, furnished 
in Matt. 26:26,28, and Luke 22:7-20, and 1 Cor. 11:23-26; we 
incline to the view that it was designed to be a yearly remembrancer 
of our Lord's death, and that it is properly observed on its 
anniversary. Apparently it was instituted by Christ Jesus "our 
Passover," "The lamb of God which taketh away the sins of world," 
(John 1:29) as a substitute for the Jewish Passover. 

For this reason we meet each year for its commemoration on the 
anniversary of our Lord's death. (The 14th day of the first month- 
Jewish time.) 

We do not quarrel with any who prefer to commemorate more 
frequently, neither do we regard it as a binding or compulsory 
observance. We observe it because we rejoice thus to remember our 
ransom price- "the propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. " 

The time for the observance of the Lord's death this year will be 
after 6 P.M. of April 2d, which we believe to be the date 
corresponding to the time at which Jesus and his disciples ate of it; 
3 o'clock P.M., the day following corresponding to the hour of 
Jesus death. Matt. 27:46-50. 



Accordingly, there will be a meeting at the residence of J. L. 
Russell, No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny City, at 7:45 P.M. of 
Sunday April 2d, for commemorating the breaking of the body and 
the shedding of the blood of Christ. Thus, "as oft as we do this, (on 
its anniversary) we do show the Lord's death till he come"-till the 
last member of his body being dead with him, shall be like him, 
glorified and perfected as a new creature. For "the cup of blessing 
which we bless is it not the communion [sharing by us] of the blood 
[death] of Christ? The bread which we break is it not the 
communion of the body of Christ [in his death]? For we being 
many are one bread [loaf] and one body." 1 Cor. 10:16. Hence, 
when we eat and drink, we show not only our interest in his 
sacrifice, but also express our own covenant to be dead with him, 
and to drink of his cup. (See, Matt. 20:22,23.) 

These are always precious seasons here; and letters received from 
various groups of twos, threes, twenties and fifties last year, 
indicated that they enjoyed a similar blessing. "Christ our Passover 
is sacrificed for us, therefore, let us keep the feast"— putting away 
all leaven of malice, envyings, etc., let us be of the unleavened loaf- 
-the body of Christ -each member, not puffed up, but easily 
broken. 

We generally use unleavened cakes (which may be purchased of 
any Hebrew family) and raisin juice. 



R325 : page 2 

TRUTH, when it is won, is the possession of the whole nature. By 
the action of the whole nature only can it be gained. The king must 
go with his counselors at his side, and his army at his back, or he 
makes no conquest. The intellect must be surrounded by the 
richness of the affections and backed by the power of the will, or it 
attains no perfect truth. -Phillips Brooks. 

We have many questions, some of which will be answered in next 
issue. 



R325 : page 2 

THE PROGRESS OF INFIDELITY. 

It is acknowledged by all unprejudiced persons capable of judging, 
that infidelity is on the increase. Speaking upon this subject, the 
Chicago Tribune says: "It is idle for the people of a religious habit, 
and especially for those who are charged with nursing and 
promoting piety, to ignore the progress which infidelity has been 
making during the past few years. The contrast between the 
crowded auditorium in which Col. Ingersol delivered his lecture 
recently, with the sparse attendance which awaited similar 
appearances a few years ago, furnishes a striking evidence of its 



progress." The writer continues his theme, and very truthfully says: 
"The progress of infidelity, as signalized by Ingersoll's success, 
likewise denotes the growth and spread of irreverence. Perhaps this 
is the worst feature of the new order of things. The danger of 
irreverence is its invasive tendency. Beginning with its forms, it 
soon extends to the essence; starting with dogma, it is apt to 
proceed at a rapid rate to principle, society, and the family. The 
infidel must provide his own morality, and impose his own 
restraints. No man or sect is his guardian, and his code of ethics is 
of his own making. The modern spirit of progress is creating sad 
havoc with the traditions and precedents which might continue their 
influence even when the inspiration of Scriptures is doubted. " 

It is a very sad fact, that at this time, when God, His Christ, and His 
Holy Book are so ruthlessly assailed 

R326 : page 2 

by these godless, profane infidels, that the church has very nearly 
lost its power to withstand the oncoming tide. The finely written 
essays of her ministers are blank cartridges, when directed against 
such batteries. The pomp and glitter of modern worship, with 
sensational story-telling for Gospel, is as powerless to resist this 
overwhelming infidelity, as a shadow would be to stop a cyclone. 
The Tribune further says: 

"There is naturally great diversity of opinion as to the effect of the 
palpable growth of infidelity that marks our age. The aggressive 
infidel like Ingersoll believes it to be an essential and valuable part 
of the world's progress. To him it denotes the downfall of 
superstition and the spread of reason and enlightenment. The 
conservative doubter is inclined to deprecate the contagion of 
infidelity. He believes himself and most of those who have 
exchanged their doubts with him to be capable of shaping their 
morals in the right direction, but fears that the removal of restraints 
will lead the masses to excess and riot of free thought and 
irresponsible actions. The churchman condemns without 
qualification the new departure as sacrilegious and wicked, leading 
to all the penalties in this life and the future which the strictest 
construction of the church tenants impose upon the infidel and the 
scoffer. These various sentiments can find no common ground upon 
which to meet, and infidelity must take its course, except as it may 
be restrained by moral and social influences, for the day of the rack 
and the thumb-screw, the terror of the cross and the stake are gone 
forever. " 

It would seem to be a cruel accusation to make, to say that the 
church has done much to produce this fearful increase of infidelity, 
but so it appears from what infidels and all unprejudiced writers 
say. Not that the church had intended any such thing, but many of 
her dogmas, such as unconditional election, man's inherent 
immortality, endless torture as punishment for sin, the endlessness 
of evil and rebellion against God, appear so unreasonable and 



arbitrary, and present the character of a just and merciful Creator 
and Ruler in a contradictory light, that these infidels, assuming that 
the teaching of the church is in harmony with the Bible, have, 
without critically testing these dogmas by the Scriptures, rejected 
the Church, the Bible, and its Author. If this be true, then the only 
antidote for this infidel poison is the presentation and adoption of 
the true Bible theology, by which God and His revelations shall be 
presented in their true character. 

Brethren, the present period, with all the wonderful circumstances 
crowded into it, offers the most glorious opportunity to the loyal 
servants of Christ to defend Deity, Jesus Christ, and the holy 
Scriptures, that was ever offered to any generation of God's 
servants since the world began. The present hours are truly filled 
with grand opportunities, sublime duties, such as angels and 
prophets were amazed to see in vision, and such as holy men have 
desired to enjoy, but died without enjoying the grand privilege. 
May the God of all grace give us wisdom not to waste these golden 
opportunities in children's play, striving about personal, carnal 
things, catching motes, while golden crowns are within reach- 
Selected. 



R326 : page 3 



THE BRIDE OF THE LAMB. 

In the world despised, neglected, 
Deemed its refuse and its dross, 
She whose Lord the earth rejected, 
Shares his sorrow, bears his cross. 

By the Dragon's fury driven, 
Nourished in the desert drear, 
Rocks and caves and stars of heaven, 
All her lonely sighings hear. 

In the worldlings' gay carousal, 
How her bridal hope they spurn! 
"Where's the vow of his espousal, 
Where the pledge of his return?" 

Yet, in all the gloomy midnight, 
Sang her heart its virgin lay; 
Watching, waiting, till the daylight, 
"Till the shadows flee away. " 

From the wilderness returning, 
Who is she with radiant face; 
In the early dawn of morning, 
Coming to her rightful place? 



Tis the Bride-the Lord's espoused, 
Leaning on the Bridegroom's arm; 
Shafts of error, words of malice, 
Now are vain, to do her harm. 

Then He's present-came the Bridegroom, 
To escort her to his home? 
Ended is her night of sorrow- 
Has Millennial morning come? 

Yes, He's present and in power; 
Soon his glory all shall see; 
For 'tis written, "Filled with knowledge, 
All of earth, now soon shall be." 

"In a moment"— Oh what wonder!- 
"In the twinkling of an eye," 
Parted from the earth asunder, 
She is with her Lord on high. 

Come up hither! I will show thee 
The Lamb's wife enthroned in light, 
Sharing all his kingly glory, 
Clothed with glory and with might. 

He has kept the vow he plighted; 
Praise the Lord in song and psalm! 
Blessed they who are united, 
By the marriage, to the Lamb. 



-Repaired. 



R326 : page 3 



WHAT IS MEAT? 

"Who then, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord hath 
made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? 
Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he cometh, shall find 
so doing." Matt. 24:45,46. 

We understand these words to have been spoken to the disciples 
originally, but were for the instruction of the church throughout the 
Gospel age, but especially at its close. 

As some of the times and events spoken of by our Lord have come 
and gone, and as Christians have marked these passing events with 
careful anxiety, because they gave corresponding indication of the 
ending of trial and trouble to the children of God, many of them, for 
some reason, seem to have come to think that the exact knowledge 
of the time of our Lord's coming was the most essential thing to 
attend to. 

Far be it from us, in this connection to throw cold water upon the 
expectations of any who are watching for the revelation of the 



world's coming King; and far be it from us to join in the cry of 
objection so often urged: "O, we don't know anything about it; 
Jesus said, 'no man knoweth the day nor the hour;' I don't think we 
ought to pry into such things," etc. But, while we would do neither 
of these, let us carefully consider the words of our Saviour in the 
text quoted. In the preceding verse he says, "In such an hour as ye 
think not the Son of man cometh." Notice he is not speaking to the 
world now, but to the disciples, and doubtless to all those who 
should afterward "believe on him through their word. " As much as 
to say, I have now answered your questions regarding these 
important events; you and the succeeding members of the body of 
Christ, the little flock, can mark by the fulfillment of these signs at 
different points in this good-news age, something near the time of 
my coming and presence. (They had been asking when there should 
not be "one stone left upon another" of these magnificent buildings, 
and what should be the sign of his presence, and of the end of the 
age.) See vss. 2,3. Though they were not to be overtaken as a thief 
(the world would be), nor to be in darkness regarding it (1 Thes. 
5:4), yet they were not to know the hour, i.e., the exact time of his 
coming, yet if they were to watch closely they would not mistake 
the signs of his presence, viz., that it would be with the world as it 
was in 

R327 : page 3 

the days of Noah, careless and thoughtless, the whole attention 
given to fleshly desires, not understanding nor caring for the 
spiritual; verses 37,38,39, and saying "where is the promise of his 
coming." 2 Peter 3:4. But a very striking sign of his presence would 
be that the evil servant would be smiting his fellow servants and 
saying, "My Lord delayeth his coming" (presence). 

The nominal church is now doing this, and it is cause for regret that 
it is not confined to it. But, while he charged them to watch that 
they might not be like Jerusalem, ignorant of the time of their 
visitation, and as a consequence unprepared, he follows it up with a 
question which embodies an exhortation to a still more important 
duty, which, while being done, should not leave the other undone, 
viz., "Who is a wise and faithful servant" ...giving "meat in due 
season" to the household? What household? The household of faith. 
Then it is spiritual things he is speaking of, similar to those spoken 
of in the sixth chapter of John, 53d to 63d verse inclusive. Please 
read those words, "they are spirit and they are life. " Take them in at 
the expense of being called a spiritualist. If it is spiritual things that 
are spoken of, what must be the nature of the meat given to the 
household of faith by the faithful and wise servant? Jesus says 55th 
verse, "My flesh is meat indeed. " But the words which he is 
speaking are spirit. Then he does not mean that his physical body is 
the thing spoken of; no, for "the flesh profiteth nothing" (O, that we 
could keep this in mind when studying the nature of Christ's 
coming, and his dealings with the household of faith), and yet just 
before— 53d verse he says, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of 



man and drink his blood ye have no life in you. " Then the faithful 
and wise servant will be feeding the household of faith with the 
body and blood of Christ. Then, as this is a figure, it must be that 
somehow we take in, and take on, the nature, the character, and the 
life of Christ; if we "eat his flesh," is it not a strong mode of saying 
that we assimilate the essential principles that made up the Christ, 
and thus become like him? 

Let us consider, then, the apostle and high priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus, that we may find what those principles are. 

What was the great work which he proposed to accomplish? 

"To save a world of sinners lost. " 
How did he begin that work? 

By laying aside the glory which he had with the Father. "Though he 
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor. " Humility, then, was 
the first blade that shot forth from the seed which was to become a 
tree, the leaves of which should be for the healing of the nations. 

The "mighty" came down to man's estate, but the wondrous stoop 
was within sight, and so far as we have anything to sacrifice we are 
to imitate him. Then the faithful and wise servant will have the 
household partake of the humility of Christ. He will not be offering 
them bones of contention, nor setting them examples of arrogance 
and self-sufficiency; he will not by example nor precept have them 
partake of the spirit which on one occasion caused certain ones to 
contend "who should be greatest," and certain ones at a later date, 
who should be "leaders." If any are leaders, and Christ appointed, 
they will be partaking of this humility, and by every means causing 
the household to partake of it also. 

After humbling himself by taking the body prepared for him, his 
first act (when the body was mature) was to formally deliver it up 
to death; and this he signified by making a living picture (his 
baptism) of his submission to death and consequent sufferings 
preceding it, and of his resurrection. Here is an important element, 
that the faithful servant will be giving to the members of the 
household, though some may think that they can live without it. 

His next act was to submit to be led (but of the spirit) into the 
wilderness to be tempted, to be brought directly in contact with the 
powers of darkness. To stand as a man alone in the presence of the 
ruler of the darkness of this world to be tempted. But why was he 
tempted? It would not make him any purer nor better surely; he was 
without sin already. 

He came down to the condition of the perfect man; he was the 
second Adam. The first Adam with no preference for evil, but 
having no knowledge of its terrible nature, was tempted and fell, 
the second Adam, with no preference for evil, but with a knowledge 
of its awful results, and of the power of God (By his knowledge 
shall my righteous servant justify many. Isaiah 53:11), was as really 
tempted, and triumphed. He evidently was free and could have 



yielded; in fact, he was tempted TO yield, but gloriously resisted 
and vanquished his foe. 

Now again we ask, why did he pass through this ordeal? To show 
us how to overcome. Being the Captain of our salvation, the Leader 
of a little band of conquerors, his example was necessary, for 
through them "all the families of the earth" are to be blessed. "Now 
to Abraham and his seed were the promises made". ..and that seed 
"is Christ." Gal. 3:16. Now, if we "be Christ's (if we feed on him 
and partake of his life), then are we Abraham's seed, and heirs 
according to the promise." Gal. 3:29. 

Then here is a choice principle for the household to feed on; the 
knowledge of Christ, or Christ's knowledge. But, says one, his 
knowledge was divine, and though he was tempted, he knew he 
would not be overcome. That is just the point we wish to make 
prominent right here. He has opened for us the way to the same 
source of knowledge, divine word and spirit, and Christ's example 
to feed on. But, says one, if I could know, as he did, that I would 
come out of the conflict all right I could endure it too. But you 
would know that just as surely as he, if you would feed on his 
knowledge. Here is a bit of it, take it and let it strengthen thine heart 
when trial comes, as it did his: "God is faithful who will not suffer 
you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the 
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear 
it." 1 Cor. 10:13. This is divine knowledge, and just the knowledge 
that he had. If you believe it and appropriate it, (feed on it) you will 
triumph just as he did. 

But there are many other portions of knowledge that strengthened 
him for his labor of love and life of suffering, terminating with 
death, and the same knowledge will so strengthen and support us. 

These portions may be summarized under the general term of God's 
plan for the salvation of the world. O, how it fired him with love 
and zeal, and by parable and figure he held it up to the view of 
those whom he wished to have see it. 

But, says one, did he not wish to have all see it? No, not then; he 
only wished to have those see it who would accept the blessed 
truth. See Matt. 13:13,14,15, and Matt. 7:6. It was for those referred 
to by Paul (Acts 13:26), when he said, "Whosoever among you 
feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. " There are yet 
many persons whose ears are dull of hearing, and such ones would 
and do trample upon these pearls. This bread of life they reject. 
Like the Pharisees of old, publicans and harlots will enter the 
kingdom before them. 

This knowledge which so supported him will so support us. Modern 
Pharisees would withhold from us this love-begotten plan of God; 
but let the faithful servant give it plentifully to the household of 
faith. 



We said he passed through this ordeal of temptation and suffering 
to show us how to overcome, giving us the same facilities for 
overcoming, i.e., knowledge of God's will and plan, and his Spirit 
to give us an understanding and to support us. 

But was this example for all the world? O, no, not directly; 
comparatively few of the world know, or ever knew of it, and but 
few of those who do, care much about it. 

But his mission was twofold, to redeem the whole human race from 
death by his death (the forfeit of sin), and to be the Leader of a 
"peculiar people" by his life, and through this "peculiar people" in 
the "ages to come," he is to show to the world "the exceeding riches 
of his grace." (Eph. 2:7.) His death for the world (including those 
who became heirs) entitles them all to life; the same kind of life lost 
in Adam; this is the "common salvation," Jude 1:3, and 1 Cor. 
15:22, and his life vitalizes and raises to a high and glorious 
condition those who hear and believe (the little flock), those who 
feed on him, those who appropriate the divine which was in him, 
and thus are "made partakers of the divine nature." 2 Peter 1:3,4; 
Rom. 5:10; 2 Cor. 4:11. 

We apprehend that the life of Christ by which we are saved (have 
life MORE abundantly) is the life principle which manifested itself 
in a series of loving labors and sacrifices for the good of others, that 
such a life taken in, lived (eaten), is the begetting (through the 
spirit) of a higher life-the pledge of immortality. This we 
understand to be "the faith once delivered to the saints." Jude 1:3. 
This is "the meat that endureth." Jesus said, John 4:34, "My meat is 
to do the will of him that sent me. " That was his life, and if we 
partake of his life on earth, we shall be partakers of his resurrection 
life— made "like unto Christ's glorious body." 

R327 : page 4 

Then let the humility, the sufferings, the trials, the labors, and the 
knowledge, which, by the spirit, supported him— in short, the 
CHRIST be our daily food; and the faithful and wise servant will be 
found giving it to the household in due season, and receive the 
approval of his Lord. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R328 : page 4 

A WORD FROM BRO. A. D. JONES, 
OF ZION'S DAY STAR. 

Most of ZION'S WATCH TOWER readers will remember, that 
some time ago we took the position that it was more than probable 
that the "dead in Christ" were raised, or were then being raised, and 
we yet believe that the position was a true one. One thing is certain, 



that if Rev. 14:13, is now due [and it seems to be], then the other is 
true; for we will not be changed until the dead are raised. 

We believe that the words, "from henceforth," are applicable at the 
present time. This being understood now, is strong evidence that the 
time of favor to come into the "little flock" ended this last fall. In 
harmony with the thought that the dead saints are raised, we refer 
our readers to Rev. 19:5-16 "And I saw heaven opened, and behold 
a white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and true, 
and in righteousness he doth judge and make war. " This verse 
introduces Jesus as present in power; and by reading Rev. 3:14 it 
will be observed that he is the "Faithful and true witness," as John 
spoke of him in addressing the Laodicean Church. 

This will help us in fixing the time of the above scene, because the 
nominal churches not having been true witnesses were given up by 
him, spewed out of his mouth in the spring of 1878. While Jesus is 
represented in that spiritual condition of power, there are also 
others with him. "And the armies which were in heaven followed 
him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. " 
Verse 14. This company must be the risen dead, for the "fine linen" 
"represents the righteous acts of the saints;" (verse 8: E, D,) so that 
if Jesus is now present in the spiritual body [judging and making 
war in righteousness, verse 11], they must be also, for both are 
represented in the same spiritual [heavenly] condition. 

According to the parallel, Jesus was due to enter on his Kingly 
office in the spring of 1878, and so when seen in power with his 
armies, "He hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, 
King of kings, and Lord of lords." Verse 16. 

While Jesus and the dead saints are shown as in the heavenly, 
spiritual condition, the living saints who are not yet changed, are 
used as his mouthpiece. "And a voice came out of the throne 
[through them], saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye 
that fear him, both small and great." Verse 5. Is it not significant 
that the teachings are now to the servants, believing, as we do, that 
the door is shut to the high calling? "And out of his mouth (the 
saints his mouthpiece) goeth a sharp sword, the word of truth, that 
with it he should smite the nations." Verse 15. And again, "How 
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him [the living saints 
his feet] that bringeth good tidings [restitution], that publisheth 
peace;. ..that saith unto Zion, thy God reigneth" Isa. 52:7. 

"And his name is called the word of God," so we would proclaim 
no other word. Our teachings are not the "doctrines of men," but 
God's Word. Some may say we are not right in our teachings, for 
"he had a name written that no man knew but he himself. " Verse 
12. 

No man [unregenerated] does know, but we (his body) may know, 
for the name written is "King of kings and Lord of lords." Do we 
not proclaim Jesus as now in this position, having entered on his 



Kingly office—and moreover, that the dead saints are risen, "kings 
and priests" unto God, so that Jesus is King of heavenly kings? 

But no man knew "but he himself. " True, but we are of him, we are 
the members of his body: his "feet," therefore a part of himself. 
Dear saints, what a glorious position is ours. The nominal churches 
have been spewed out of his mouth, they are in darkness, and know 
not that Jesus has entered on his reign as King; and hence they 
know not the name written; nor do the servants yet know, for they 
are not of his body, not reckoned as part of Himself. What could 
more clearly set forth our relationship to him than those words 
which reveal to us that name? It also indicates that we shall soon 
enter on our reign with him and his armies. 



page 4 

A WORD FROM BRO. J. B. ADAMSON. 

BELOVED IN CHRIST:-After several months engaged in 
distributing and preaching the Gospel, you will doubtless be glad to 
hear from me again. I have had good opportunities for observing 
how this Gospel of the grace of God is received by the different 
classes in and out of the nominal churches. Only those who go forth 
into the world, with the real Gospel of gladness, can have a full idea 
of the joy and rejoicing of God's true people, when presented with 
these truths. And only such can realize how bitter is the opposition 
of many of the clergy (Scribes) and false religionists (Pharisees) 
who abound in the churches now, as they did in the Jewish. 

I worked in nearly all the large towns of twenty states, being 
present also at nearly all the leading Camp Meetings, Conferences, 
and Assemblies of the year: distributing thousands of books, and 
addressing many people. At Camp Meetings it was impossible to 
give away books with much discrimination, but after the season for 
such gatherings ended, I found time and place for seasonable words 
about our hope, joy, heirship, and the restitution of the world at "the 
manifestation of the sons of God. " I soon began to realize what a 
blessed work I was engaged in, and the glorious privilege of being a 
mouthpiece for the Lord. 

The true people of God who are really making good their promises 
of entire consecration of all to the Lord, received me with every 
sign of gratitude and love, and praise to God for this message of 
grace and love, expressing surprise that the "Food" had reached 
them, and gratitude to God for "meat in due season." Limited in 
time, I devoted it principally to those who seemed to "have an ear 
to hear"-the truth hungry, passing by those who seemed to think 
themselves rich and increased in goods and needing nothing; thus 
following the example of our Forerunner— convinced that now, as 
then, no man can come into the light except the Father draw him by 
his Word and Spirit of truth. There is no inducement of a worldly 



character to lead one of the world-conforming, Babylon people into 
the narrow way and race for glory. On the contrary, this teaching is 
most repulsive to the larger portion of the nominal church, and 
those who deliver them are continually subject to contempt, 
reproach, and dishonor. Those who for years have been carrying the 
honors of the world with the name of Christ in self-indulgence, feel 
outraged by the teaching that glory, honor, and immortality will 
only be given to those who take up their cross, deny self, and 
follow their Leader in a life separate from the world. 

Most bitter in their opposition are the clergy who doubtless feel 
their craft endangered— some of whom obtained the books from 
their people when I was gone and burned them. This was especially 
true among the sect calling themselves "Second Adventists," 
strange as it may seem. They greatly fear, that which they cannot 
gainsay. 

I now gladly recur to the effect of the truths we hold, upon the dear 
sainted people of God who only are the church- yet for the present 
much mixed up in Babylon except to God's clear vision. These 
were glad to get out of her, and hailed the message and the result, as 
a deliverance from sin. Many infidels and worldly people got to 
hear the message also, and often spoke of God's plan in the ages, as 
something reasonable, and as demonstrating his Wisdom, Justice, 
and Love. 

Being a willing instrument in God's hand, subject to any use I can 
be fitted to, I now try a preaching tour, and expect to meet many of 
the brethren and labor together with them. Again desiring your 
prayers, I remain your brother and fellow worker in Christ Jesus. 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



R328 : page 4 



SACRIFICE. 



I entreat you, therefore, brethren, by the tender compassions of 
God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, well-pleasing, 
to God— your rational religious service— Rom. 12:1. — Diaglott. 

There is very much involved in the above quotation. In fact all that 
precedes it, to which the word therefore refers, as a reason why a 
certain thing should be done; but we will call especial attention to 
the term sacrifice. 

It is translated from the Greek word, thusia, and means a slaughter, 
or an animal slaughtered. 

We have natural-animal-bodies now— 1 Cor. 15:44-46; and if we 
have accepted of Jesus as our ransom, they are not our own, but 
have been bought with a price; and we are exhorted to present them 
a living sacrifice, to be slaughtered— killed. But why give them? 



There must certainly be a reason for so doing. The term bodies 
seems to include all there is of our earthly existence. Jesus gave his 
life a ransom for many-Matt. 20:28-and he gave his body-Heb. 
10:10. All there was of the man Jesus, was given as ransom— 1 Tim. 
2:5,6.— and we are exhorted to have the same mind that was in him. 
Phil. 2:5. 

As he became obedient unto death, so ought we. Hereby have we 
known love, that as he laid down his life for us, we ought to lay 
down our life for the brethren. 1 John 3:16. 

For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the 
sanctuary by the High Priest, for sin, are BURNED without the 
camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with 
his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore 
unto him without the camp, bearing the reproach- Heb. 13:11-13. 

To present our bodies a living sacrifice, then, means to be crucified 
with Christ; baptized into his death; dead with him as men; but 
alive unto God as new creatures. 

The proclamations of Rev. 14:6-1 1 having been given; Paul's 
mystery, "we shall not all sleep," is now due. And from this time, 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord," they shall not sleep- 
become inactive— but be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and 
while they will have ended the toil and weariness of this present 
condition of corruption, of dishonor and weakness, they will be 
changed to a condition of incorruption; glory and power; and "their 
works follow with them. " 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a 
covenant by sacrifice." Ps. 50:2-5. 

Many seem to get the idea that all that is required, is to give a 
certain portion of our time and substance. Cain came with such a 
sacrifice, and it was not received. Abel offered an animal to be 
killed, typifying the better sacrifice, and it was accepted. If we 
present ourselves we will surely present all we have also. 

B. W. KEITH 



R328 : page 4 



"WHAT IS MAN?" 



"What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that 
thou visiteth him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the 
angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honor. Thou madest 
him to have dominion over the works of thy hand; thou hast put all 
things under his feet: All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the 
field." (Psa. 8:4-8.) 

We believe that a failure to rightly understand what constitutes A 
PERFECT MAN, is a fruitful source of error among Christians, and 



tends to shroud in mystery, many Scriptures otherwise easily 
understood. 

It is the common view, but we think unsupported by a single text of 
Scripture, that a perfect man has never been seen on earth-in fact 
that all that is seen of man on earth is only the embryo, imperfect, 
undeveloped man; that to reach the perfection of his nature (perfect 
manhood) he must become a spiritual being like unto angels, etc. 
This view, we think, sadly mixes Scriptures, (as well as students) 
instead of developing harmony and beauty, by "rightly dividing the 
word of truth. " 

We understand the Scriptures to teach that there have been only two 
perfect men— Adam and Jesus— Adam was created in the image of 
God: A fleshly image of a spiritual being; an image, in the sense 
that he possessed capacity for reasoning, planing, ruling, and 
protecting-for Benevolence, Justice, and Love, and ability to 
execute these, in earthly matters: characteristics which resembled 
his Creator. To such an extent he is an image, that God can say 
"Come, let us reason together. " 

As Jehovah is ruler over all things, so, man was made a ruler over 
all (earthly) things-"In our likeness, let him have dominion" -over 
the beast, foul, fish, etc. Thus as our text declares, God crowned 
him with 

R329 : page 5 

glory and honor and placed him (in dominion) over earth. Thus 
David agrees with the account in Genesis, as to man's high honors 
originally— with all earthly) things under his feet, or subject to him. 

Genesis tells us, that God recognized the man whom he had made 
(not merely commenced to make, but completed) and God 
considered his creature "Very good." David in our text expresses 
the same thought when he says: "Thou hast made him a little lower 
than the angels." (Not a little while, as if a matter of time, but 
clearly and distinctly a little lower in degree.) Should we say then, 
that because man was a little lower, it means that he was a little less 
perfect than angels? Nay, but they were totally different kinds of 
beings; the one a lower degree of spiritual being, of which Jehovah 
is the highest; the other, the highest degree of animal (or earthly- 
fleshly) being, of which beasts, fouls, etc., are the lower degrees. 
Yet the highest of these earthly creatures was "a little lower than 
the angels," or lowest order of spiritual beings- Yet both were 
perfect, each according to his nature. Yes, God created man perfect 
and upright but he sought out many inventions through sin, by 
which he has woefully degenerated. 

Ah yes, there is a wonderful contrast between man as we now see 
him, degraded by sin, and the perfect creature God called "very 
good." Sin has gradually exchanged the expression and features. 
Hundreds of generations of ignorance, licentiousness, and general 
depravity, have so changed humanity, that it is no longer an 



IMAGE of the Divine. The moral and intellectual qualities are 
dwarfed and the animal propensities overgrown. He has lost 
physical strength to such an extent, that with all the aid of medical 
science, his average of life is about thirty years, whereas, at first, he 
survived nine hundred and thirty years under the same penalty. 

Man, who was thus degraded and defiled by sin and its penalty 
death, working in him, is to be restored to his original perfection of 
mind and body, and to glory, honor, and dominion, during, and by, 
the Millennial reign of Christ; because his ransom has been found 
in the person of Christ; and "as in (or by) Adam all die, even so, in 
(or by) Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) The things to 
be restored by and through Christ, are those things which were lost 
through Adam's sin. (Rom. 5:18,19.) Man did not lose a heavenly, 
but an earthly paradise. Under the death penalty, he did not lose a 
spiritual, but a human existence; and all that was lost is purchased 
back by his REDEEMER. 

If any one be not yet satisfied that Adam was a perfect MAN, we 
can furnish conclusive proof that the perfect MAN is not a spiritual 
being, as follows: 

Jesus in his pre-human existence, was, we are told, "in a form of 
God," i.e., he was a spiritual form or being, but since to be a ransom 
for mankind, he must be a MAN, and of the same nature as the 
sinner whose substitute in death he was to become, therefore it was 
necessary, for him to change his nature; and Paul tells us that he 
took not, or changed not, to the nature of angels, but to the nature of 
men— he became a man. (Heb. 2:16.) Now notice, that this teaches 
not only that angelic nature is not the only one on the spiritual plane 
of being, but that it is a lower plane or nature than that which Jesus 
was before he became a man. And Jesus was not then so high as he 
is now, for-Him hath God highly exalted: (Phil. 2:9), because of 
his becoming our RANSOM. He is now of the highest form of 
spiritual being -a partaker of the divine (Jehovah's) nature. 

But, not only do we thus find that the Divine, Angelic, and Human 
natures are separate, distinct, and totally different; but this proves 
that to be a perfect MAN, is not to be an angel, any more than to be 
a perfect angel implies that they must become equal with Jehovah, 
for Jesus took not the nature of angels, but a different NATURE- 
the nature and form of men; not the imperfect human nature as we 
possess it now, degraded and marked by sin, but-A PERFECT 
HUMAN NATURE. 

Jesus must have been a perfect man, else he could not have kept a 
perfect Law, which was the full measure of a perfect man's ability. 
He must have been a perfect man, else he could not have given a 
ransom for imperfect, sinful MEN; for since by MAN came death, 
by MAN also came the (right to a) resurrection of the dead." (1 Cor. 
15:21.) 

Now we have the question fairly, in another form, viz. : If Jesus in 
the FLESH was a perfect MAN, does it not prove that a perfect man 



is a human and fleshly being, full of the glorious IMAGE of his 
Creator, and crowned with glory and honor-"a little lower than the 
angels," and not an angel, not like angels, nor in any sense a being 
of their order and nature? Paul so teaches in Heb. 2:9. [I know your 
questions and texts and will answer quickly.] Let me go further, and 
say that if Adam was a perfect man, any subtraction or addition 
(except of knowledge) must render the manhood IMPERFECT, for 
perfection cannot be made MORE perfect. 

Again, look at the second perfect man, Jesus: Possessed of all the 
qualities of perfect manhood, he could not be made more perfect as 
a man. He possessed all those qualities of perfection (shown but 
slightly in his sacrificial life), which could have commanded 
obedience of all imperfect men. 

Under promise of an after high exaltation, from the human to the 
divine nature; to glory, honor, and immortality, he consecrated all 
human (earthly) hopes, aims, interests, pleasures, and with them 
human NATURE, too, to death. Because it is impossible to possess 
two natures at the same time, the human nature was given up to 
death before the divine nature could be received. The human ("form 
of a servant") was only taken for the purpose of becoming our 
ransom- "that he by the grace of God, might taste death for every 
man." (Heb. 2:9.) 

He received the divine nature fully, when, having been put to death 
in the flesh, he was quickened, raised to life, in the Spirit. He 
received an earnest, or foretaste of this birth to the divine 
(Jehovah's) nature, when he was begotten of the Spirit. When 30 
years of age, he commenced his ministry by consecration, typified 
in baptism, and was sealed as accepted to the divine nature, by the 
Holy Spirit of promise. (John 6:27; Eph 1:13.) 

And now, he who paid our ransom, and is to bless and restore man 
to perfection, and then to restore the dominion of earth to him- 
blessed with knowledge of good and evil to such an extent that he 
will be able always thereafter, to choose the good; this one, now 
highly exalted above angels and men, and of a higher nature than 
either, sharing the perfection of the divine nature, is selecting a 
"little flock" to share with him those honors, and to partake of that 
same divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) They, as joint heirs, are, with him, 
to be engaged in blessing and restoring mankind to the perfection of 
their nature-the human, with all the earthly glory and dominion as 
at first, but with knowledge and appreciation increased. 

Because the present age is devoted exclusively to the development 
of those who shall change their nature -Christ and his Bride; and 
because the epistles of the apostles are devoted to the description of 
the interests of the "little flock" and the prize for which they are 
now running a race, it should not be inferred that God's plans end 
with the completion of that choice company. Nor, on the other 
hand, should we go to the opposite extreme, and suppose that these 
choice things— divine nature, spiritual bodies, etc., are God's design 



for ALL mankind. No, to rightly divide the word of truth, we 
should see that the Scriptures recognize the perfection of the divine 
nature in the little flock, and of the human nature in the restored 
world, as two separate things. 

The same Word of God contains earthly promises and "heavenly 
promises"; and it symbolically likens the earthly class to the "sands 
of the sea," and the heavenly class to "the stars of heaven." (Gen. 
22:17.) Of the one class it is said: All the LAND which thou seest, 
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed forever. (Gen. 13:15.) "And 
they shall build houses and inhabit them; plant vineyards and eat 
the fruit of them and long enjoy the work of their hands." (Isa. 
65:21,22.) To the other class, who will change their nature from 
human to spiritual-divine promises are made- "EXCEEDING 
GREAT and precious promises" (2 Pet. 1:4.)— "heavenly 
promises." Theirs is a "heavenly calling," a calling to a heavenly or 
spiritual condition; it is a call to become joint heirs with Jesus, and 
to sit with him "in his throne. " This heavenly calling is confined to 
the Gospel age; was never made before it, and will, as the 
Scriptures inform us, never be made after this age. The earthly call, 
was made before the high calling, and we are Scripturally told will 
follow after, the Gospel age. It is during the Millennial age that 
mankind will have the glorious opportunity of reaching human 
perfection, and earthly glory, honor, and dominion; their right to 
that restoration having been purchased by the sacrifice of the 
humanity of the Christ. 

Now, who cannot see a distinction between these natures, and that, 
though both will finally reach perfection (except those who are 
"cast away" as unworthy), yet, because of different natures, the 
perfected creatures will be totally dissimilar, except that in common 
they will have dispositions to do the Creator's will. We know that 
they will be thus alike-in harmony— one, because the perfect 
human was made an image of the perfect divine. 

The ancient worthies obtained a good report (record) through faith, 

R330 : page 5 

but received not the things God promised them, viz.: the land, 
peace, etc., "God having provided some BETTER thing, for us [the 
Gospel Church], that they [the faithful-Abraham, Samson, Moses, 
Isaac, Jacob, and Rahab, whose faith amounted to the hiding of the 
spies, etc.], without us, should not be made perfect:" (Heb. 11:40) 
i.e., These, to whom the earthly promises are made, cannot obtain 
their fulfillment until the Gospel Church is finished, and receives 
the spiritual things promised to it; then, through it, the earthly 
promises will be grandly fulfilled. 

Beloved, it will help you amazingly to keep clearly in view these 
differences of calling and of nature. It will enable you to see why, 
we who would attain the high, spiritual promises should not look to 
Samson, Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob as illustrations of— crucifying the 
flesh— or following in the footsteps of Jesus; they were running for 



the earthly prize, we for the heavenly. Look unto Jesus as the 
pattern and illustration of how we ought to so run as to win the 
spiritual prize. He was the first to run for the spiritual prize, the 
"forerunner," the Leader. Look, too, to others who ran in his 
footsteps, Peter, Paul, James, John, etc. These are illustrious 
examples, of those who crucify the human nature and sacrifice it, if 
by so doing they might attain the new nature offered-the prize of 
our high-calling. 

While your steps and mine may not shine so brightly as the 
mentioned apostles', yet the only difference in our sacrifices and 
work, should be those of ability and opportunity. Our wills should 
be as thoroughly sanctified as theirs; and if so, we may feel assured 
that our sacrifice is as well pleasing and acceptable to our Father by 
Jesus Christ, as was theirs. 

But fall not into the error of supposing that crucifying the flesh 
means the putting away of sin. No, Jehovah would never accept 
sins as a sacrifice. Sins should be put away, shunned, exterminated 
to the best of your ability; but you sacrifice, when you deny 
yourself personal ease, comfort, pleasures lawful to the natural 
man, but which you relinquish, to do something which you 
recognize as the will of God. In our crucifying, etc., we are to 
follow in Jesus' footsteps. Did his sacrifice consist in forsaking 
sins? No, in Him was no sin to forsake; but he denied himself 
things lawful and proper to him as a man, even life itself-and thus 
sacrificed. 

To show the contrast, we will look at Paul as compared with 
modern preachers. Many preachers of this day, choose the ministry 
as "a profession" which is honorable, has the respect of the world, 
and a comfortable and easy living, etc. Paul was called to the 
ministry by the grandeur of the "glad tidings of great joy"-he could 
not help preaching it, so overwhelmed was he by the "high calling, " 
so anxious to obtain it for himself and to enable others to attain the 
same. He preached it despite the persecution, disgrace, and frown 
of the world— at the sacrifice of earthly opportunities, honors, ease, 
pleasures; and accounted it a pleasure to be permitted to preach, 
even though, instead of luxury, he was obliged to "labor, working 
with his hands" at very humble employment, and was often in 
hunger and poverty and danger. He was willing to endure all this, 
because he had a correct appreciation of the good tidings he 
preached, and of the prize it presented. And it is from a failure to 
apprehend either of these that the clergy of to-day deserve the 
severe 

R330 : page 6 

words applied to them by the prophet: "His watchmen are blind; 
they are all ignorant; they are all dumb dogs; they cannot bark; 
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber: yea, they are greedy dogs 
which can never have enough-and they are shepherds that cannot 
understand; they all look to their own way [self-interest], every one 



for his gain from his quarter." Isa. 56:10,1 1. Because they hold the 
traditions of men, they cannot see the great prize of our calling. 
They have not "good news," but very BAD NEWS to tell-the very 
worst and most awful news that could be imagined, viz. : That the 
God of love, possessed of all power and all wisdom, prearranged 
for the eternal misery of nine-tenths of his human creatures. 

Oh, when will God's children learn that their fear toward Him is 
taught by the precepts and traditions of men (read Isa. 29:10-14), 
and that his true character is Love? When will they learn that it is 
because "His mercy endureth forever" that he has provided for 
human restitution in the next age, and for the development of the 
little flock in the present age, through whom to communicate the 
coming blessings to earth. 



page 6 



THE REVIVAL SEASON. 



"The spiritual barrenness in our local churches has been the cause 
of great anxiety to the official and leading men in them, and has led 
to some prayer and efforts for the betterment of this condition of 
things. The net addition to the Presbyterian churches of the North 
during the last ecclesiastical year was a fraction of one convert to 
each church. In some parts of the country the Congregationalists 
have not had a dozen additions to their churches in the same 
number of years. Baptists and Methodists do a little better but not 
much. The net addition of Baptists to the 874 churches of their 
faith, in this State for the last ecclesiastical year, for instance, is 
only 286, which is about one-third of a member for each church. 
More than one-half of the churches had not a single convert. The 
proportion of Methodists is between two and three new members to 
each church of their order. In view of these facts and figures the 
Presbytery of New York, the Baptists' Association and the 
Ministers' Conference of both Baptists and Methodists have 
endeavored to increase the number and improve the quality of their 
church members and converts, by special efforts begun with the 
new year and continued with much regularity and interest since. 
Days of special prayer have been held and evangelists, male and 
female, have been brought hither from other cities and states." - 
New Yew Herald. 

It might be added that nearly all of the additions above mentioned, 
few though they be, are from the Sunday schools; and many of 
them, so young as to be incapable of intelligent action. Few, very 
few, are converts in the true sense of the word. 

Yes, the church is losing the worldly respect which for some years 
has been the great attraction for the worldly element. They, as well 
as the most pious of God's true children are getting ashamed of the 
hollowness of Churchianity. Nominal Zion, is beginning to lament 



her inability to bring forth children— "Woe unto them that are with 
child in those days." 



R330 : page 6 

SEVEN PORTRAITS OF THE 

MILLENNIAL KINGDOM OF CHRIST 

AND ITS WORK. 

Revelation 20 to 22 contains eight portraits of the true Kingdom, 
just as we have seen that chapters 12, 13 and 17 contain repeated 
descriptions of the false Kingdom— Anti-Christ's. 

This repetition of the same things from different standpoints, and 
with other details, is a principle which applies especially to this last 
book of the Bible. A failure to recognize this, is, we think one of 
the reasons why so many of those who study this book, fail to get 
sense from it. 

The portion of Scripture we are about to consider, is frequently read 
as though it were one connected narrative, instead of several 
repetitions of the first statement. Because of failure to rightly 
divide, some get the thought, that the "great white throne" is to be 
established after the Millennial age, and after Satan is destroyed; 
consequently, are at a loss to know why the dead are raised at that 
time, or how they could have a probation after the Millennial Age, 
and are much confused generally. 



To better illustrate the distinctness and harmony of these portraits, 
we have diagramed them as follows: 



DIAGRAM OF REV. 20-22. 



Satan (Evil) loosed a 
little season, after the 
one thousand (1,000) 
years. 


END 

OF 

THE 

ONE 

THOUSAND 

YEARS 


Satan Bound for a Thousand (1,000) years — 
Evil and Vice under thorough restraint. 


Rev. 20 1-3 




Earthly Thrones cast down, and the 
Overcomers Reign with Christ a Thousand 
(1,000) years. 


Rev. 20:4,5 


Satan Loosed. 
The Evilly Disposed 
deceived and 
destroyed 


The Holy and Blessed of the First Resurrection 
life and Reign a Thousand (1,000) years. 


Rev. 20: 6-10 




The Great White Throne. 

Heaven and Earth Flee. 

The Dead Judged from Opened Books. 

Second Death. 


Rev. 20: 11-15 


Second Death, of the 
Unbelieving and 
Abominable. 


New Heaven and Earth. 

The Holy City (Government). 

Its blessings to mankind — Pain, sorrow and 

death abolished. 


Rev. 21 1-8 




The Bride — The Holy City — The Kingdom of 

God — come to Earth. 

The Light of the World. 

The good may enter the Kingdom. 


Rev. 21:10-27 




The water of Life flows freely. 
The World's troubles healed. 
The Curse (Sin, and its result, Death) 
Destroyed. 


Rev. 22:1-3 



R331 : page 6 



FIRST VIEW. 

SATAN BOUND.-EVIL RESTRAINED. 

Let us more particularly examine these pictures, all of which 
clearly pertain to the same period, the Millennial Age. The first, 
shows us that a restraint will be put upon evil, during that age of 
peace and blessing. This naturally commends itself to us, as the 
order for a reign of righteousness presupposes a restraint of 
unrighteousness. Satan is the best representative of evil principles, 
practices and persons, being the chief and leader in wickedness. 

An angel is seen, with the key of the abyss, (covered, secret, hidden 
place,) and a chain. The key represents authority, and the chain 
represents strength. The word angel signifies messenger, and this 
picture shows us, that God will send some messenger with authority 
and power to subdue Evil-the adversary of truth and right. In this 



work of binding, many agencies will doubtless take a part— an 
increase of knowledge probably being one of the strongest. Yet all 
of these agents, are typified by the one messenger. There is that 
about this figure, which seems to indicate that Christ Jesus, and his 
body, the church of the first born, is the one in whose hand is the 
power and authority to bind and control Evil- "To bind their kings 
with chains and their nobles with fetters of iron; to execute upon 
them the judgments written-this honor have all his saints." (Ps. 
149:8,9.) The language, too, reminds us of one who declares that he 
has the keys. (Rev. 1:18.) 

The binding or suppression of evil during the Millennial Age, will 
result from the exercise of authority and power, by our Lord, when 
he shall take unto himself his great power and reign. (Rev. 11:17.) 
But we have reason to think that the manner in which our Lord 
takes his great power, and binds Evil, will differ much from the 
general conception of it. We believe that truth binds error, and error 
binds truth: like light and darkness, they are constantly opposed to 
each other. During this Age the powers of darkness and error hold 
control; but light and truth will come with the new rulership. 

We believe that this New Ruler has already come, (visible only, as 
are all the glorious and spiritual things, to the eye of faith 
enlightened by the Word of God,) and that the binding is already 
commenced. As is God's rule- "Judgment [trial] must begin at the 
House of God." (1 Pet. 4:17.) Errors and evils- the devil in the 
church, must be bound first, and truth set free, among those who 
profess to be children of the light; and then it will progress, 
overturning errors, injustice and bad government among the 
World's people —thus blessing both nominal church and world, 
though the experience may for a time, seem a curse to both. 

Many may be the instruments used in this work; some fine and 
polished tools from the Lord's laboratory; some moral and upright 
Infidels, honest in their unbelief; and some God-dishonoring and 
defiant unbelievers; to displace errors and prepare a place for truth. 
So too, among the nations, he may make the wrath of man to praise 
him, and perhaps use bloody-handed Communists, as advocates of 
civil rights, and for the overthrow of evil and oppressive 
governments. But the result will be, that Satan shall be bound for a 
thousand years. The loosing for a little season, we will examine 
presently. 

SECOND VIEW. 

GOVERNMENTAL POWERS OVERTHROWN, 
AND SAINTS REST AND REIGN. 

"I saw thrones and they sat upon them and judgment [Rotherham- 
judicial sentence] was given unto them. " The thrones are those of 
earthly kingdoms at the present time, and all under the "prince of 
this world." (John 14:30) These are all condemned as unfit, and are 
to be overthrown, to give place to the kingdom of Christ. [The 



Greek word rendered judgment here, is the same rendered 
condemnation in the following passages: Luke 23:40; Jas. 3:1; Jude 
4.] 

"And I saw the persons of them that were beheaded for the witness 
of Jesus, and for the Word of God. " We believe that a few of this 
class are now living. It is not a literal beheading, but in keeping 
with other figures; it is a symbolic beheading. [Some suppose this 
to refer to all the martyrs of past ages— but of them the fewest 
number were beheaded.] 

Beheading, is to cut off from a head. There are many so called 
bodies of Christ: the Methodist body, Presbyterian body, etc., are 
common expressions. (The Scriptures, of course, recognize no such 
division into sects; but assure us that there is only one body and one 
head.) Of course, each body must have a head or authority, from 
whence comes its government and laws. These are Conferences, 
Assemblies, etc., and we predict that any one connected with any of 
these who will "witness for Jesus," as the only head of the church, 
and for the "Word of God," as the only standard of doctrine, will 
very quickly be treated as described— beheaded— cut off from those 
church heads. This is in harmony with the next clause 

R331 : page 7 

which says they worshiped not the Beast, neither his Image, neither 
received his mark. These, we saw in our last number, represent 
sectarian systems. 

This Scripture shows that such as are of this bounden class, not 
separated -beheaded— cut off-from others than the true head, are 
not overcomers, while the class described, of all ages, who will live 
and reign with Christ a thousand years, are. "This is the first 
resurrection." (Vs. 5. -We omit the first clause of the verse, which, 
as heretofore explained, is wanting in several of the oldest MSS.) 

This reference to the first resurrection, seems to indicate that it 
includes all of the first fruits company-bofh those who "sleep in 
Jesus," and the living who shall not sleep, but be changed at the 
moment of death. * 

THIRD VIEW. 

THE BLESSED REIGN AND END OF EVIL. REV. 2:6-10. 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the (chief perfecting) first 
resurrection; on such the second death hath no power, but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand 
years." 

This seems scarcely to require comment. It shows the holiness, as 
well as blessedness of all that reigning company. Another thought 
is suggested, by the fact that these shall be priests to teach, as well 
as kings to reign. They will not only see to the execution of God's 
laws, but will give instruction and assistance to mankind, such as 



will enable them to render obedience. Yes, it is a blessed thought, 
that we will be both kings and priests, (Rev. 5:10) and reign with 
him a thousand years. 

During this reign of the Christ, all will have been brought to a 
knowledge of the truth, (1 Tim. 2:4) the true light will have 
enlightened every man, ever born into the world. (Jno. 1:9.) All will 
have been brought to a recognition of Christ; those in heaven, 
(angels) those on earth (living men) and those under the earth, 
(those now in their graves who must be brought to life). All will 
have been brought to recognize the power of Jehovah's anointed; 
and unto him every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess. 
(Phil. 2:10,11.) And all nations that God ever made (Sodomites and 
all) shall come and worship before him. (Rev. 15:4.) All people 
shall be blessed by having an opportunity to reach human 
perfection, and consequent perfect happiness, and life ever-lasting. 
This kingdom over earth, after subduing all evil, will cease by 
being delivered up to God, even the Father (Jehovah), as Paul tells 
us: "He must reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet: [in 
subjection] The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death." [The 
destruction of death implies the raising of mankind out of it, to 
perfection of humanity: abolishing death and all of its incipient 
stages of sickness, pain, etc. This will be a gradual process, 
requiring all of "the times (1,000 years) of restitution" for its 
complete accomplishment.] 

It should be remembered, that to humanity the Millennial Age is not 
the perfect, but the perfecting age, to be followed by that which is 
perfect; even as to the Bride of Christ, the Gospel Age is not the 
perfect, but the perfecting period, to be followed by ages of glory 
and perfection, of which the Millennial is the first. 

And when all things shall be put under him, then shall the Son, also, 
himself be subject unto him (Jehovah) that put all things under him 
[that gave him the power]; that God may be all in all." (1 Cor. 
15:25,28.) 

But since all things before presentation to Jehovah must be perfect, 
whatever their nature; and since no sin is to go beyond the 
Millennial Age; therefore, it would seem but proper, that those who 
had experienced the blessings of knowledge and restitution, should 
be proved or tested, before they should be considered sin-proof. 
Having then reached, perfection of being and having had a previous 
knowledge of sin and its results, perfect obedience should be 
expected. Therefore Satan —evil— will be loosed a little season, in 
order that it may be manifested, 

whether their obedience results from a fear of the punishment of 
evil doing, or from a heart love of God, and a desire to do those 
things well pleasing to him. 

As evil will be bound by the infliction of punishment on the evil 
doer, so we may presume, it will be loosed by allowing evil deeds 
for a time to go unpunished; much as it is during this age. (See Mai. 



3:15-18.) With full liberty to do good or evil, the actions of each 
individual, will show his true disposition. Some will remain 
faithful, called holy ones (saints) others from among all nations. 
(The world will then be very populous— "as the sand of the sea"), 
will join the insurrection of evil; and the two classes will thus be 
manifested. (Vs. 7-10.) Then fire-judgments-will come upon 
them, and they will all be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, [fire 
representing judgment, trouble, and brimstone representing 
extinction of life-no life is proof against the fumes of brimstone- 
hence the force of the symbol, as a representative of extinction.] 

The trouble and judgment into which the devil and those followers 
will be cast, is of the same sort as that into which the symbolic 
BEAST AND FALSE PROPHET, (image) are cast at the end of 
this Gospel Age. These we have seen to be symbols, representing, 
not persons but systems: and these systems are said to go alive 
(while they are yet active and powerful systems) into the same lake 
of fire or gehenna fire of trouble and destruction. This fire, is 
already burning we think; beginning to torment those systems and 
to cause pain to all who do not recognize their true characters, and 
the end God has marked out for them- destruction. 

The devil and those followers shall be tormented day and night for 
ever and ever; more properly- "unto" the ages of ages or "until" the 
perfect ages are due. 



*The word anastasis, here rendered resurrection signifies-"a 
standing or rising up"-to bring to perfection. The bringing to 
perfection of mankind in general, will be a gradual work, requiring 
all of the Millennial Age, while the resurrection or bringing to 
perfection of the Bride of Christ-the little flock, will be 
instantaneous, and at the beginning of the Millennial Age. 
Remember, too, that though both reach perfection, yet one is a 
human and the other divine perfection. 

The attainment of the divine perfection is called the first 
resurrection, and signifies the chief or best perfection. The same 
Greek word (protos) is translated best in Luke 15:22, and chief in 
Acts 13:50; 16:12; 17:4; 25:2; 28:7; 7:17, etc. 

R332 : page 7 

FOURTH VIEW. 

THE THRONE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS AND 
THE WORLD'S TRIAL FOR LIFE. REV. 20:1 1-15. 

"And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from 
whose face the earth and heaven fled away, and there was found no 
place for them. " 



The throne or kingdom of Christ will be a pure-a righteous one, 
here symbolized by white, the symbol of peace and purity. "A 
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom." (Heb. 1:8.) 

The one who sat in the throne represents The Christ-primarily 
Jesus, the head, but also the overcomers who sit with him or share 
his glory and power (Rev. 3:21)-yet all one. 

Now call to mind the definitions of the symbols, earth, heaven, and 
sea, given in our last issue; you will find them of service here: 
heaven— spiritual control; earth— organized society; sea— the 
turbulent masses without religious restraint. From before, or at the 
presence of, this enthroned Christ, all forms of evil oppression and 
injustice must flee-no place is found for them, indicating that they 
will be driven from one place after another, but can remain 
nowhere. 

Earth— society— as at present organized, is a series of layers, or 
strata, or classes, each holding its position by oppressing those 
below it. (This class oppression is less in degree, in this land than in 
any other; yet even here, social caste is easily discernable.) The 
"lower classes" and "upper crust" are recognizable in the entire 
social fabric; both in the nominal church, and in the world. The 
upper classes are usually proud and haughty— the meek are oftenest 
found in the under strata, among the oppressed. The present system 
of society will pass away— not be permitted anywhere, when the 
throne of Justice is established in the earth; and a new earth (system 
of society) will take its place; viz. : the recognition of merit, not of 
pride and power. Then, love to God and mankind will be the ruling 
principle. 

This change of (earth) society begins immediately on the 
commencement of the dominion of Christ's kingdom. (This, we 
understand the Word of God to teach, was due in the spring of 
1878. If correct, the elements for the overturning should already be 
in preparation-and we believe they are.) 

A symbolic statement by the prophet (Isa. 24:1,2) is in keeping with 
the above exposition, God says he will turn the earth up-side-down 
-the "upper crust"-the proud, will be debased and the humble and 
meek will be exalted. 

Another prophecy, often mis-applied by "Second Adventists," and 
others, and supposed to mean that the earth will be melted by fire, 
and when cooled off, be a perfectly flat surface, without hills or 
mountains, and thus a new earth, is found in Isa. 40:4. "Every 
valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made 
low: the crooked (perverse) shall be made straight, and the rough 
places plain. " This we understand to be but another way of showing 
that society (earth) is to be reconstructed and equality of classes 
obtain, in which individual merit will be recognized, blended with 
humility and benevolence. 



But, not only does the present ("earth") society pass away, but also 
the present "heavens" or spiritual powers of control. Satan is 
declared to be "the prince of the power of the air" (heavens) who 
"now worketh (operates or rules) in the children of disobedience. " 
(Eph. 2:2) This one called at present, "The prince of this world" 
(John 14:30), we have seen, is to be bound; consequently his 
control, or spiritual power, now exercised in favor of evil doing, 
etc., will cease, or pass away; gradually, because his binding, as 
shown by some prophecies, will not be fully accomplished for some 
33 years. 

The fact that the present "earth" and "heaven," are to be succeeded 
by, or give place to, a "new earth" (society), and a "new heaven" 
(new spiritual powers of control also unseen, good and not evil— of 
Christ and not of Satan), is not here mentioned, but is afterward. 

"And I saw the dead, small and great (high and low-humble and 
proud) stand before God; and the books were opened-and another 
book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were 
judged out of those things which were written in the books, 
according to their works." 

That this will not be a marshaling of mankind in ranks, and rows, 
before a literal Judgment-bench, we have heretofore shown. We 
believe that the world of mankind, during their day (age) for trial of 
worthiness or unworthiness of perfect human life, will be tried in a 
similar way to that in which certain ones are now being tried and 
tested in this day (Gospel age), to prove whether worthy or 
unworthy of the perfection of the DIVINE nature. The Greek word 
here rendered judged, has the significance of tried or tested. Paul's 
use of the same word will prove this. We here give a quotation, in 
which he uses the same word (krino) three times: (We italicize the 
words translated from this Greek word.) "Dare any of you, having a 
matter against another, (1) go to law before the unjust, and not 
before the saints? Do ye not know that the saints (2) shall judge the 
world? and if the world (3) shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy 
to judge the smallest matters?" (1 Cor. 6:1,2.) 

Here Paul refers to the coming trial of the world, when the 
overcomers of the present trial, shall be their judges— judges, who 
like their Head, Jesus, will not only be able to assist the world as 
the kings, but also to sympathize with them— having been 
themselves tempted, in all points. 

The first illustration gives it clearly -"go to law"-or stand trial. 

"The dead," includes all of the Adamic race, who, during this 
Gospel age do not escape from the condemnation that is on the 
world- DEATH-by becoming partakers of spiritual life through 
Jesus. "By the offence of one [Adam] judgment came upon all men 
to condemnation," but there is "now no condemnation to them 
which are in Christ Jesus;" for the law of life in Christ made such 
free from the condemnation of death. (Rom. 5:18; and 8:1,2.) 



As during this age a little fragment of humanity escapes 
condemnation (death), by obtaining spiritual life offered on certain 
conditions, so we understand the world are to be privileged to 
escape from the death condemnation, by obedience to certain laws 
of natural life. Their right to this privilege of running for life comes 
as a consequence of Jesus having ransomed them. 

This verse relative to the dead, 

R332 : page 8 

shows us how all those death condemned ones, will be on trial 
before the White Throne. And so surely as it is a throne of purity 
and Justice, their trial, as ours now, will be full, fair and impartial. 
The Judge himself, has already become their bail, so that they shall 
have a full and sufficient trial before himself, to attain perfection of 
human life. 

The books opened, according to the rulings of which they will be 
tried, we understand to be the books of the Bible. The church, now 
on trial, is being judged according to these same books— and none 
now are on trial, to whom those books are not to some degree 
opened (understood). This too, accords with Jesus' words: "My 
words shall judge you in the last day (period)-the Millennial day. 
John 12:48. (The word here translated judge is the same word as in 
our text and in 1 Cor. 6:1. And the same word is rendered "sue at 
the law" in Matt. 5:40.) 

The words of Jesus will no longer be hidden under parables and 
dark sayings, that hearing the people might hear and not 
understand; but the secret things will be uncovered ("The mystery 
of God"-the church -being finished) the books will be opened, and 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. For God "will 
have all men to be saved, [redeemed] and [then] to come unto the 
knowledge of the truth." 1 Tim. 2:4. 

R333 : page 8 

The succeeding verse is in harmony, and says that "the sea 
(masses of mankind not under religious restraint) delivered up the 
dead which were in it:" i.e. mankind will be taken out of that 
condition, and brought under the restraints of the White Throne. 
(Consequently, when all are restrained there will be "no more sea"- 
see Jude 13, Jas. 1:6.) "And death and the tomb delivered up the 
dead which were in them, and they were judged every man 
according to their works." (During that age or day.) 

This trial includes all the world, (but, not the saints-John 5:24,) and 
is indeed the grand prospect held out before them. By means of that 
trial, the entire groaning creation, may be delivered from the 
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty (freedom from 
death) of the sons of God. Rom. 8:21,22. 

Another book— of life, was opened. This suggests to us that as there 
is a book (record), of life, in which the names of all the Gospel Age 



overcomers are recorded, who are worthy of divine life, so there 
will be a book or record kept in the next age of those worthy of 
perfect human life. 

The book of life now about finished, will not be opened-the results 
or record will not be known until the full end of this age; then we 
will see those deemed worthy to be of the Bride the Lamb's wife: so 
too, the records of the next age, will not be opened until the end of 
that age, when those worthy of receiving back the dominion of 
earth, lost by Adam, will receive it. 

Another feature of difference between the world's judgment of that 
age and ours of this, is, that though they will be required to have 
faith, yet their trial will be based on works -"judged according to 
their works." We, on the contrary, live in an age when perfect 
works are impossible, and our judgment depends largely on faith: 
According to thy faith be it unto thee, and works only according to 
our ability. 

In the end of that age of trial, death and the tomb, and all not found 
written in their book of life, will be cast into the lake of fire- 
already described as representing wrath and destruction. That the 
lake of fire is symbolic, is readily seen, because death and the tomb 
are represented as going into the same— the tomb will be no more, 
and the Adamic death will be no more. (Isa. 25:7,8.) All men who 
are then judged unworthy of life, die: but it is the second death, and 
is attributable to willful sin on their own part; for the Adamic death 
and all its results will have been destroyed. 

FIFTH VIEW. 

THE HOLY CITY (GOVERNMENT)- THE BRIDE- 
GOD'S DWELLING AMONG MEN. 

SORROW PAIN AND DEATH ABOLISHED. REV. 21:1-7. 

This brings the glory side of this glorious Millennial Age to view. 
The former heaven and earth and sea passed away entirely, and the 
new are fully inaugurated at the opening of this scene. The new 
heavens (the spiritual dominion of Christ) and the new earth, (the 
reconstructed condition of society) being now established; as a 
matter of course there will be no more sea— people unrestrained. 

The New Jerusalem coming down from God to earth, hereafter to 
be God's dwelling place, is a beautiful representation of the church 
as a kingdom or government over the earth. 

As the false system, or church (anti-Christ) has during this age 
attempted to govern the nations of the earth, so the real church- 
made one with the true Christ, will possess the true kingdom over 
earth's nations. The one, is in Scripture called "that great City 
(government) that reigneth over the kings of the earth," and is also 
called "Babylon"; (confusion) so the other is to be a strong City 
called Zion and The New Jerusalem (or "the city of the Great 



King"-King of kings and Lord of lords.) "God is in the midst of 
her, she shall not be (re-) moved. " 

Being the dwelling place of God- it will be the place from which 
he will operate in blessing all the world; for "reconciliation for 
iniquity" having brought mankind into harmony, and having blotted 
out sin, it will be meet that God's power should be engaged in 
lifting up and blessing all -"as God has spoken by the mouth of all 
the holy prophets." (Acts 3:21.) 

Yes, God himself shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. It was 
God's plan from the very first-God so loved the world that he sent 
Jesus: and so, of him and through him and to him are all things and 
we through him. (2 Cor. 5:18.) Not only do the past features of the 
plan indicate that God was in Christ reconciling the world to 
himself, (paying the ransom exacted by his own Justice,) but now 
we learn, that the Millennial work is still His. He it is, who will 
wipe all tears, etc. Yet, as in times past, he will use means and 
agencies— Christ Jesus and His Bride are to be the agencies; and as 
it has been all along it will still be, God in Christ and Christ in you. 

How blessed the thought that we soon shall share in the wiping 
away of all tears from humanity. Yet this shall be our glorious 
mission work during that age, for wiping is a gradual work. And the 
tears will last so long as their cause— imperfection, pain and death 
exists; and these will not be fully removed until the end of that age- 
-Then "there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are 
passed away." All those evils are part of the curse— results of sin; 
and all being redeemed by him who was made a curse for us it is 
proper that in due time all should have these blessings, and the 
curse be forever removed. 

"He that sat upon the throne said: Behold I make all things new." 

Yes, for this cause he became a man, then gave his human life as 
man's ransom price from sin. And thus having bought him in his 
low estate, he by his new (divine) life is to bless him with full 
ability to regain his lost estate, as perfect man— the image of his 
Creator. 

He that sitteth in the heavens has already declared— a "time of 
restitution" or making new-by the mouth of all his holy prophets, 
and he now tells John that promise is faithful and sure— "Write, 
these words are faithful and true." (margin.) 

He is the A and Z, the beginner and ender of the great salvation of 
mankind. He surely will, as he has said, give to all that are 
ATHIRST of the water of life freely— all men who will, may come 
into harmony and live forever. 

Those who are worthy of the perfect human life then, are called 
overcomers and "inherit these things"— the earthly kingdom, just as 
the overcomers of this Gospel Age are called "overcomers" and 
inherit spiritual things, and the heavenly kingdom. 



But those who do not then renounce fully the works of darkness, 
have their part in the lake of fire and brimstone— are subjects of the 
second death. This death is for their own sins, and is everlasting; 
will never be ended or interrupted by a resurrection. No, Christ 
dieth no more, and there is no ransom from that tomb, as there was 
from the Adamic death. 

Then— sin blotted out-sinners extinct -all things in heaven and in 
earth shall sing praises and thanks, to the King eternal, immortal, 
invisible, the only wise God. 

SIXTH VIEW. 

THE NEW JERUSALEM THE LIGHT OF THE NATIONS. 
REV. 21:19-27. 

This view seems to come back to our day, as its starting point. 
John representing the living members of the Bride company, is 
shown the Holy City (government) coming down to earth. But 
before he could see it, he had to go, in spirit, as high as possible 
above the earthly level. So we, the anti-type, may now see the 
kingdom of God coming:— the rule of the Highest commencing to 
direct and overthrow earthly things, preparatory to the full reception 
of the will of God on earth as in heaven." 

We can see his coming judgments as they circle all the earth, 
The signs and groanings promised, to precede the second birth, 
We read his righteous sentence in the crumbling thrones of earth, 

Jerusalem come down! But all cannot see this kingdom as already 
on its way to earth— "coming down." To thus recognize it, we must 
get away from the world and its standpoint of view; we must go in 
spirit (by and by in person) to the great and high mountain 
(kingdom of God), i.e. we must come into full sympathy and 
loyalty to that heavenly kingdom before sharing the King's 
confidence, so as to be shown its glory and power, and our future 
position as the Bride of the King. 

From our present standpoint, we can see what very few seem to 
see- that that kingdom will be an all powerful one, a spiritual one- 
"Having the glory (majesty and power) of God. " 

We have here a symbolic description of this glorious government of 
earth. The entire city is of pure Gold-divine glory, an untarnishing 
glory-the glory of God. It has "walls of salvation"; (Isa. 60:18.) 
protection and security abide in it. Its walls will never crumble nor 
fall, for the foundations are built of precious jewels, and the wall 
itself of Jasper, clear as crystal-(probably a diamond). The 
salvation walls rest securely on the finished redemption -the 
completed foundations as expressed by Jesus, the Apostles, and 
Prophets. (Eph 2:20.) 

The city lieth four square, the height, length, and breadth being 
equal— a cube, a perfect figure. This is another way of showing its 
perfection; it is perfect toward God, as well as toward earth. 



R334 : page 8 

We have already seen, that when God's kingdom (dominion) is 
established on earth, mankind will be brought into harmony with it, 
and the literal earthly city of Jerusalem will be rebuilt upon her old 
heaps, and will again become the great city of earth and Israel (the 
children of Abraham according to the flesh), as God promised-the 
channel through which a blessing will flow to all the nations of 
earth, from the spiritual seed-Christ. (Gal. 3:16 and 29; compare 
Rom. 1 1 :25-33.) And when we read that it has gates in every 
direction, and the names of the twelve tribes of Israel inscribed 
thereon, it seems in perfect accord, to show Israel's position as 
channels, gateways, by which the world may approach to the 
heavenly government, and through which may come the blessings 
to mankind. At the gates were twelve messengers (angels). This 
would seem to teach that Israel will in due time be the messengers 
to communicate the Love and Knowledge of the Lord to all 
creatures. 

The city had no need of the Sun (Gospel message), neither of the 
Moon (the Gospel reflection- "The Mosaic Law") to shine in it; for 
it is filled with the glory of God. Now we know in part, and see as 
through a smoked glass dimly; then, we shall know even as we are 
known, being made perfect as divine beings, having the glory of 
God. 

But the nations of earth will still need the symbolic also the natural) 
sun and moon. In fact, it is when "the books shall be opened," that 
the pure and full light of the Gospel and of the Law will shine out 
and bless mankind. The prophet says: "The light of the moon shall 
be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven fold 
(perfect) ...in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his 
people [caused by sin] and healeth the stroke of their wound. " (Isa. 
30:26.) But not only will the knowledge of the Lord flow out from 
the opened books, but the city (government-ruling) will be such as 
to shed light upon them. 

(Continued on page 2.) 

R334 : page 2 

(Continued from page 8.) 

"And the nations shall walk in the light of it." [The words-"of them 
which are saved"— are omitted from the oldest Mss.] 

And the kings [saints, Rev. 5:10] shall bring the glory and honor of 
themselves into the city. And they shall bring the glory and honor 
(the choice, bright, perfected) of the nations into the city. Thus we 
see that this government will at first contain the glory of the 
spiritual kings of earth, and afterward as the Millennial age 
progresses, the kingdom will embrace or include all of earth's pure 
and good— but only those counted worthy of life. Among them, will 
be found none defiled— for all who will, may by that time have been 
cleansed from all sin and defilement. 



SEVENTH VIEW. 

THE RIVER OF WATER OF LIFE REV. 22:1-3,17. 

This view begins after the city (government) of God is established 
in earth, and illustrates its blessings under still different figures. 

A river of water of life is seen, and trees of life whose fruit sustains 
life, and whose foliage heals the people. How this calls our minds 
back to the Paradise from whence Adam was driven on account of 
sin, and to the tree of life in the midst of Eden, from which he was 
debarred, and from the lack of whose fruit Adam and his race died. 

Oh, what a picture of the "restitution of all things, which God hath 
spoken"-the healing of all the curse, the blotting out of sin, and 
with it, of misery, pain, and death, because a ransom has been paid; 
and he who ransomed, is the one who gloriously restores. 

The water of life which will there flow from the throne is a picture 
of the future; for not yet has the throne been established on the 
earth. We still pray "Thy kingdom come," and not until that prayer 
is answered, can that river of water of life flow. The water of life is 
knowledge— truth-for which mankind famishes now. It will flow 
out bountifully when the tabernacle of God is with men. Then 
thirsty humanity, groaning and in painful bondage to sin and death, 
will be refreshed and restored. 

A type of humanity may be seen in the condition of Israel in the 
wilderness. Thirsty, they cried to the Lord for water; the rock was 
smitten, and from it came forth streams in the desert. So now 
mankind's prayers and groans (Rom. 8:21,22) have been heard of 
Jehovah and he has permitted the ROCK, Christ Jesus, to be 
smitten. Yes, and the smiting still continues, for we are permitted to 
"fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. " (Col. 
1:24.) And while one member is being smitten, it is true that the 
smiting is still in process; but when all the sufferings of Christ 
(head and body) are ended, then will flow forth streams of water of 
life, and whosoever will may drink freely and live forever. Typical 
Israel drank of the typical water from the typical rock; but the 
substance is of Christ and the whole world— whosoever is athirst 
may yet come to the river of life and drink freely. (1 Cor. 10:4.) 

Knowledge of God (whom to know is life eternal) is now possessed 
to a limited degree by those now begotten of the word of truth, but 
it is as Jesus expressed it, in such, "a well of water springing up"; 
but in the next, the Millennial Age, it will be a full, broad river of 
truth and of the knowledge of the Lord. Now confined to the few- 
"a little flock," it will then be free to all. Then the little flock who 
now walk the narrow way to reach the grand prize of life - 
"Immortality" -will have reached and won the prize. The chaste 
Virgin now espoused to the Son of Heaven's King, will be united to 
the Bridegroom-no longer the virgin, she will be the Bride, the 
Lamb's wife and joint heir: and her future work as Bride is shown 
in verse 17- "The Spirit and the Bride say come. And let him that 



heareth say, come. And let him that is athirst, come. And 
whosoever will let him take of the water of life freely. " 

In the present Gospel age we (a) members of the espoused Virgins 
may be used by the Spirit, in the work of taking out (selecting) the 
one who shall shortly be the Bride, and share the Bridegroom's 
name and glory and work, and this is a grand privilege; but what 
comfort it brings to the heart of every one begotten of the Spirit of 
God (Love) to know that the very object of our present selection is 
to enable us to be in the next age co-workers together with the 
Bridegroom and our Father, in blessing all families of earth by 
causing the water to flow freely, and inviting them to drink into the 
knowledge and love of God and live forever. 

Trees of life seem to symbolize saints, whose leaves— professions- 
teachings, will heal men, and whose fruit will be adapted to the 
changing conditions of men as they are brought upward toward 
perfection- fruit suitable for each changing season, thus restoring 
man, to man's estate. 

"And there shall be no more curse" -the curse will be gradually 
removed and man gradually released, under the blessings of that 
glorious age. There his servants shall serve him, and reign unto the 
age of ages, when the kingdom shall be delivered to God even the 
Father. 



R334 : page 1 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1882. 

NO. 10. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R334 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Everywhere the knowledge of the love of God and the grandeur of 
his plans seems to be spreading and deepening among his truly 
consecrated children. We think we rightly express the causes of its 
spread, when we say that not only has increase of civilization been 
gradually preparing mankind for a less heathenish understanding of 
the teachings of God's Word; but, as we recently informed a 
Methodist minister-all of our people are preachers, from the least 
to the greatest of them. They make the preaching of the "glad 
tidings" the chief business of life-all other business being 
considered secondary. Women as well as men, each according to 
his or her ability, preach Christ and him crucified, and the blessed 
results accruing to every man, for whom he died. Their preaching, 
though often in a humble way, shows the inestimable value of the 
ransom from death, far better than the flowery essays of three- 
fourths of the "clergy. " We preach because we cannot keep the 
glorious news. It fires our own hearts with so much love and praise 
to our great God of love, that we must tell it. 

I love to tell the story, 
It did so much for me, 
And that is just the reason 
I tell it now to thee. 

On the other hand, those who preach the bad tidings of everlasting 
misery to the race in general, can only be induced to do it by larger 
salaries than they could otherwise make with the same outlay of 
service. 

We hope we did not overstate the matter when we said that all who 
believe "this way" make preaching the chief object of life- 
preaching by 

R335 : page 1 

word, preaching by letter, preaching by dress, and manner, and 
looks, and deeds. We know that as we were "all called in one 
hope," so we were all given the same commission: "Go ye into all 
the world and preach this glad tidings to every creature. " We were 
all anointed by the same spirit, for the same work as our Head— 
"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he hath anointed 
me to preach the glad tidings to the meek." (Isa. 61:1.) 

The glad tidings we preach is, that Jesus hath died, and there is 
remission; that Him hath God highly exalted "to be a PRINCE and 
a SAVIOR"; and that this Prince and Savior whose kingdom and 
work are soon to be recognized over all the earth, has all power in 
heaven and earth. He will, during his reign, exalt the meek, and 
bless the world by saving it out of death and sin. It is a message so 
grand that its opponents dare never state it fairly, lest all the world 
might see that, truly, "God is love"— that God's ways are not as 
men's ways, nor his thoughts (plans) as theirs. 



Neither need you fear the influence of truth upon the worldly 
minded. Some delight to tell of God's plan to His children, but fear 
to mention it to worldly people, lest they, being freed from the fear 
of eternal torment, might be made worse. We believe that these 
things are mainly due to the saints, but have no fear of injuring any 
class with the truth. In the first place, people don't believe in such a 
place, and are seldom restrained by it. Secondly, the reason so few, 
except Sunday School children, become Christians now, is because 
they see through the shallowness of the teachings of the sects, much 
better than the unthinking members of those sects. They see that to 
claim that God possessed all WISDOM, all POWER, and all 
LOVE, and also to claim that nine-tenths of the race (or even one- 
tenth) will to all eternity wail in agony and anguish beyond all 
reach of God's WISDOM, POWER, and LOVE, is not only 
contradictory, but extremely absurd. The very thing that such need, 
is a glimpse at the real plan, and perfect harmony now unfolding 
from the Word of God. In fact, this is the only thing which can set 
at rest a reasonable and reasoning mind. God wants us to use our 
reason, and says, "Come, let us reason together." 

An illustration of what we here mention occurred in this city, which 
we will relate. A Christian mother who had been attending our 
meetings and had become interested, had a son who felt little 
interest in Christianity. The mother endeavored to conceal from her 
son one of our pamphlets, which she had been reading; to her 
surprise and alarm, she one day found him reading it. She feared 
that if he got an idea that eternal torment was not a doctrine of the 
Scriptures, it might make him yet more careless of religion. Judge 
of her surprise when he remarked that this book was the most 
sensible thing he had ever read, and if that is what the Bible 
teaches, he thought he would like to be a Christian. 

Again, remember the effect of these "glad tidings" upon your own 
heart, when first you came to KNOW the Lord in his true character 
of love; when first you tasted that the Lord was gracious. Then 
neither be ashamed of it, nor fear its effects. Truth cannot produce 
bad effects, as a good tree cannot bear bad fruit. 

As seen from the WATCH TOWER, a book setting forth our 
present positions is needed, and will be ready as soon as possible. 
See notice of "Millennial Day Dawn," in another column. The 
announcement of the "Emphatic Diaglott," in this paper, at about 
one-third the regular price, will gladden some who need and desire 
this valuable work, but have been deterred from its purchase 
heretofore by reason of its cost. 

The public laborers generally report progress. Meetings are being 
held in various localities. Bro. A. D. Jones is now giving a series of 
discourses in Newark, N.J., and is arranging for the same in New 
York City and in Brooklyn-The "Day Star" shines brightly and 
increasingly. Bro. Tackabury will travel some through western New 
York, holding meetings, commencing this month. We may also 
count among the public preachers Bro. Graves, who for many years 



has been not only a "commercial traveler," but a railroad train 
preacher and tract distributor. He is rejoicing in the shining present 
truth, and has done good in preaching it, distributing "Food" during 
the past six months. Bro. Boyer will, for the present, remain in 
Pittsburgh, where he will do some mission work among his 
numerous friends and former co- laborers in the temperance work, 
meantime giving much time to the study of the Word which is able 
to make us wise; preparing himself thus for more public work. 

Bro. Keith, after having spent a pleasant and, we trust, profitable 
time with the saints at Lynn, Newark, and Chambersburg, and 
visited us at Pittsburgh a few days, started west for Elyria and 
Norwalk, O., Argos, Ind., and sundry towns in Mich. We are 
requested to announce his coming to the following places at the 
dates specified, where he will be happy to meet and commune with 
those joint-heirs who "seek for glory, honor, and immortality." He 
will be in season, for meetings on the dates below specified. 

Buchanan, Mich., April 2d; Hartford, Mich., April 7th; Lapeer, 
Mich, April 15th; Almont, Mich, April 21st; Brockway Center, 
Mich., April 26th; Detroit, Mich., May 2d. 

Bro. K. will be in season to commemorate our Passover Lamb's 
death with the Buchanan friends on Sunday night, April 2d. May 
the Lord bless and prosper his visit among you and cause that it 
work for your nourishment in spiritual things-your growth in 
grace, knowledge, and faith. We pray similar blessings upon the 
labors of the other brethren mentioned, as well as upon others who 
publicly minister, and upon the thousands who are in a more private 
way, as "living epistles" letting their light so shine as to glorify 
their Father in heaven. 

We have many inquiries from England, relative to preaching-if 
there are among those interested in these things there, some who 
can declare them publicly, they have a great and grand field. Let us 
hear from you. Some one or two should be in London. 

We are in possession of many refreshing and encouraging letters, 
but owing to a lack of space, we are unable to publish them in this 
issue. 



R335 : page 1 

MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN. 

This is the title of a new book we are about to publish. It will 
contain some matter already published, and much that will be new. 
It will contain a statement of what we understand to be the plan of 
God, an explanation of the most prominent symbols of the book of 
Revelation, together with comments on many of the "parables and 
dark sayings" of Jesus and the Apostles, and the Scriptural time 
proofs showing our present whereabouts on the stream of time, 



written in a clear and pointed, yet as condensed a manner as 
possible. 

It will not only be such a book as you would desire to loan to 
interested ones, and would want to study yourself, but it will be 
arranged with a view to making it a 

BOOK OF REFERENCE 

on almost all theological subjects. 

It will contain matter from the pens of several brethren well known 
to the readers of the WATCH TOWER, yet the work will not 
mention the name of any writer. We have thus arranged for several 
reasons: First, we shall thus have the benefit of the ability of several 
writers, each of whom may excel in his own peculiar channel; 
Second, such a method will serve to restrain personal pride and 
egotism, so often lamentably noticeable among men who have 
"written a book"; Third, it will be advantageous to you as readers, 
teaching you 

R335 : page 2 

to lean not on the words or opinions of any man, but to test all 
things solely and only by the Word of God -"that your faith should 
not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. " Lastly 
and chiefly, we hope that by thus veiling humanity, the glory of 
truth's Divine Author may the more appear. 

The price will be fixed at such a sum as will place it within the 
reach of all— just about cost and postage, probably 50 cents for cloth 
bound. 

This work is made necessary, not only by reason of the edition of 
"Day Dawn," published in 1880, being about exhausted, but also 
from the fact that since its publication, many precious and brilliant 
jewels of truth have been found. By reason of our being in "The 
path of the just which shineth more and more unto the perfect day, " 
no book could be written which would long be a fresh and full 
expression of the ever unfolding beauties of our Father's Word and 
plan. 

And still new beauties shall we see, 
And still increasing light. 

The name which we have selected will distinguish it from the old 
"Day Dawn," and yet is sufficiently like it to identify it with the 
edition which we have advertised the world over in the "Food. " 
However, after the present edition of Day Dawn is exhausted, you 
may, for abbreviation and convenience, use the same name for the 
new work, and it will be understood by us. We have on hand about 
100 COPIES OF "DAY DAWN," cloth bound, the price of which, 
we will reduce to 50 cents each to close them out before the new 
work appears. Address, C. T. RUSSELL, 

No. 101 5th Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa. 



R336 : page 2 

THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 

"The Revelation of Jesus Christ," which God gave to him, to show 
unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass, is a book 
of pen-pictures of events and of periods of earth's history-from 
Christ's first advent onward— usually in groups of seven succeeding 
stages; several of the groups running more or less synchronous, or 
parallel in time, with each other. 

The seven messages to the seven churches, to be in harmony with 
the rest of the book, must also mark or be directed to seven 
succeeding periods in the history of the church. The remarkable 
harmony between the prophecy and that history not only leaves no 
doubt of this interpretation, but is an unanswerable proof of the 
inspiration of the book, and a pledge to our faith in what remains 
unfulfilled. 

In Rev. 1:11 we are given the names of the cities to whom the 
messages are sent. Seven cities then existing, and which remain 
(some in ruins) until the present. Whether the condition of these 
local churches in John's time was such as would be specially and 
respectively blessed by these messages, we know not; but it seems 
evident that these cities were chosen from a peculiarity in their 
names which fitted God's purpose. We will notice this in due time. 
In verse 12 and onward we have a description of the appearance of 
the glorified Saviour and his surroundings, some feature of which 
seems to be peculiarly fitted to each church; and is quoted in the 
message to it, as if saying, remember who it is that speaks. 

These churches are placed in Asia. The Roman province of Asia 
was a part of that district which we now call Asia Minor, and 
embraced only the southwest half of the peninsula. 

The word Asia means muddy or boggy. Any one doomed to a long 
journey through a wild bog would, we think, before he got through, 
have a tolerably correct idea of the pathway of the church during 
the past 1800 years; especially if the greater part was traveled in 
comparative darkness-what with pitfalls and treacherous ground, 
with will o' the wisps and fog, it would prove a hard journey. True, 
the church has always had a polar star, but the mists of the 
Babylonian mystery had nearly hidden it. 

"To the messenger of the assembly in Ephesus write." [Rev. 2:1.] 

Ephesus was the capital or chief city of the province of Asia. Being 
the first or chief city of the province, and from or through which the 
laws, proclamations, etc., would go forth, it fitly represents the first 
period of the church. The church of Christ and his apostles. We 
believe implicitly the records left and the proclamations made by 
the messengers of that first church-Matthew and his three co- 



laborers, Peter, James, John, and Paul. But why? "These things 
saith he who is holding the seven stars in his right hand, who is 
walking in the midst of the seven lampstands -the golden. " 
[Young's trans.] These, who were to be messengers to all the 
churches, were so held in the grasp of Christ that they could not 
waver or deviate. We accept the fact of their inspiration, and 
receive their writings as from the right hand of him who guided 
their pens. 

We accept another fact, that only the spirit of him who in Spirit has 
walked with his church all the way down, can make clear the 
messages given in the Word. Moreover, we believe it is only 
because he is again personally present in his church, that such an 
abundance of light is now given— such as the church never had 
during his absence. 

The Lord commends this church for its works, toil, and patience; 
and because "thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and 
are not, and hast found them liars." 

Why, in apparent opposition to the general command, "Judge not," 
are they commended at this and only this time for trying these false 
teachers? Because to the first church (and to her only) was given 
the supernatural power of discerning of spirits. The cases of 
Ananias and Sapphira, of Simon and Elymas the sorcerers, and 
others, reveal this power. 

After those gifted ones fell asleep, the enemy, without hindrance, 
came and sowed tares among the wheat; and then the command was 
not to pull them up, but to let both grow together until the harvest. 
In opposition to Christ's command, the servants have, all the way 
down, been trying to pull tares; but of course they pulled wheat, just 
as our Lord had foretold. Now, in the harvest, the tares are being 
revealed and bound in sectarian bundles preparatory to the fire. 
Verses 4 and 5 show us that the "Ephesus" period reaches down to 
where the church began to lose her first love. 

"Thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate." 
Nicolans, in Greek, has the same meaning as Balaam, in Hebrew; 
and means a conqueror or lord of the people. 

In the Ephesus, and also in the Pergamos periods, there were those 
who loved to lord it over the Lord's heritage. It was the old 
contention -who should be greatest in the kingdom? "Which thing 
I hate," emphatically says Christ. Those whom God makes leaders 
will be the last to boast of it. 

"Him that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the 
churches." Jesus often used these words, evidently to show us that 
there are some messages sent which are not for all, but to those 
(overcomers) who are prepared to receive them. Our Lord 
recognizes two classes in the church all the way down— the nominal 
Christian, and the overcomer. To these last, who had gladly yielded 
up the pleasures of life for the truth's sake; who, like Paul, had 



spent their lives in hardship, even unto death, spreading the good 
news, there is a blessed promise of rest, a feast of life, and unending 
joy "in the Paradise of God." 

[To be continued.] 



R336 : page 2 

BIBLE STUDENTS' HELPER. 

Many inquiries come relative to helps to Bible study, and 
doubtless many desire information on the subject who have not 
written. 

To all such we would say that the most valuable publication of the 
kind known to us is the Emphatic Diaglott. It contains the New 
Testament in the Greek by Griesbach; also a word-for-word English 
translation of the same, placed directly under the Greek text, so as 
to be of greatest service to the student; it contains also an arranged 
version based on the readings of three very old Greek MSS. 
Altogether, we can say for it, that in our estimation it is the most 
valuable translation of the N.T., extant, for both the English and 
Greek student. 

We have for some time felt that our readers would be much 
benefited by its aid, and have furnished them to you at the 
wholesale price, $2.95 (cloth bound), the retail price being $4. 

Many, especially of the poorer of our readers, will be glad to learn, 
that we have come across a lot, new and fresh in every particular, 
and but slightly damaged in the fly-leaves. To all intents and 
purposes they are the regular $4 books-in no respect do they differ, 
except in the front "fly-leaves." 

We have purchased the 83 copies of the above described, and will 
furnish them to our readers at $1.50 per copy (this includes 
postage). Those desiring should send at once as we are confident 
this number will not half supply the wants of subscribers. Orders 
will be filled in rotation. 

Let us add a word: It is important that we should each provide 
ourselves with helps in study; better deny yourselves some of the 
luxuries of food or clothing (sometimes almost considered 
necessities), and be possessed of needed assistants for direction in 
the heavenly course. 



R336 : page 2 



THE INVISIBLE LINE. 



The restraint of the Gospel is the most perfect liberty. A divine 
hand holds us from evil that we may be free to do good. 



When I was a child my nearest neighbor had occasion to repair 
some breaks in the roof of one of his barns. So he sent his "hired 
man" aloft to do the work. There was not a sign of any staging built 
nor so much as a cleat nailed on to steady himself by. But, catching 
a glimpse of the man, from our place, I saw him walking up and 
down the old fashioned roof as erect and unconcerned as if he were 
only pacing a parlor floor. So I was naturally curious to learn how 
he did it. But coming a little nearer, I saw a long, tough cord 
securely tied about his waist and extending over the ridge of the 
roof, while down in the rear of the barn stood the proprietor holding 
the cord very firmly with both hands. When the man wanted to 
walk down toward the eaves, he would sing out, "More rope, more 
rope!" Instantly the proprietor would hear him, though out of sight, 
and would begin cautiously paying out the cord, a few inches at a 
time. When the workman wished to return and ascend the steep 
roof, he again called out the proper signal, the rope would tighten, 
and he would walk up as leisurely as he would have mounted a 
broad stairway. Now this man was bound with the cord and firmly 
held by the power of another. But who can fail to see that this 
restraint was really what gave him liberty. The more carefully the 
cord was grasped and handled the 

R337 : page 2 

more complete the liberty of the workman-not to fall and to break 
his neck, but to go up and down and do the repairs in safety. The 
bond made him free. 

So God gives men liberty, through the restraints of the Gospel. He 
throws the cords of his protection around the believer, allowing him 
to go up and down at will, scaling heights, treading paths of danger, 
passing securely anywhere in response to the call of duty. His 
bonds always, draw upward, never downward. The freedom which 
sin gives, of which so many boast, is the freedom which the 
breaking or the loosening of that cord would have given to the man 
upon the roof- perfect freedom to loose his footing and to plunge 
into remediless ruin. He who is willing to submit his erring nature 
to the divine restraints of the Gospel, will forever "walk at liberty," 
unhampered by self, untouched by sin, and carry with him a witness 
of safety and of peace that armed guards and castle walls and 
munitions of rocks could not assure. — N.E. Methodist. 



R337 : page 2 

MISTAKES will occur from various causes, and some of our 
subscribers fail to receive their papers. If you have subscribed and 
paid for the paper, or if you have asked to be put on "the Lord's 
poor" list, within a year, and do not receive it, be assured that if the 
fault is ours, it is unintentional. 

All such will oblige us by sending a postal card, stating their case, 
and we will attend to it. The trouble is often caused by irregularity 



in country post-offices, and many times by incompleteness of 
address furnished us. Please be very particular, and on every letter 
or card give your full address. Write it very plainly; we have a 
number of letters, the addresses of which we cannot decipher, and 
on which much valuable time has been wasted. 

IN consequence of our decision to publish the "Millennial Day 
Dawn," the Oct., Nov., and Dec, 1881, numbers of the WATCH 
TOWER will not be re-published as once proposed. The three 
leading articles of those numbers will appear in the book. 

SUNDAY evening, April 2d, after 6 P.M., will be the anniversary 
of the "Lord's Supper"-that date corresponding to the time of its 
institution as mentioned in our last issue. We again remind you of 
it, and suggest the appropriateness of its celebration on that 
occasion. We would be glad of a card from all companies of three 
or more who meet and celebrate it. 



R337 : page 3 



WE'RE DEAR TO GOD. 



O, when Christians meet and part, 
This thought is graved on every heart- 
We're dear to God! 
The future Princes in disguise 
Each look on each with loving eyes, 
All dear to God. 

O, wonder! to the Eternal One, 
Dear as His first beloved Son; 
Dearer to Jesus than His blood, 
Dear, since the Spirits fixed abode, 
Yes, dear to God. 

Though frailties cause each other pain, 
Still does this thought our love retain- 
We're dear to God! 
When truth compels us to contend, 
What love with earnest searchings blend, 
Since filled with God. 

When any glance from pilgrim's lot, 
Back to earth's charms, forget them not, 
But win them back with love and prayer; 
And leave them not to perish there- 
Those dear to God. 

Shall we be there so near, so dear, 
And be estranged and cold whilst here 
If dear to God? 

No, though by cares and toils oppress'd 
We've found in God our perfect rest, 



Love binds our hearts and heals our woes; 
We cannot do enough for those 
So dear to God! 



R.W. 



R337 : page 3 

WEALTH OF THE SAINTS. 

While in this body of flesh accompanied with the frailties of our 
first parents, with our heritage of death ever present in mind, and a 
law in our members warring against the law of our mind, how easy 
it is for us to fall into the spirit of the world, and under value or fail 
to appreciate the riches which the "little flock" have as an 
inheritance through Christ, our head. The inestimable value of our 
riches through Him was aptly illustrated by a friend in a letter lately 
received. The illustration was something as follows: 

Not long since, having become involved in debt, our creditor 
secured a judgment against us, and we were cast into prison. A 
friend of ours understanding the situation we were in, bought the 
claim against us and set us at liberty. Not long after he informed us, 
that having become acquainted with the location of a certain rich 
gold mine, and on inquiry finding that it could be purchased for one 
hundred thousand dollars, and he having just that amount, 
purchased it, knowing that when developed it would be worth as 
many and more millions, offered to make us (there were several of 
us), equal partners with himself, except that he would manage and 
be at the head of the concern, if we would put in all we had. 

This was an offer of such uncommon, unheard of liberality, that it 
was almost bewildering in its nature, and with embarrassment we 
cast about to see if we could find anything of value to offer. 

Finally we were compelled to admit that we were actually 
penniless, and all we had, (and that was not worth mentioning) was 
a few filthy rags, and that it was because of our extreme destitution 
that we were unable to pay the debt that caused the imprisonment, 
from which he had gained our release; whereupon he informed us 
that our riches consisted in our personal worth. 

That he had paid for the mine, and now what was needed was 
willing, capable persons, who would put in their all of time and 
talent, and sacrifice every other interest to the development of the 
resources of this mine; that none would be more likely to be faithful 
and true than those who felt that they owed a debt of gratitude to 
the head of the concern, and none more capable, nor more 
acceptable. 

At first it seemed too good to be true, and it was with some 
difficulty that we could bring ourselves to believe that he was really 
in earnest. We plead that we were indeed so poor that we could not 



clothe ourselves in proper attire to associate with a person of such 
wealth and dignity as himself. 

In reply he said, that as for wealth, we should be wealthy like 
himself, and as for the apparel, he would clothe us with proper 
garments from his own wardrobe when the time came for us to be 
recognized as partners. 

But an important pre-requisite was that we were first to go through 
a systematic course of education and training in order to fit us to be 
partners in a concern of such magnitude and significance, adding 
that the training would involve an acquaintance with the various 
elements of nature, earth, air, fire, water, &c, and that becoming 
acquainted with these, great danger and suffering would be 
incurred; but after that, the whole business would be to superintend 
the work, and would be most pleasant and profitable. We agreed to 
the terms and they were signed and sealed in the presence of 
witnesses. 

In this parable, as it may be called, we can see the picture of man's 
poverty, bankrupt and in prison. Christ's love and sympathy for a 
lost race, and the price he paid for the mine, all he had, and the 
conditions of co-partnership with him; a giving up and sacrificing 
all we have. 

In the offer of partnership, though to be preceded by disciplinary 
education and trial, even so as by fire, we see the conditions of our 
high calling held out to view. 

But few will accept such conditions; but few will share in such 
glory. 

But we are persuaded that the "sufferings of this present time are 
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in 
us, For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the 
manifestation of the sons of God." Rom. 8:18,19. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R338 : page 3 



THE WORD OF GOD. 

JOHN 1:1-17. 



The Greek word, Logos, translated word in John 1 and 14 of this 
chapter, would be properly translated by the words, intention, plan, 
purpose, or expression. Apply this definition to the following 
passages where the same word (logos) occurs: Acts 10:29. "I ask 
therefor for what intent (logos) ye have sent for me." Acts 4:29. 
"Grant unto thy servants that with all boldness they may speak thy 
word"-declare thy plan, purpose, or intention. Acts 8:4. "They that 
were scattered abroad went everywhere preaching the word," plan 
or purpose of God. Acts 18:11. "Teaching the word (intention, plan 



or purpose) of God among them." Mark 4:20. "Such as hear the 
word (intention, plan or purpose of God) and receive it. " Matt. 
24:35. "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words (plans or 
purposes) shall not pass away. " 

With this understanding then, we may thus read John 1:1. "In the 
beginning," before anything was created, and when none existed, 
but Jehovah, "was the word"-plan, intention, or purpose of God. 
Yes, God had a well defined, and matured plan, formed in his own 
mind before it found expression in the slightest development. The 
great Architect of the universe and Author of all life, first counted 
the cost, and reckoned that all should culminate to his honor and 
glory. (Luke 14:28-31; Rev. 4:11.) 

"And the word (plan or purpose) was with God." So far, it existed 
only in his own conception; it was his own thought, intention, plan, 
purpose, not yet expressed. 

"And the word was God." The term logos, not only applied to the 
plan existing only in the mind, but also to the expression of that 
plan. We understand this text then, to mean that the word-plan or 
purpose of God found its first expression in the creation of him, 
who was "The beginning of the creation of God"- "The first born 
of every creature" (who afterward became the man, Jesus). Rev. 
3:14 and 1:5. Col. 1:15; and who is now fully exalted to the divine 
nature, and still "His name is called the "Word of God." Rev. 19:13. 

This being, in whose creation, Jehovah's plan began to find 
expression, is here called a God- "And the Word [expression of the 
plan] was God." The word God signifies mighty one; but not 
always the All-mighty One. It is the translation of each of four 
Hebrew words— el, elah, elohim, and adonai, all signifying the 
mighty, or great. It is a general name, often and properly applied to 
our Heavenly Father, as well as to Jesus, angels, and men. (Deut. 
10:17. Gen. 32:24,30; Judges 13:21,22; Jer. 16:13, 10:11; Exod. 
7:1.) In Psa. 82 the distinction of beings translated by the word God 
is very marked: "God (elohim) standeth in the congregation of the 
mighty (el); he judgeth among the Gods" (elohim). Here the first 
word, God, evidently refers to Jehovah, the All-mighty one, while 
the others evidently refer to other mighty ones-the church, the sons 
of God, of whom Jesus is the head or chief. Again vs. 6, "I have 
said ye are Gods (elohim); and all of you are children of the Most 
High (el yon, the highest God), yet ye shall all die like men." We, 
now, though sons of the Most High die and appear to men nothing 
more than the others. In us, as in our Leader and Head, God is 
manifest in our mortal flesh. (See John 10:35 and 2 Cor. 4:11.) 

The Hebrew word Jehovah, is the distinctive name of the Almighty 
Father and is never applied to any other being- "I appeared unto 
Abraham, unto Isaac and unto Jacob, as God Almighty, (el— God 
shaddai— almighty) but by my name JEHOVAH, was I not known 
to them." Exod. 6:3. In our common version (O.T.) its 
distinctiveness as a name is lost, being generally rendered the Lord. 



"And the word was God." The Son of God (afterward called Jesus,) 
is here called THE WORD, because Jehovah revealed his word- 
plan or purpose, through him. It was an eastern custom for kings to 
have an officer, called the King's Word or Voice, who stood upon 
the steps of the throne, at the side of a lattice window, where there 
was a hole covered with a curtain. Behind this curtain the king sat 
and expressed his commands to this officer, who communicated 
them to the officers, judges and attendants. It is from this custom 
we presume, that the phraseology of the text is derived. 

Primarily then, the word refers to the plan of God, and it is 
afterwards applied to the messenger of that plan -the Son of God. 

John 1:2 and 3, "The same (being) was in the beginning (of 
creation) with God. All things were made by him, (as the agent of 
Jehovah) and without him was not anything made that was made. " 
He then, as here plainly stated, being the first and chiefest of 
Jehovah's creatures, was honored by him, as the agent through 
whom all things, both animate and inanimate were afterwards 
created- "Without him was not anything made. " 

Jehovah had no beginning but is "from everlasting to everlasting;" 
(Psa. 90:2) hence that which is here called the "beginning" must 
refer to the beginning of creation. 

"In him was life. " How brief this expression, and at first sight how 
simple and seemingly absurd. If the surface meaning were taken, 
the statement of such a self-evident truth would indeed be absurd— 
that in the Son of God, who was Jehovah's agent in the works of 
creation, was life. But let us look deeper, and we will see that it is 
just like God's grand and eloquent brevity. Since the 
accomplishment of the work narrated in verse 3, the Son of God 
had laid aside the glory of his pre-existent condition, and become a 
man. As a man, he had lived 30 years— the maturity of manhood, 
and had consecrated his human being to death. Here he received the 
earnest of his after, high exaltation-the begetting of the Spirit, to 
the Divine nature, to which he was born in the resurrection, when 
the consecration of the human being to death, was actually 
accomplished. In the Son of God-the Word-Jesus, then, from 30 
years of age, was this Divine life which he never before possessed. 
(See "Narrow way to Life," page 134, of "Food for Thinking 
Christians.") "And the life (this divine life) was the light of men. 
And the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness apprehendeth it 
not." (E. Diag.) 

John 1:10 and 1 1 . He was in the world and the world was made by 
him; and the world (of mankind) knew him not. He came unto his 
own, (people-the Jewish nation) and his own received him not. 

But, though the world knew him not, neither did his own receive 
him, yet, nevertheless-vs. 9, "That was the true Light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world. " This Light has not 
yet enlightened every man. It now lights only those referred to in 
vs. 12— "as many as received him and believed on his name." To 



this class— believers— "gave he privilege (margin) to become sons 
of God" (John 1:13, E. Diag., begotten... of God)-on condition that 
they follow in his footsteps, sacrificing the human nature. These, 
throughout the Gospel Age, "walk in the light," and like their Head, 
Jesus, are "lights in the world." (Phil. 2:15.) But still the world fails 
to apprehend the light, and will, until Jesus and all the members of 
his body-followers in his footsteps -constituting the Heavenly 
City (Rev. 21:2) are as "a city set on a hill (which) cannot be hid." 
(Matt. 5:14.) Yes, this heavenly city "shall be established in the 
tops of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all 
nations shall flow unto it:" (Isa. 2:2.) "And the nations shall walk in 
the light of it." (Rev. 21:24.) Then this "true light (shining in its 
strength, from the exalted Divine Christ-head and body, will) 
lighten every man that cometh into the world. " 

R338 : page 4 

That this interpretation of John 1 :4 and 5 is correct, is proven by 
John 1:6,7,8, and 15. John came six months before Jesus' baptism, 
and begetting to the divine nature, bearing witness of the coming 
light, saying, "There cometh one after me, who is preferred before 
me." 

Jesus had already come as a human being, and had, as John 
declared, existed before him, not as a man, for John was six months 
older than Jesus; but in his glorious pre-human condition. In what 
sense, then, did Jesus come after John's preaching? We answer that 
at the time of his consecration and typical baptism, he came as the 
Anointed One, the Christ, the divinely begotten Son of God, and 
consequent light of the world. 

Vs. 14. "And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us." 

As in John 1 : 3, we are informed of the glory and power of the pre- 
existent Word, and in John 1 :4, ignoring the subsequent human 
nature for which he left that glory, we are informed of that divine 
life which is ultimately to enlighten every man that cometh into the 
world; so John 1:14 goes back to tell how he left the glory which he 
had with the Father, gave up his spiritual being, and became a 
human being. 

"And we beheld his glory (the glory of his perfect humanity), the 
glory as of the only begotten of a father. " His perfect human nature 
shone with such lustre in contrast with all other imperfect men, that 
he seemed not to be a son of the fallen race, but the only begotten 
of some perfect being— and such he was, a new creation of God, the 
second direct human creation of God, just as Adam was the first, 
though Jesus was born of the virgin Mary, while Adam was formed 
from the dust of the earth. 

Jesus, because a perfect man, was full of grace (favor) and truth. He 
lived in full and constant favor with God, and therefore God made 
known his truth-his plans-to him. 

R339 : page 4 



Vs. 16. "And of his fullness have all we (believers) received." Yes, 
of that same fullness of favor with God, which Jesus enjoyed 
because of his sinless perfection, have all we received because of 
our justification through faith in his blood. Thus Jesus lifts 
believers up to the plane which he occupied, into fullness of favor 
and communion with God- "justified freely from all things." 

"And grace for grace," or favor on account of favor: that is, being 
lifted from the condition of rebels and sinners to that of justification 
by faith, was one act of favor; then that favor opened the way for 
another favor- viz., the call to become partakers of the Divine 
nature, to become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus by 
suffering with him. 

Yes, with Paul, because of this grace (of justification) wherein we 
stand, we rejoice in hope of the glory of God (Rom. 5:2); reckoning 
that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. (Rom. 8:18.) 

John 1:17. "For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ. " Here a contrast is drawn between the Jewish 
and Gospel Ages: In the former, only the Law (the shadow of good 
things to come in and after the Gospel Age) was given. But it could 
never give life, because none were able to measure up to its 
requirements. "But grace"-the payment of our ransom price, and 
not only so, but also the additional favor- "truth," or the knowledge 
of God's plan, and our high-calling as revealed through it- both 
these favors came by Jesus Christ. "The appearing of Jesus Christ, 
our Saviour, brought life (the 'restitution' to perfection of humanity) 
and immortality (believers' high-calling) to light." (2 Tim. 1:10.) 
This special favor ("grace"), and this wonderful knowledge 
("truth") then, are peculiar only to the Gospel Age. 

In the brief space here considered what a glorious biography we 
have presented to us, of the once glorious spiritual, subsequent 
perfect human, and now "highly exalted" Divine, Immortal WORD. 
Here it stands on the sacred page in its simple, eloquent brevity as 
dictated by the spirit of Jehovah. Behold what grace the Father 
bestowed upon him- "That all men (and all created beings) should 
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. " 

If all the world my Savior knew, 
Then all the world would love Him too. 

Thank God the happy day will soon dawn when this knowledge 
shall fill the whole earth. 

Beloved followers in his footsteps, "behold what manner of love the 
Father hath bestowed upon us that we, (as partakers with him, and 
joint-heirs of the same things) should (also) be called the sons of 
God." 



R339 : page 4 



TRUTH SPREADING. 

At a meeting of the local Evangelical Association held in the First 
Presbyterian Church of this city, March 6th, Dr. Bittinger, of 
Sewickly, read an able essay on the "Eschatology of St. Paul," or 
the Apostle's teachings relative to death and judgment. The paper 
required more than an hour for its delivery. The last paragraph, 
which we quote below, gives the gist of the argument, and in our 
opinion shows a marked step toward truth, by an able and 
seemingly fearless man. 

We would be glad to see more men of nerve, and of intelligent, 
untrammeled interest in the teachings of Paul and all the Scriptures. 
But so surely as they step upon the Word of God as a basis of faith, 
they will find, as did this essayist, that the traditions of men are 
sadly out of joint under the present rule of anti -Christ. Mark and 
ponder well the force of the argument of this brother just 
awakening to a realization of the shortness of the "bed" (creed) in 
which he has been resting. (Isa. 28:20.) 

"In conclusion, accept a few remarks and reflections. I have been 
struck with the prominence which Paul gives to the coming of 
Christ, in his epistles, speeches, and sermons; the many direct 
statements of the dogma, and the still more numerous allusions and 
references to it. I am struck and startled by the practical value of 
this doctrine for exhortation, encouragement, comfort, warning, and 
vigilance. It is the farthest goal set for this life, and to appear 
blameless at Christ's coming is the highest aim of Christian living. 
It is evident that with Paul and the primitive Christians, Christ's 
coming took the place of our popular conception of heaven. We are 
refugees fleeing from a pursuing wrath; they were pursuers of hope, 
looking for a deliverer. We think, speak, and sing of going to 
heaven; the Apostles wrote and spoke of Christ's coming from 
heaven, and to this expectant King all David's psalms were set. We 
think of the judgment, with fear, trembling, and horror; they 
thought of it with solemn joy. I might mention other things, but 
these are enough to show that the modern Church does not conceive 
of Christ's second coming as the Apostolic Church did. As a 
practical doctrine, it has no place in our theology, no influence in 
our lives. Has the virtue all gone out of it, or have we fallen away 
from the faith once delivered to the saints?" 

Truly a wonderful awakening of the people, relative to what is 
taught in the Bible is in progress. Thousands of letters from all parts 
of this country and Great Britain, give abundant evidence that 
people will no longer "stop thinking," or "burn the book" at the 
behest of self-satisfied sectarians, interested only in the upbuilding 
of their party and its views, and not in the elucidation of Bible truth. 

Oh, how sad it is, that the so-called pastors care only to have their 
flocks asleep and dreaming, and will not lead them to the beautiful, 
fresh fields of living truth, and streams of living water. On the 
contrary, they seek by every means to prevent the sheep from eating 



Food by raising the cry of POISON. Their flocks may drink deeply 
into pleasure of the world, or satiate themselves with worldly 
business, and it is all "very natural"; but let them seek to acquaint 
themselves with the teachings of their Father's Word, and they are 
the subjects of prayers, entreaties, expostulations, and threatenings. 
They are told that they are on the road to infidelity and hell, and 
that the only cure is to "stop thinking, and get at church work." If it 
is true that to be a Christian to-day means that we must "stop 
thinking," and be mere MACHINES, controlled by the theological 
schools, then is that Scripture out of place in which God says: 
"Come, let us reason together"-and again, "Search the Scriptures"- 
and again, the Scriptures "are able to make thee wise." 

Yes, it seems to be one of the snares which Satan sets for the saints' 
feet: He gets them to work at holding fairs, festivals, and church 
lotteries, in the belief that that is working for Jesus. Perhaps it is to 
cancel a church debt which Satan prompted them to incur, to 
minister to religious pride. And we might add, much of the other 
church work seems to us conducive to evil results, and hence 
attributable to evil. For instance, it has become fashionable for 
nearly all churches to have three meetings on Sunday, and four or 
five during the week. This absorbs all the spare time of many, and 
leaves them weary of religious things, and without any time for 
Bible study, or thought on the "deep things of God." 

The meetings do not give spiritual nourishment and strength, but 
merely soothe the minds of some who think that thus, they please 
God, work for Jesus and bear the cross, while instead, much of it is 
the merest nonsense, conducive to self satisfaction. 

True Christians see through the hollowness, and endeavor to have 
their hearts fed by secret worship and communion, and conclude 
that because all Christians and ministers do and sanction this 
system, it must be right. Thus, this which is called work for Jesus, 
is in reality an arrangement with Satan to make people "stop 
thinking"-He puts them to work; since he cannot get them to do 
evil, he does get them to work so hard and so much that they can 
get little good and no truth. 

We were struck with the operation of this plan as practiced by a 
minister of Allegheny city, recently. An elder of the church came 
twice to our afternoon meetings to get some "Food. " He was 
spotted as a sheep likely to jump from the fold, and being a sheep 
of some means and influence, he must be penned again. 
Accordingly the minister was informed, and he visited the elder, 
who candidly said that he had gone to our meetings to hear for 
himself, and so far he had heard nothing which he thought was 
unchristian or unscriptural. He excused himself by saying, that he 
had gone because they happened to have no afternoon meetings in 
their church. Before the next Sunday a meeting was appointed for 
the afternoon hour and this poor sheep was made its leader. 



If we are correct in judging, that much of the work, is arranged by 
and in the interest of Satan, and he has able helpers in many of the 
under-shepherds. 

How does the chief shepherd regard such tenders of the flock, think 
you? As there are kinds of work owned and accepted of God, so 
there are exceptions among the ministers. 

To any who doubt our conclusions we say, "Come, let us reason 
together," test your preacher and see whether he is able to show you 
how and where our Bible based teachings are wrong. But if he says 
"stop thinking," "burn the book," or any 

R340 : page 4 

other unChristlike or unreasonable thing, conclude that he cannot 
meet it fairly. If they offer theory, or if they speak disparagingly of 
those "of this way," remember that ours is only a repetition of the 
experience of Jesus, the Apostles, and of the reformers— Knox, 
Wesley, Luther and all who ever proclaimed advanced truth. 
Answer all opponents with a "Thus saith the Lord," or a "Thus it is 
written," and ask them for Scriptural proofs for their utterances. To 
this end, study to show yourselves workmen approved unto God, 
that you may be able to give to every man that asketh you, a reason 
for the hope that is in you with meekness and fear. (2 Tim. 2:15, 
and 1 Pet. 3:15.) 

You will be sure to find that their titles and knowledge of their own 
line of theology, is the extent of their stock; and of Bible 
knowledge, they have very little— next to none. (Isa. 29:10-14.) 
Then, too, if ever so well posted in the Scriptures, there is very little 
which can be applied in harmony with their creeds. 

Then, with charity for them, and love for all the sheep, go to the 
storehouse of the chief shepherd; there drink in the truth and give to 
others, fearless of infringement upon any theological patent, and 
God will bless you with refreshing draughts. 

"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, (right 
and truth) they shall be filled," if they know the voice of the 
shepherd and follow him. 



R340 : page 4 

LET THE SAME MIND BE IN YOU WHICH 
WAS ALSO IN CHRIST JESUS. 

Guard against impatience when any deny this doctrine, or call in 
question your experience of its blessings. There are very good men 
who do not understand this doctrine as we understand it. They have 
been led by education and training to look at it from a different 
standpoint, and consequently have arrived at different and opposite 
conclusions. To 



R340 : page 5 

betray impatience when conversing with them, will help to confirm 
them in their unscriptural views and their opposition. Let this grace 
dwell in you so richly that nothing shall move you. Let the opposers 
of the doctrine see in your spirit a manifestation of its fruit. 

Holiness and truth will not long exist without opposition; and the 
most perfect holiness, purest truth, will provoke the greatest 
opposition. Birds, when they can, generally peck at the choicest and 
ripest fruit; so the beak of slander generally strikes the holiest and 
ripest Christians. No matter how closely we may walk with God, or 
how blamelessly we may walk before men, some will charge us 
with imperfection, or perhaps with sin. To the blinded Jews and 
Pharisees, Christ himself was guilty of great imperfection and even 
blasphemy. And strange as it may seem, this opposition will come 
chiefly from professors of religion. "Those who love God with all 
their hearts," says Wesley, "must expect most opposition from 
professors who have gone on for twenty years in an old beaten 
track, and fancy they are wiser than all the world; these always 
oppose sanctification most. " But opposition to the doctrine of entire 
sanctification, if the friends of it take care to exhibit it in their lives, 
will tend to spread it. Opposition should not be courted, but it 
should never be feared, and it should always be borne in a meek, 
sweet spirit. If we retaliate when an injury is done us, it shows that 
self is not dead. 

Beware of disputes and quarrels with fellow-Christians. If any use 
sharpness of speech with you, and try to breed a quarrel, it is even 
better to answer nothing and suffer wrong than to become angry. 
There is an excellent antidote for this evil disposition in keeping 
fully employed in the Lord's work. "Work, full work for God," says 
Collins, "would leave us little time for quarrelling; and devotion, 
full devotion, would leave us no inclination. " It is a great mistake, 
when evil is spoken of you, to be anxious to vindicate yourselves, 
"As they, who for every slight infirmity take physic to repair their 
health," says one writer, "do rather impair it; so they, who for every 
trifle are eager to vindicate their character, do rather weaken it. " 
"Take care of your spirit and conduct," says another, "and your 
reputation will take care of itself. " 

We often need charity exercised toward ourselves; let us not be 
slow in exercising it toward others. We do not think it just or fair 
towards us when our fellow-Christians overlook our general 
character, and pick out some imperfection and hold it up, and 
perhaps magnify it to our disadvantage; let us not do so in respect 
to them. Let us get completely under the sweet influence of the love 
of Jesus. With a heavenly unction constantly dwelling in the soul, 
we shall shrink from a censorious spirit, and shall have other work 
than to be constantly hunting after failings in our brethren. Those 
who find or profess to find, the most faults in others have generally 
the greatest number in themselves; and those who are loudest in 



trumpeting their own praise have usually the least in them 
deserving of praise. 

Do not let your mind run much on opposers of the doctrine except it 
be to pray for them, or to consider how you may best present to 
them the truth. To think too much of their opposition may foster 
unkind feeling. To converse too much with others about it may 
beget evil speaking. You may thus loose your sweetness of spirit 
and your mind may become sour. Remember you were once 
standing on the same ground that others are standing on now. The 
light that now illumines your mind did not always shine upon you. 
The opposition you now meet with from others you once 
manifested yourself. You were as slow in coming to the truth as 
many around you are. These things should teach you charity, 
forbearance, clemency, and mildness. 

Watch against any omission of the privilege and comfort of prayer 
and fellowship with the Father of spirits. The life of faith and 
holiness cannot be maintained without much prayer. Regular habits 
of secret devotion are indispensable. Each day should be begun 
with a season of close communion with God, that the heart may 
obtain new strength for new conflicts. The business of the day 
should not be entered upon without the clear sunshine of the Divine 
presence. There should be a deep consciousness that Jehovah is 
with us, and that He will abide with us through the day to sustain 
and protect us. 

The purified believer, in his seasons of closet prayer, has not daily 
to begin such seasons with confession of sin, and intercession for 
pardon, but living in constant acceptance with God, the intercourse 
between him and God is always open. Dwelling in Christ, and 
Christ abiding in him, he realizes no condemnation. United to 
Christ, there will flow into his soul heavenly life-currents, and his 
life will be a Christ-life; it will be a life of health and strength, a life 
of fruit-bearing to the glory of the Father, a life of constant victory 
over the tempter, a life of calm and peace, and joy and hope. To 
pray, therefore, will be as natural as to breathe, and through the one 
Mediator he will be able to draw near to God at once. 

-R. W. 



R340 : page 5 



THIS SAME JESUS. 



Probably no passage of Scripture has been the subject of more 
discussion and less understood, than Acts 1:11. "Men of Galilee, 
why do you stand looking towards the heavens? This Jesus, who is 
taken up from among you into the heavens, shall so come in the 
manner in which you saw him go into the heavens." (Emphatic 
Diaglott.) 



It will not be necessary, for the benefit of those who are in the light, 
in regard to the "Tabernacle and Its Teachings," to say very much 
upon this subject. Those who understand the sacrifices, will 
certainly not be looking up into the heavens, expecting to see, with 
their fleshly eyes, Jesus coming in the flesh. They have learned that 
the eyes, with which we see in this age are the eyes of the 
understanding -Eph. 1:18; which are certainly the very best kind of 
eyes. And they have learned, also, that even though we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet now we know him so no more. 2 Cor. 
5:16. rev. ver. So we see that what is true of the members of his 
body, is true of him, as the head. Having given his (animal) body as 
a sacrifice for us, it must be dissolved, and to him was given a new 
body, a house not made with hands, etc.— 2 Cor. 5:1. 

Having sacrificed his human nature, there was given to him a new 
nature-the Divine. 

Paul says: But some will say, how are the dead raised up? And with 
what body do they come? Oh, senseless man, that which thou 
sowest is not quickened— made alive— except it die; and that which 
thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall be, etc., but God 
giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed its own 
body. 

The world at large have been sown with the natural seed— human 
nature -and will be raised with the natural bodies; while the new- 
divine— nature, becomes a new seed, and requires a new body; and 
God giveth to every seed its own body, etc., 1 Cor. 15:35,38. 
Before his crucifixion, Jesus had that treasure-the divine nature in 
an earthen vessel— body— 2 Cor. 4:7; in him dwelt all the fullness of 
the divine nature, in a body 

R341 : page 5 

-Col. 2:9 (Rotherham); so that new seed was sown in a natural 
body (earthen vessel); and raised in a spiritual body. 

It should be noticed that the word same is left out of the passage 
under consideration, by the Em. Diaglott- it not being in the Greek. 

The blinding phrase is, in like manner. Let us examine the Greek 
term, hon tropon, rendered like manner, in Acts 1:11; giving all the 
passages where it occurs, and putting the English translation in 
italics; then let those who are so tenacious about the exact manner, 
be just as tenacious in all the passages where it occurs. Now as (hon 
tropon) James and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these resist the 
truth. 2 Tim. 3:8. Read Exodus, 7th and 8th chapters in regard to 
those magicians— Satan's mediums. Wilt thou kill me, as (hon 
tropon) thou didst the Egyptian yesterday? Acts 7:28. 

Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem... how often would I have gathered thy 
children together, even as (hon tropon —like manner) a hen 
gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Matt. 
23:37 and Luke 13:34. 



Will anybody claim the exact manner in any of the references 
given, especially the last? Is not the true idea that just as certainly 
as one thing has been done, another will be done? 

As certainly as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, so Jesus 
would have gathered Jerusalem's children; but we think no one 
would insist upon the exact way. Jesus said, If I go and prepare a 
place- official position, by preparing us for it-for you, I will come 
again, and receive you unto myself, etc.-John 14:3. All the Angels 
could mean in Acts 1:11 (the only remaining passage where hon 
tropon occurs), is: ye men of Galilee why do you stand looking up 
into heaven? This Jesus has gone away as he said he would, and he 
will as surely come again, as he said he would. 

Really there is nothing in the passage as to the manner of coming, 
but a positive declaration that he would come. 

Other Scriptures teach the manner and time. We have taken heed in 
our hearts, to the sure word of prophecy; and the eyes of our 
understanding have been enlightened; because, as we see the "day 
star" -(phosphorus-light-bringer-E.D.) has arisen. 2 Pet. 1:19. It 
is contrary to the teachings of the types of the old and the positive 
statements of the new Testament, to expect that Jesus will come 
again in the flesh. 

The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for 
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2:14. 

B. W. KEITH. 



R341 : page 5 

A VIEW FROM THE OTHER SIDE 
OF THE WATCH TOWER. 

A few years ago the watchmen who were in the light, proclaimed 
that the "Day of the Lord" had come; that the King of kings and 
Ruler of rulers had arrived and is present; that he had taken unto 
him his great power, and had begun his reign. At that time there 
was little or no outward signs of any such stupendous event; and 
very naturally, as clearly foretold, there arose scoffers, walking 
after their own desires, who sneeringly asked, "Where is the 
promise of his presence? (See margin of New Revision)... all things 
continue as they were," etc. Walking by faith, and not by sight; 
trusting the infallible Word of God, the watchmen proclaimed 
further as to what means would be used by the Stone Kingdom in 
striking the kingdoms of earth; that oppressed peoples would rise 
against the governments and throw them down. It was announced 
that the "Times of Restitution" had begun; and the faithless asked, 
Where? It was also clearly taught that the time had come when 
God's ancient people, the Jews, (beloved for the Father's sake) 



would be stirred up to begin to return to their own land. Lastly, the 
proclamation went forth, "Babylon has fallen," "Come out of her, 
my people, that ye partake not of her sins, that ye receive not of her 
plagues." 

As we said when these announcements began to be made, there 
were but few outward signs. It required implicit faith in the Word to 
believe that these things were to be fulfilled in "our day." Any 
believer almost was willing to assent to their being due two or three 
generations in the future. 

While the world and a worldly church still lie in darkness, to those 
in the watch tower there has been increasing light. Already to any 
who have eyes to see, the outward signs are multiplying. Day by 
day we see all about us increased proof of our position. Compare 2 
Tim. 3:1-7 with the days we live in, and see if the picture is not a 
faithful one. But such things have always been, says some one. 
True, to a certain extent, in accordance with verse 13; but are we 
not reaching a climax in wickedness? Judges, grand juries, and 
others who have opportunity to see and to know these things are 
alarmed at the prospect. The land is flooded with the vilest 
literature. The artist and the writer vie with each other in dishing up 
the horrid feast to the hungry army. And who compose this insatiate 
and ever-increasing multitude? Old and young, rich and poor-we 
had almost said saints [?] and sinners— we will simply say, church 
members. It is not in novels, story papers, etc., alone that the poison 
is found. If it were, we could easily keep it out of our homes. The 
reporters of the daily press have caught the infection, and news 
items that the briefest note of would be quite enough, are spiced 
and seasoned and served up steaming hot. If the facts are few, the 
reporter draws, without stint, on his morbid imagination for the 
balance. What kind of men and women will the rising generation 
make, fed on such slops? It is not difficult to see the result; it is 
already showing itself. Boys not yet in their teens are getting quite 
familiar with the revolver; a spirit of independence and lawlessness 
is revealing itself everywhere. 

R341 : page 6 

Enough of this picture; let us look at something else. It has been 
announced that the times of restitution have begun; and that Christ's 
kingdom now established, is about to overthrow the beastly 
kingdoms of earth. Be patient, it will take time. The forces are at 
work; see all over the earth the people are waking up and clamoring 
for their rights as never before. 

Ireland is not alone. The Irish are only a little more demonstrative 
than some others: the feeling is universal. 

The Czar of Russia has obtained the title of the Emperor Recluse, 
because he is afraid to go out amongst his beloved [?] subjects. He 
has not yet been crowned (it is a year since he became emperor). 
Plots have been discovered to blow up both him and his guests at 
the coronation, and it has been postponed. Failing to kill him, the 



Russians have been amusing themselves robbing and slaughtering 
the Jews. 

The stories that come to us of these atrocities read like Indian 
massacres, or something worse. We clip the following: "In 
Southern Russia alone LI 6,000,000 ($80,000,000) in property have 
been lost, 100,000 Jews rendered homeless, and in 45 places where 
reliable statistics could be collected there have been 40 murders and 
225 women subjected to torture." We hope, and rather think that the 
reports are, as usual, exaggerated, yet there may have been much 
that we have not heard of. Many are fleeing to America, but many 
more are destitute, and piteous ly appeal for help to come. 

What does this mean in the light of prophecy? It means that we 
have reached the period spoken of in Jer. 30:7. "It is even the time 
of Jacob's trouble; but he shall be saved out of it [read the context]. 
Their coming to America is, of course, not returning to their own 
land; neither will they go there in any such multitude at the first 
gathering. The prophecy says, "Ye shall be gathered one by one, O, 
ye children of Israel." Isa. 27:12. It is well to remember that there 
are over 30 years yet to accomplish this work. The recent 
developments and proposed improvements in Palestine, and all this 
trouble shows plainly that the present Lord has begun this work 
also. 

What of Babylon? Are there any outward signs of her fall? Very 
many. People are waking up to investigate as never before. 
Reverence for old creeds is rapidly passing away. Among some this 
causes a searching to know the truth. (Blessed are those seekers.) 
Among others it brings nothing but skepticism, carelessness, and 
hypocrisy. Among the masses it produces infidelity —an utter 
disregard for many of God's laws, and contempt for all who profess 
his name. The trial of Guiteau has evidently been an instrument 
used to bring odium upon the Christian profession. The church is 
losing its power and falling into disrespect. The stars are falling: 
some one way, some another. Soon the lights will be all out— not 
even a candle left. Rev. 18:23. Already the merchants (priests) 
complain that "no man buyeth their merchandise any more. " Read 
the clip from the New York Herald, in this paper, which shows that 
some of the denominations did not average one new member per 
church during the past year. The membership completely fails to 
keep pace with the growth of the population. One hopeful mission 
statistician is so pleased with the success amongst the heathen 
[where a chief commands and all his people are numbered in at 
once], that he asserts that if Christianity can only hold its own at 
home the world will in a few years be converted. What an 

R342 : page 6 

idea ! It sounds like the derision of an enemy. It looks like an 
acknowledgment that what is now preached, though easily foisted 
upon and suited to the ignorant savage, is repudiated by the 
intelligent and civilized. And is there not much truth in this 



thought? Is it not a fact that the most intelligent and best of the 
people have outgrown the creeds? Some, unfortunately, failing to 
see the whole truth, have drifted off to sea; others are boldly 
attacking error with all the light they have. [See article "Liberty of 
Protestantism," in Zion's Day Star for Jan.] 

One recent event should demonstrate to all that the house has been 
left desolate. Where in all the records of the past did a whole 
nation, almost as with one voice, cry to God in prayer without being 
answered? Did God ever do so with his chosen people? And did not 
all the orthodox churches in the United States pray that President 
Garfield's life might be spared? Even the infallible [?] Pope 
mingled his prayers with those of Ingersoll and the Protestant 
churches; and one proved as potent as the other. 

If God has proved unfaithful it is the first time. Something is 
wrong. It evidently never happened before. One of two has become 
unfaithful. Is it the Unchangeable One? or rather, has not the hand 
appeared and written on the walls of Babylon, NUMBERED! 
NUMBERED! WEIGHED! DIVIDED! and above all in letters of 
fire, ICHABOD! 

W. I. MANN. 



R342 : page 6 



"THIS GENERATION. 



"Verily I say unto you this generation shall not pass till all these 
things be fulfilled. " Matt. 24:34. 

This passage has puzzled us many times, and our experience may 
be the same as some others with regard to it, but we think we have 
the solution of it now. It may not be new to some, but it is to us. 
However, it is not because it is new, but because it is true (as we 
believe) that it satisfies us. 

The disciples had been asking Jesus (ver. 3) about the destruction of 
Jerusalem, what should be the sign of his coming, and of the end of 
the world (age), and after answering their questions with regard to 
it, he adds the words referred to above. We understand some to 
think that this prophecy was fulfilled at the transfiguration; and a 
careless reading of Mark 9:1, with 2 Peter 1:17,18, might seem to 
justify that conclusion; but when we reflect that not alone was his 
coming inquired after, but the end of the age ("what shall be the 
sign of the presence and of the end of the age" [Emphatic Diaglott]) 
and in accordance with their questions he gave the signs all along 
up to the end of the age, and then says, "Verily I say unto you this 
generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled. " This 
could not be fulfilled by any events recorded in the above 
scriptures, but Mark 9:1 was fulfilled "six days after," and is 
referred to by Peter. 



We think Jesus, as he was not talking to the multitude, used plain 
language, no figure nor symbol, but that the whole difficulty centres 
in the meaning of the word generation. We think the key to it is 
found in Matt. 19:28. "Verily I say unto you that ye who have 
followed me-in the re-generation when the son of man shall sit 
upon the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. " 

We understand that he used the word generation in distinction from 
the word regeneration; in other words, that he gave them to 
understand that he would be present before the regeneration, and 
before the people of this age should pass away ("this generation 
shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled") for (ver. 38) "as in 
those days, those before the deluge... thus will be the presence of the 
Son of man. " E. Diaglott. 

We consider this, in harmony with other scriptures, is clearly 
opposed to the post millennial view, and strongly in confirmation of 
the pre-millennial view. 

Now, then, are "all these things" fulfilled? Are they nearly all 
fulfilled? This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the 
world for a witness unto all nations." Has that been done? Yes. 

"Then shall the end (of the age- The harvest is the end of the age. 
Matt. 13:39,) come." HEKO, have come, be here; (see Young's 
Analytical Concordance.) "Therefore let us hold fast the profession 
of our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that promised, and 
let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works, 
not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner 
of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye 
see the day approaching." Heb. 10:23,24,25. 

The end of one day (Gospel day) having come, "another day," Heb. 
4:8, is approaching. "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R342 : page 6 



THE GREAT FEAST. 



"A certain man made a great supper and invited many. And he 
sent his servant at the hour of the supper to say to those who had 
been invited, 'Come, for it is now ready.' And they all began with 
one accord to excuse themselves.... And that servant, having 
returned, related all to his Master. Then the householder, being 
angry, said to his servant, 'Go out quickly (at once) into the open 
squares and streets of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and 
crippled, and blind, and lame.' And the servant said, 'Sir, I have 
done what thou didst command, and yet there is room. " Luke 
14:16-22. Diaglott. 



Our Heavenly Father, kind, bountiful, and rich, is ever pleased to 
dispense of his bounties to those requiring and appreciating them. 
He tells us of a feast he will soon spread for all the world, when he 
will not only feast them on fat things, refined joys and pleasures, 
but he will "wipe away all tears from off all faces"— destroy death 
and remove the vail of ignorance from all nations. In the day of that 
feast it shall be said: "Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, 
and he will save us;. ..we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation" 
(Isa. 25:6-9.) A salvation from the vail of ignorance, and from 
Adamic death. That will be a delightful feast, a blessed season for 
poor, wretched humanity. But before that feast can be spread, the 
MOUNTAIN or KINGDOM of the Lord must first be established 
(see vss. 6,7), that from and through it may come this blessed feast 
"unto all people." 

The feast described by Jesus, though made by the same kind, rich 
Heavenly Father, is not the same feast above viewed. It applies, we 
believe, not to the next, but to the present age. It is not for all 
people, but for the "few selected" from among the "many invited" 
in the present age. (Matt. 22:14.) Those first invited were the 
leading representatives of the Jewish nation. "What advantage had 
the Jew? Much every way"— they being typically justified by typical 
sacrifices, were reckoned as being on a plane of friendship with 
God-having intercourse with him. To these, through the prophets, 
he had long ago intimated his intention of spreading a great feast, 
and when the time for it was come, he sent Jesus (who in turn sent 
others) "to those who had been invited," saying, it is now ready,- 
"The kingdom of God is at hand. " 

The call first reached the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of 
the Law who sat in Moses' seat (Matt. 23:2), and were acquainted 
with the Law of the Prophets, and who knew that such a feast was 
proposed. "And the Pharisees also who were covetous, heard all 
these things, and they derided him." (Luke 16:14.) They had a plan 
and system of their own arrangement; they were busy and could not 
heed the message; they had no desire to have their own plans 
superceded by God's plans, or, in the language of the parable, to 
taste of his supper. 

Jesus perceived that they received not the message, and gave most 
of his time and attention to the lower classes, "who knew not the 
law" (John 7:49), and had not heard the invitation. 

He said to those who were originally invited, "Verily I say unto 
you, that the Publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God 
before you." (Matt. 21:31.) "Ye shall see Abraham and Isaac and 
Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and ye 
yourselves thrust out." (Luke 13:28) -You shall not taste of the 
supper. 

"The common people (who knew not the Law, and had not 
heretofore heard the invitation) heard him gladly." (Mark 12:37.) 
But those first invited, who rejected, were grieved that he and his 



disciples taught the people (Acts 4:2), and invited them to the feast. 
Jesus therefore said, "Ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye 
them that are entering to go in." (Matt. 23:13.) 

This application of the first two calls, is in harmony with the 
parable -first the merest mention to those already invited, then 
quickly, when they refused, an invitation was given to the morally 
blind, lame, and halt, of the same CITY (or government). Thus 
Jesus came to his own, and his own people received him not; but as 
many as received him (believed his message), to them (publicans, 
harlots, etc.) gave he power (liberty) to (come 

R343 : page 6 

to the feast) become sons of God. (John 1:12.) This second feature 
of the call to the Gospel feast, continued to be the only one, for 
some years, but there were not enough of the worthy ones there in 
Jewery to complete the number of guests— yet there was room. 

Hence the servant (the body of Christ) was commissioned to go 
outside the CITY (outside Judea) to the highways and hedges— to 
the Gentiles, and constrain*-urge enough 

R343 : page 7 

to come in, to furnish this feast. "Go ye into all the world and 
preach the Gospel to every creature." (Mark 16:15.) The servant 
that calls the world is always the Christ, either head or body, while 
the servant that guides the Christ is always the Holy Spirit. 

We, then, are of those blessed under the third call. We Gentiles 
were children of wrath— strangers from the commonwealth of Israel; 
but now, by the blood of Christ, we are made nigh to God and hear 
the call, Being justified freely from all things by faith, we are 
clothed with the robes of Christ's righteousness, and invited to 
come to the feast now spread. Here is food to satisfy every longing- 
-more and better than we could ask or think. 

The feast to which we are invited is a spiritual feast of future good 
things— joys and pleasures in the presence of the Lord. It has a 
beginning just as soon as we accept the call and come to it. We at 
once begin to enjoy and feast upon God's bounteous provision; by 
hope, by faith, we have a joyful anticipation and rich feast on the 
promises of God. 

To come to this feast in any sense, either to the real feast of the 
future, or to the feast of hopes and promises of the present time, 
involves a leaving of worldly hopes, aims, and pursuits. In 
proportion as earthly things are abandoned, each may feast now. So 
the coming in and the feasting by faith and hope has continued 
during the entire age, until the door of opportunity closed Oct. 2d, 
1881, since which time we do not understand that any may enter to 
the spiritual feast (-be begotten of the Spirit, and thus enabled to 
know and understand spiritual things). But there is still time for 
those in the guest-chamber to continue their preparation for the 



marriage. We rejoice to know, however, that, though the door to the 
marriage feast is closed, there is another feast in preparation for all 
people. 

Because coming to this feast involves the leaving or sacrificing of 
earthly aims and pleasures, the world counts those who come, 
foolish, and it causes such the loss of the esteem of men. This is a 
mingling of bitter experience and sweet hope, and they are 
proportionate. As we eat his words —feast on his promises— we are 
strengthened, and will as surely have the cup of trial, death, 
presented after. Thus it was with our Head and Leader, and thus it 
must be with all his followers. After supper, he gives also the cup, 
saying: "Drink ye all of it," and again he said, "Ye shall indeed 
drink of the cup that I drink of, and with the baptism that I am 
baptized withal shall ye be baptized." (Mark 10:39.) 

To our understanding since, this third call ceased, it is no longer 
proper to invite to this feast. Those who have heard, and have 
accepted the call, came in and the door was shut— the opportunity of 
entering has ceased forever. Since all have come in, we know that 
the actual feast, the realization of the things we have long hoped 
for, is at hand. 



*The word translated compel in the old version is, in the Diaglott, 
constrain; the same word is rendered constrain in Matt. 14:22; Mark 
6:45, etc., of old ver. 



R343 : page 7 

THE MARRIAGE FEAST. 

"Jesus continuing to discourse to them in parables, said: The 
kingdom of the heavens may be compared to a royal person who 
prepared a marriage festival for his son; and he sent his servants to 
call those who had been invited to the festivities, and they refused 
to come. Again, he sent other servants, saying, 'Inform those who 
are invited-Behold I have prepared my entertainment; my oxen and 
fatlings are killed and all is ready; come to the festival. But they 
disregarding it, went away, one to his own farm and one to his 
merchandise, and the rest seizing his servants, insulted and killed 
them. And the king was indignant, and having sent his military 
forces destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.'" (Matt. 
22:1-7. Diaglott.) 

Some have questioned whether or not this parable is the same 
which Luke furnishes in very similar language, but with other 
details, previously narrated. But whether exactly the same or not, 
there seems to be no doubt that it covers the same period of time, 
viz: the Gospel Age. God has indeed prepared royal blessings for 
his Son, and has invited some to share these glorious blessings with 



him. (Eph. 1:4.) Jesus first invited Israel as a nation-as represented 
in the rulers and chief priests of his day, and in this work he 
employed his disciples but these servants were disregarded— they 
refused to come. A second message was sent them at Pentecost 
through other servants; (The disciples at first were simply justified 
men, but on and after Pentecost they were NEW creatures begotten 
of God. 1 Pet. 1:3.) but this message also they disregarded, and 
insulted and killed many of the Apostles. No wonder, then, that 
their polity (city) was subjected to (fire) wrath to the uttermost, and 
entirely overthrown-Titus' army desolating it in A.D. 70. In this 
view, as in Luke's parable, two invitations were given to the Jews; 
and here, as in that we shall find the third message to be to the 
gentiles- the Gospel call during this Gospel Age. 

The king said to his servants, the entertainment indeed is ready but 
those who have been invited were unworthy. Go therefore into the 
PUBLIC ROADS and whoever you may find invite to the 
marriage-feasts. And those servants went into the road and brought 
together all that they met, good and bad, and the feast was well 
supplied with guests." (Vss. 8-10 Diaglott.) 

Here the public roads in which the call is made, represent the 
Gentile world, in which, for over 1800 years, the invitation to come 
to the spiritual feast has been made. All who hear and accept the 
invitation, may come to the banquet. The call does not come solely 
to the good, but all who have an ear may hear and come— "good 
and bad. " Since all guests are furnished a robe (Christ's 
righteousness) it matters not how poor or ragged they were when 
they were called; at the feast all stand on an equality, so far as their 
previous condition is concerned. All are acceptable at the feast if 
clothed by faith with the righteousness of Christ. 

Just as I am without one plea. 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bidst me come to thee; 
O lamb of God, I come, I come. " 

As in Luke's parable, the feast is both a present one of hope and joy 
mingled with earthly bitterness, and also a future real feasting, or 
sharing of eternal joys with Jesus our Lord. In this account it is 
called a marriage feast. The King's Son-our Lord Jesus Christ is to 
be married, and the bride is found among those invited to the 
festivities. Yes, those who sacrificed much in proportion to what 
they had, in order to come to this banquet— these are the ones 
termed overcomers, who are to be united to the King's Son who was 
also an overcomer. 

The full control of the feast is given to the Bridegroom, who has 
become the "heir of all things" and at this time enters office as a 
King. Before the marriage (union) he appears as King, and inspects 
or judges of the guests, and selects the overcomers (Rev. 3:21). 
Among those assembled there as guests, he discovers three classes, 
the overcomers or bride, the guests or friends, and one who had not 



on a wedding garment— some who did not realize the necessity of 
having on Christ's righteousness, who did not recognize the 
necessity of being bought, redeemed, clothed with Christ's merit 
only, as a pre-requisite to a participation of the feast. 

When the King arrives, he makes the two selections: The one (small 
class) not having on the wedding garment, is deprived of the 
privilege of guests— bound, and cast into the outer darkness of the 
world. To the overcoming class he gives his name and a share in all 
that he hath, by uniting them to himself. They thus become heirs of 
God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ, their Lord. After the marriage, in 
joyful praise a "great company" of the bride's loved companions 
shall say, "Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to (God), for 
the marriage of the Lamb is come and his wife hath made herself 
ready." Rev. 19:7. 

These, though not of the overcomers, not of the Bride, are 
nevertheless beloved of both Bridegroom and Bride. They are the 
great company of Rev. 7:9, and in Psa. 45:14, are called, "the 
virgins, her companions which followed her," who also shall come 
into the palace of the King with gladness and rejoicing. (Vs. 15.) 
These will be the guests at the great supper, and after the marriage 
is accomplished, they shall enjoy the feast with the Royal Family, 
as it has been written to them, "Blessed are they which are called 
unto the marriage supper of the Lamb." (Rev. 19:9.) 

Matt. 25:1-10, seems to show this closing end of the age, when 
some having gone in during the entire age, the Bridegroom King 
comes, and they of the living that were ready to go to the supper 
went in 

R344 : page 7 

with him and this ended the admittance -"The door was shut." 
Since the King came in we believe that the inspection of the guests 
has been in process. Now is an important time -a testing time. Who 
will be cast "into outer darkness"-the world's condition, on account 
of denying the Lord's having bought them-taking off the wedding 
garment? "Who shall be able to stand?"-be accounted worthy, as 
his bride to "stand before the Son of Man." Take unto you the 
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand. " 

In answer to questions of those anxious to be at the Marriage 
Supper, we would say: If you heard the call, i.e., the gospel 
invitation to the feast of good things God has prepared, and having 
heard, if you accepted and commenced to feast upon the promises 
before the call ceased by the shutting of the door (Oct. 2d, 1881), 
then, we understand the Scriptures to teach that you have yet 
opportunity to make your calling and election sure— even to the 
highest position as the Bride of the Lamb. Even now in the hour of 
inspection, let us lay aside every weight, and every besetment of 
earth, and run with patience the race for the prize of our high 
calling. 



R344 : page 7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Please let me know by what name you people call 
yourselves? What denomination? 

Ans. We are strictly unsectarian, and consequently recognize no 
sectarian name, believing with Paul, (read 1 Cor. 3:1-4) that where 
one saith I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, or I am a Baptist, or I a 
Methodist, etc., it is an evidence of carnality, and consequently in 
opposition to the Spirit of Christ. Did Paul or Apollos die for us? If 
so, let us call ourselves theirs. Were we baptized into the Methodist, 
Presbyterian, Baptist, or other denominational churches? If so, we 
are members of it, and should be properly recognized by those 
names. But if we were baptized into the one body or church of 
which Jesus is the one and only Head, then we are members in 
particular of his body, and the only name appropriate would be his; 
Scripturally called the "Church of Christ," "Christians," "Church of 
the first born," and such like general names. Again we would 
remark that ours is the only Scriptural basis of Christian union, viz. : 
We have no creed (fence) to bind us together or to keep others out 
of our company. The Bible is our only standard, and its teachings 
our only creed, and recognizing the progressive character of the 
unfolding of Scriptural truths, we are ready and prepared to add to 
or modify our creed (faith— belief) as we get increase of light from 
our Standard. 

We are in fellowship with all Christians in whom we can recognize 
the Spirit of Christ, and especially with those who recognize the 
Bible as the only standard. We do not require, therefore, that all 
shall see, just as we do in order to be called Christians; realizing 
that growth in both grace and knowledge is a gradual process. Nor 
do we see reason to expect that any but the watchmen of Zion will 
"see eye to eye" (Isa. 52:8) until that which is perfect is come, when 
that which is in part shall be done away. (1 Cor. 13:10.) 

If all Christians were to thus free themselves of prescribed creeds, 
and study the Word of God without denominational bias, truth and 
knowledge and real Christian fellowship and unity, would result. 
The Spirit of the Head would pervade the unfettered members of 
the body, and sectarian pride would vanish. Thus we believe, thus 
we practice, and thus we teach. It becomes our duty to denounce 
sectarianism and the God-dishonoring creeds of men which, while 
contradicting each other, unite in misrepresenting God's Word and 
character. Because these are bonds which hinder God's children 
from rendering him the homage due unto his name, hinder their 
knowing him, hinder their worshiping in spirit and in truth, and also 
hinder them from enjoying that joy and peace which their Father 
designed they should have. We "cry aloud and spare not. " 



Because we believe sectarianism to be a snare of the devil, and in 
opposition both to God and his saints, therefore we labor to set 
them free, and bring them into the liberty of Christ. That this has 
been so accounted before the present day by holy men of God, we 
quote you from the words of JOHN BUNYAN, whose 

R344 : page 8 

name is a household word, and one of whose books has been more 
read than any other ever written except the Bible— "Pilgrim's 
Progress." He wrote:- 

"Since you would know by what name I would be distinguished 
from others, I tell you I would be, and hope I am, a Christian; and 
choose, if God should count me worthy, to be called a Christian, a 
believer, or other such name which is approved by the Holy Ghost. 
And as for those factious (or sect) titles of Anabaptist, Presbyterian, 
Independent, or the like, I conclude that they came neither from 
Antioch nor from Jerusalem, but from Hell and Babylon, for they 
tend to divisions: you may know them by their fruits." 

JOHN BUNYAN. 

John Bunyan was a Christian whose creed was the Bible (He was 
commonly called a "Baptist," though, then, and in a few Baptist 
churches now, the Bible is the only written confession of faith.) He 
was imprisoned in Bedford Jail by the English Church in 1660, 
because he thus believed. It was while there imprisoned that he 
wrote of "Pilgrim. " 

Ques. Was not the typical perfection of the Jews the perfecting of 
the human, to which their sacrifices pointed? 

Ans. The sacrifices and people and reconciliation, were all alike 
typical of the real sacrifices, all people, and the reconciling of the 
world. To re-concile is to harmonize again. It of course means a 
reconciling of two already existent beings— God and man. Because 
of the ransom and reconciliation, man is to be liberated from death 
and restored to perfection. This certainly involves no change of 
either God's or man's nature. Hence, we argue that the benefits of 
Christ's ransom is to men, restitution of what was once possessed- 
perfect manhood. The change of nature (to become new creatures) 
is only made during this age, and results from self-sacrifice after 
justification. 

Dear Brother R. I have not been a reader long and cannot 
understand how you harmonize, the article in the Dec. No., "The 
Blessed Dead," with "The Door Was Shut," article which appeared 
in a previous number of the Tower. Please explain. 

Ans. To our understanding, all who died previously to Oct. 2d, '81, 
passed into a "sleep" or "unclothed" condition to wait for this time, 
when the sleeping should be awakened in resurrection by their 
Lord, or the unclothed be clothed upon of their spiritual body-their 
house from heaven. It has not been a blessing to die and thus fall 



asleep; but now since we live to the time when we may step from 
the earthly tabernacle into the heavenly (spiritual) body, without a 
moment's sleep, it is a blessing. To be thus "changed in a moment"- 
-not unclothed for an instant, but translated from the natural to the 
spiritual condition instantly, is a privilege never before enjoyed. 
Since this glorious time is come, "Blessed are the dead which die in 
the Lord from henceforth," (Rev. 14:13,) because as Paul expresses 
it, they may now be "clothed upon with their house which is from 
heaven." (2 Cor. 5:1-4.) 

The human is to die— the earthly form must be laid off, as Jesus our 
pattern showed us, (2 Pet. 1:14) but the new life hid with Christ will 
not die, though it slept until now. Now we understand that the 
exaltation of the members of the Christ who were asleep has taken 
place, and the exaltation of those who are alive and remain, is due; 
and the remaining members of the body will, each in his turn soon 
experience that glorious change, from this sleep to the perfection of 
life as immortal spiritual beings like himself— by investing or 
clothing them with their house from heaven. Thus it may readily be 
seen that we the living, left over unto the presence do not precede 
the sleeping ones, but they rise first: Then we shall be changed in a 
moment to the same immortal condition— like unto Christ's glorious 
body. As did Jesus so must we all, fully lose humanity, putting off 
this "tabernacle even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed. " (2 Pet. 
1:14.) This tabernacle-the flesh. It was consecrated to death and 
must fully die, but we, the new creatures who inhabit these bodies, 
do not die and will not need even to sleep, but instantly we shall 
become more alive than ever; or as Paul says, have "mortality 
swallowed up of life. " 

We tarry only as the mouth-pieces —Priests of God, to sound the 
trumpet notes of truth until the white robed Levites (advanced 
justified believers) learn to sing the song of restitution and the 
fullness of salvation, purchased through the precious blood of 
Christ. (2 Chron. 5:12-14.) 

The door which shut was not the door into the kingdom, but the 
door into the guest-chamber— to the feast. (See article on Feasts.) 
We understand that though the marriage is not yet accomplished, it 
is just about to be. The present moments are occupied by the Bride 
in making herself ready, and no more guests are now admitted. 

Ques. If the door to the "high calling" is now closed what should 
we say to any who now say, "Lord what wouldst thou have me to 
do?" If we are mouth-pieces of the spirit, we should have a word of 
the Lord for them- what? 

Ans. If it be one who had already consecrated himself as a sacrifice 
and 

R345 : page 8 

entered covenant relationship as a new creature, we would say, 
proceed as before only more zealously to carry out your covenant 



and become dead to the world, that in the inspection by our King, 
he may be approved as one who has been faithful unto death. 

If it be one who has never before covenanted, he stands in exactly 
the position of Abraham. He has the gospel or glad tidings of 
coming earthly blessings to all who love and obey God. This is the 
"Everlasting Gospel" -that sin's penalty has been paid, and all men 
may come into harmony with their creator and live. This was the 
very Gospel which God preached unto Abraham, saying, "In thy 
seed shall all the nations of the earth be BLESSED." (Gen. 22:18; 
Acts 3:25.) In this Gospel Age— as we speak of it, there is an 
addition made to the glad tidings which did not apply before it, and 
does not apply now, since the door is shut. We now know not only 
that all nations of the earth are soon to be blessed with opportunities 
of everlasting life and happiness, but during the Gospel age we 
have been privileged or invited to become members of that spiritual 
seed of him whom Abraham typified (Jehovah), and as such to be 
the cause or instruments of the coming blessing. (See Gal. 3:29, and 
Rom. 11:31,32.) This last call properly ends, when all the members 
of that seed have been selected from the world, and then the Gospel 
message stands just as it did to Abraham— the privilege of joining 
the blessing seed being ended by accomplishment. 

We would say then to such, Live good moral lives— lives of 
communion with God, engaging in, and promoting every good 
word or work according to your ability. But you are not now called 
upon to sacrifice yourselves nor your sinless pleasures and 
comforts. It is proper that they should abstain from sins to the 
extent of their ability, and realize that their ransom price covered all 
the unavoidable weaknesses which arise from the Adamic 
transgression. Let them thus trust in the Lord and do good, and soon 
they will share in the blessings of the reign of righteousness. 

The glad tidings of justification and redemption, and the call to 
faith, repentance, and obedience, which we thus proclaim, is the 
same which the nominal church has been proclaiming all along, 
though so greatly mixed with error and superstition as not to be 
discernible to many as glad tidings. Very few have realized their 
privilege to sacrifice things, to which, as men, they have a 
legitimate right; very few have realized a begetting to a new nature. 
One prominent point of difference however, should be 
remembered: Our God is not a demon with a heart of stone, unjust, 
unmerciful, unkind; but a God of LOVE, plenteous in MERCY, 
who so loved the world, that he gave his Son that all might come to 
a knowledge of the truth, and be brought back to perfection of 
being and happiness. "And for this purpose are the ages to come," 
in which, to show the exceeding riches of his grace and his loving 
kindness. Eph 2:7. 

Ques. Please explain Matt. 25:46. 

Ans. The punishment and reward are of equal duration. We are here 
told that the reward will be life, but in this passage the nature of the 



punishment is not specified. Readers generally take for granted that 
it means everlasting misery and torment. They infer this from some 
symbolic expressions used in the book of Revelations, which they 
confess they do not understand. But God's Word nowhere says that 
the punishment of sin is torment. If we admit what is here stated 
that their punishment will be equal in duration with the reward 
promised, and will then inquire of the Word- What is the nature of 
the punishment?- we shall soon have light. We read, "The soul 
(person) that sinneth, it shall die; "-"The wages of sin is death, but 
the gift of God is eternal life. " So we find it quite harmonious. 
"These shall go away into eternal punishment death, from which 
there will be no release -no resurrection); but the righteous into life 
eternal. 

The power to live comes from God, and he promises it only to the 
righteous. God has an unquestionable right to deprive all his 
creatures of life, if they will not use it in harmony with his 
righteous will. But none but a devil of worst stamp could perpetrate 
eternal hopeless torment and agony upon any creature. Satan has, 
from the first, been a misrepresenter of God's character and word, 
and in this matter seems to have succeeded in deceiving many of 
God's dear saints. Oh, that all might learn to study God's Word in 
the light which it throws upon itself, and not allow the creeds and 
traditions of men to twist and warp their minds, destroy their peace 
and their trust in God, by turning the Word of God into a lie. 

To what extent the minds of men may be twisted, is illustrated by 
the teachings of New England's great preacher of former years- 
Jonathan Edwards. In preaching upon the eternal punishment of the 
wicked, which he said was misery and torture, he pictured it so 
frightfully, that some in the congregation sprang from their seats 
screaming, and caught hold of the pillars of the church as though 
fearful of being dropped into the yawning chasm. We quote his 
sentiments, and, as nearly as we can recall, his words. 

Addressing the Christians present, he said: Your hearts then will 
not ache for, and throb in sympathy with your friends and children; 
you will look over the battlements of heaven and see them in that 
awful everlasting torture, and turn round and praise God the louder. 

What a terrible, strong delusion possessed that child of God, that he 
could utter such blasphemy. It was a blasphemy against men as well 
as against the God of love, for if there is or ever was in all the 
universe of God, so awfully degraded a being that he could have 
everlasting joy at the expense of another's everlasting misery, that 
one is too miserable a wretch to be worthy even of the name of 
devil. If being made like our glorious and perfect Head would 
annihilate in this manner every spark of love, pity, and mercy, then 
should we earnestly pray and hope that we to his likeness should 
never attain. Take it home to your own heart, thinking Christian- 
Have you by death lost a loved and cherished son or daughter, 
brother, sister, father, or mother, or friend, whom you feel sure 
walked not "the narrow way to life"? Think, then, of what a change 



must come ere you could blend with their cries of anguish, your 
shouts of joy and pleasure. 

But no longer will such preaching frighten the people; the picture is 
so wide of the truth that the unprejudiced thinker, both in and out of 
the church, sees it to be the very opposite to the character of a God 
of love. For this reason, though the Bible has not changed, nor their 
creeds, theologians have generally abandoned the fire theory, and 
now say the punishment will be a gnawing of conscience. Yet when 
wanting to alarm some one into love for God, they will add that the 
lashings of conscience will be even more terrible than flames. 

No wonder that many sectarians, imitating their conception of a 
God, become loveless and hard, and in their families exalt the rule 
of fear, rather than the rule of love. No one knows how bad an 
effect is produced on civilized society by the monstrous ideas of 
God's character, as instilled by the traditions of men. 

All heathen nations have horrible images of their Gods. All picture 
them horrible, with malicious power; and though Christians ignore 
pictures and images, yet they draw a mental picture of their God as 
dreadful. It surely needs much help to love a being such as they are 
taught he is. The wonder is that every intelligent person has not 
been driven into infidelity by it, and we verily believe that many 
more are skeptical than openly profess it: their actions speak loudly 
ofit. 

In God's Word we see how evil was permitted for good reasons, 
and that the "little flock" now being developed, instead of rejoicing 
in the misery of ninety nine one hundredths of their fellows, will be 
praising God and manifesting the exceeding riches of his grace in 
the ages to come, by blessing all the families of the earth. 



R345 : page 1 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1882. 

NO. 11. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R345 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Many letters received tell of much interest among our readers. As 
requested, a number reported the observance of the anniversary of 
our Passover sacrifice. It was very generally observed— reports 
coming from all directions. The largest of these small gatherings 
were at Newark, N.J., and in this city, the attendance at each of 
these being about the same— sixty persons. 

The reports indicate that these meetings wherever held, were 
solemn and impressive— blessed seasons. Here, it was a very 
precious season. We recounted the scenes of the upper room at 
Jerusalem 1 849 years ago. We looked at the type which Jesus and 
the twelve had met to observe. We saw through the shadow the 
substance. Through the type, we saw the antitype— our deliverance 
from the world through the death of Jesus our Lamb. 

R346 : page 1 

Then, we saw that the law shadow ceased, with that last 
observance of the Passover. That there the reality commenced by 
our Lamb being slain —the same day. We saw clearly that Jesus had 
not only substituted himself for the typical lamb, but had 
substituted his supper of bread and wine (emblems of our Lamb's 
body and blood) as instead of the flesh of the type. And we saw 
how, so often as we celebrated the anniversary with these emblems, 
we do show forth our Lord's death. 

Then we commemorated the supper, examining as we did so, the 
import of the broken bread of which we partook, and of the wine of 
which we drank. We heard Jesus' words, that it was his body and 
his blood. Then we heard His further testimony-that if we drank of 
the cup, it meant that we were sharing or filling up the sufferings of 
Christ, as members of his body. Next we took Paul's testimony, 1 
Cor. 10:16,17. (Diaglott.) "The cup of blessing for which we bless 
God-is it not a participation of the blood of the anointed one? The 
loaf which we break-is it not a participation of the BODY of the 
ANOINTED ONE? Because there is ONE LOAF we the many are 
ONE BODY; for we all partake of ONE BODY. " 

We endeavored to take in the full import of this teaching; to see 
how we must drink of his cup of suffering and death, in order to 
share future glory with him. The breaking of the loaf, represents our 
mutual strengthening of one another as members of the BODY. 
Each must do his share, according to his ability to strengthen and 
nourish and build up the body. We thought of the order, bread first, 
and then the wine. We saw that thus, our Lord gives us strength 
through the food—truth, before he passes us the cup of death and 
sacrifice. None can sacrifice, until strengthened by the exceeding 
great and precious promises. 



We have regretted since our last issue that we recommended raisin 
juice, as a substitute for wine. Upon further reflection it seems to us 
that wine is the only proper emblem. All Scriptural references to 
wine indicate that it was of a sort that would intoxicate. In fact any 
wine which, when freely used, would not stupefy, (deaden) would 
not represent what is shown by the cup of which we are to partake. 
As we part-take of the cup of Christ's sufferings and death of the 
human will and nature, it gives a deadness to worldly things. At the 
same time it gives a blissful peace of mind. This is well illustrated 
by the symbol— wine. It produces the most thorough stupor or 
deadness to surroundings of any liquor. Now consider the Apostles 
words: "Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess; but (do that 
which would be symbolized by it) be ye filled with the spirit. " If 
filled with the Spirit of Christ we will be dead to the world and 
daily desirous of drinking more and more into His cup, while at the 
same time filled with a peace the world knows not of. 

At our Pittsburgh meeting, both wine and raisin juice were 
provided; but under the influence of the above considerations, all 
partook of the wine. 

A correspondent inquires, why keep the supper since the Lord's 
presence, since Paul says: "Till he come." 1 Cor. 1 1:26? Since it is 
an emblem not only of the death of our Lord Jesus, but also of the 
death of His Church, which is his body, it is proper that we should 
thus signify our "participation of the blood of the anointed one." 
While any of his members are yet in the suffering, or crucifying 
condition, the sufferings of Christ are not ended. The head, and all 
but those of us still in the flesh, have, we believe, entered into the 
glory of power. The members who preceded us having finished 
their course, no longer need to declare annually their continued 
determination to share in his death; but until the Christ in the flesh 
has fully died, and the Christ-the New Creature has been 
completed, it is appropriate to show forth the death. 

Our Brother Keith, whose trip through Michigan was announced 
last month, was suddenly called home by the death of a little one. 
Not, he writes for the sake of the dead, but for the comfort of the 
living-Sister Keith being quite ill. The Lord bless them and grant 
that this, as one of the "all things," may work for their good. Bro. 
K. writes, that the Lord willing, he will soon make a more extended 
trip in the direction intended, including other places. You will 
probably hear from him in due time. Any (in that North- Western 
direction) desiring him to meet with them, may address this office. 

Bro. Adamson is holding some very successful, and we trust 
profitable meetings in Mercer county, Pa. 

Bro. Leigh, who has been preparing for some time, is about to go 
forth. 

The number of orders for "Food," which come in by every mail, 
indicates that some are doing effective preaching by loaning 



reading matter. We have still plenty of these pamphlets. Order all 
you can use to advantage. 

We fear that the last supplement- the "Tabernacle" tract has not 
had the deep study and care which such a subject requires. It is 
strong meat even for those who have had their senses exercised 
(Heb. 5:14), and requires thorough mastication. Read it at least 
twice or three times. Do not loan this last to any but fully 
consecrated Christians. 

We subjoin extracts from a few of the many precious letters 
received. 



LONDON, ENGLAND, April 5, 1882. Editor Zion's Watch 
Tower. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-The copy of the TOWER and 
"Tabernacle" came duly to hand, for which please accept my most 
grateful thanks. I have read carefully to see if I could find anything 
contrary to the precious word of truth, and confess if this is the 
mystery hid for the ages, it is magnificently grand and glorious, and 
worthy of our only immortal God and Father. It is blessed to 
contemplate as concerning man's future blessedness and wonderful 
salvation; in fact it seems to be the embodiment of justice, mercy 
and love. No wonder Paul exclaimed: "Oh, the depth of the riches 
and wisdom and knowledge of God!" 

I have a brother, a D.D. in the Methodist Church, and have been 
always told I was called to preach the blessed glad tidings, but I 
never have felt satisfied with orthodoxy, although I have been a 
member for twenty- five years. I threw out the doctrine of natural 
immortality five years ago, the Trinity three years ago, and with the 
Em. Diaglott and Bible, with other helps, have been feeling after 
the truth. I left the Methodist Church three years ago, and though 
often asked to join that and others, never felt willing, the Saul's 
armor of the creeds did not fit, and it seemed to me I could not fight 
the good fight in them. I desire to fight the fight of Faith, and lay 
hold of everlasting life. I have held up the thoughts given in your 
works of "Tabernacle" and "Food" to some of Spurgeon's people, 
and they were unable to gainsay me. It does seem to be too good to 
be true, but nothing is too hard for God, and I confess I see a 
harmony between the infinite Creator and created (fallen) man, 
given in the Bible as brought out by the light from your exposition, 
that I never have seen before. It satisfies my understanding and my 
longing spirit. Can I with fair speaking ability be exalted by our 
dear Lord to the high honor of telling or preaching the glad tidings, 
which are to all people, that Jesus anointed tasted death for every 
man, and all may look and live? Whatever tracts and instructions 
you have in the divine mysteries of truth will you have the kindness 
to forward by return mail, as I may be required to leave London by 
the 1st of May, and please instruct me how and what to preach so as 
to accomplish the blessed work God wishes done. 



Was this a revelation? Where did you get these clear ideas? They 
must have come from above, for all wisdom comes from God, and 
He giveth it liberally and upbraideth not. Pray that I may be led into 
the truth, and that I may be free indeed. 

Yours in hope, 



CALEDONIA, MISS., April 8, 1882. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-The Emphatic Diaglott, mentioned in this 
month's issue of the WATCH TOWER, is the very book I want (or 
rather need). I do wish that some good friend would pay for it for 
me, as I am not able to at this time. I am a colored Congregational 
minister, and I am anxious to know the truth of God's word, but I 
am too poor to purchase the Bible helps I need. I have learned more 
from "Food" and "Tabernacle" in two or three weeks than from 
anything else in ten years. I am grateful to you for them, and for the 
paper also. I and all that 

R345 : page 2 

have seen and can understand them are much interested. I have no 
means with which to purchase, and I want them so much that I am 
forced to beg for them. 

Yours in Christ, . 



NOTTINGHAM, ENG., Feb. 24th, 1882. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I thank you most sincerely for what I have 
received from you this last few days. The "Day Dawn," reached me 
on the 15th, and what I have already seen of it, has both pleased and 
instructed me. Like its fellow- "Food for Thinking Christians," it 
needs much careful thought; but I am sure it will amply repay it. 
Last evening I received the "WATCH TOWER" and "Tabernacle 
supplement," and I am looking for more blessing through the 
perusal of this valuable paper, as each month brings me something 
fresh. 

Tears came to my eyes this morning, as I read the letters of your 
correspondents who had received so much help and comfort from 
the December number. To me also it was indeed a "feast of fat 
things." The article on the "Creative Week" and the one on the 
"Importance of 

R347 : page 2 

Baptism" was a great help to me. 

In this number the articles on "Assembling Together"- 
"Consecration to a Work," and Mrs. Russell's Answers to Inquiries, 
are wonderfully pregnant and helpful. I feel as though I must read 
my Bible all over again, for the difference between Ransom and 
Pardon, pointed out in your closing article, had never struck me, 



though obvious enough when you put it before your readers. I 
wonder if it will ever be my lot to come over to some of your 
meetings. I very much long to see this happy type of Apostolic 
Christianity Revived —for such I think it must be— in the persons of 
its professors and preachers. The books and papers I regard as a 
blessing sent to my house; and which will bring forth fruit in my 
own soul, and I trust in my people also. Believe me to be, 

Yours most faithfully in our Lord Jesus Christ, 

. (A Minister.) 



page 2 



NEWARK, N.J. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Please accept my thanks for your 
kindness in sending the papers and pamphlet on the "Tabernacle," 
&c. 

I am thankful to say that all my skepticism has fled away. The 
darkness is chased away by the light of truth that has shone around 
me for some time past. 

We are having a very happy time in Newark, and I look forward to 
a number of people of this city being brought under the influence of 
the truth to rejoice with us in the great plan of salvation. 

We had a very pleasant and instructive visit from Brother Keith. He 
has left a very good impression among the friends in Newark, and 
we shall be glad to see him again. 

Yours in the truth, 



SEVERANCE, KAN. Zion's Watch Tower. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-It is with much feeling and thankfulness I 
send you my greeting for the benefit I have received from perusing 
your valuable publications. No one knows how I have yearned after 
the truths found in the Bible that are so much clearer to my mind 
since I read your valuable paper. 

Yours in the cause of truth, 



R347 : page 2 



OUTLINES OF SERMONS. 

We have frequent calls for outlines of sermons on these glad 
tidings, by those in various places who desire to publicly make 
known the glories of our Father's plan. 



To such we would say, we have now prepared suggestive outline 
notes for six sermons, explanatory of the "Chart of the ages." (This 
chart most of our readers have received as a supplement to July, '81 
issue.) A copy of these notes will be mailed free, to those who are 
anxious to use them. You may order at once. 

When you receive them, commence with the first, and with your 
chart placed in good position, thoroughly acquaint yourself with the 
first, and so with each of the succeeding ones in order, study much 
and thoroughly. 

Then, when thoroughly conversant with them, lay aside your notes 
and give the discourses in your own language. Patient perseverance 
will enable you to place the plan before your hearers in a strong and 
convincing manner. Always bear in mind in study and presentation 
that "Order is heaven's first law." 

The small charts (33 inches wide) will answer to begin with, and 
are well adapted to an audience of about a dozen. We will have 
larger charts for any who prove themselves capable of using them 
to advantage. 



page 2 



R347 : page 2 



A WORD TO ALL. 



Your chart should hang in a much-used room; you should often 
run over it mentally, noting its various points, and thus be refreshed 
with the hopes illustrated, and prepared to give a general 
presentation of its significance to interested friends; an explanation 
of Chart is in "Food," p. 105. Our American readers may all have 
them by ordering-they cannot be mailed to Europe. 



page 2 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



Had we not fortunately received more copies of this work than 
was announced in our last issue, many of your orders would have 
been unfilled. As it is, however, we have some yet on hand, of 
those but slightly damaged copies, which you may have at $1.50 
per copy. (Postage paid by us.) 

We repeat, these books are so slightly damaged (in the fly leaves) 
that many would not discover it. They are in all other respects the 
regular $4.00 books. We knew that many of you would need and 
want this valuable book; hence we purchased this entire lot. Order 
soon that you may the sooner have the benefit of this helper. 
Several may order together if they choose, but please order only for 



readers of the paper, at present. If any remain after our readers have 
been supplied, they will be offered to the public. 

Any one purchasing one of these, may, if not satisfactory, return it 
in good order within seven days after receiving, and we will refund 
his money. 



page 2 



ANOTHER HELP. 



Every one in studying the Bible should have a concordance. One 
of the best, recently published is "Young's Analytical 
Concordance." It can be had of book-sellers in all large towns. If 
any cannot thus obtain it, we can purchase it for you here. The 
wholesale price, bound in sheep $3.80, in cloth $3.00, by mail- 
postage prepaid. By express 50 cts. less. All who can afford it 
should have some kind of a concordance. 



R347 : page 2 

EXTRACT FROM A LETTER. 

Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus, through God's will, to those 
saints who are in Ephesus, even to believers in Christ Jesus-favor 
to you and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

Blessed be that God of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us 
with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies by Christ, even as he 
chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we might 
be holy and blameless in his presence; having in love, previously 
marked us out for sonship through Christ Jesus for himself, 
according to the good pleasure of his will to the praise of his 
glorious beneficence, with which he graciously favored us in the 
beloved One. By whom, through his blood, we possess the 
redemption— the forgiveness of offences— according to the opulence 
of his favor, which he caused to overflow towards us, in all wisdom 
and intelligence, having made known to us the secret of his will, 
according to his own benevolent design which he previously 
purposed in Himself in regard to, an administration of the fullness 
of the appointed times, to re-unite all things under one head, even 
under the Anointed One;-the things in the heavens, and the things 
on the earth-under him; by whom also we obtained an inheritance, 
having been previously marked out according to a design of him 
who is operating all things agreeably to the counsel of his own will; 
in order that we might be for a praise of his glory- we who had a 
prior hope in the Anointed One."— Paul's Letter to the Ephesians 
(Eph. 1:1-12, Diaglott). 



R347 : page 2 

TRIBULATION AND PEACE. 

Both are promised us: "In the world ye shall have tribulation, but 
in me ye may have peace," said Jesus. (John 16:33.) Do you have 
any tribulation? Yes? Then make sure that it does not arise from 
natural causes. Possibly you are being paid back in your own coin- 
possibly you deserve the tribulation which you receive. If so, be 
diligent to repent and reform. Let none of you suffer as an evil doer; 
yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed. 
"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and 
say all manner of evil against you FALSELY, for my sake," said 
Jesus. "Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in 
heaven. " So then, if we suffer for the cause of Christ and His word, 
we should thank God and take courage, and remember that by the 
sharing in His sufferings, our future reward is secured. If we suffer 
with Him, we shall reign with Him, said Paul. 

Sufferings in the present time, for the truth's sake, we are to reckon 
a part of our wages, and all who think they are running for the 
heavenly prize of our high calling, should look for these wages as a 
proof that they are so running as to obtain that prize. (1 Cor. 9:24.) 
Do you experience but little or none of the sufferings of Christ 
now? Do you begin to count the time of suffering over, and are you 
building your hopes on the fact that in times past you suffered a 
little for Christ's sake? That is a serious mistake; it is one of the 
devices of your adversary to put to sleep the saints of God, saying 
peace, peace, while we are yet in the enemy's country. It is the fatal 
error with which he has lulled the nominal church to sleep, from 
whose condition we have just escaped. Jesus and Paul ran and 
suffered to the very end of the race, and Jesus said that the disciple 
or follower is not above his Lord and teacher; that if they called the 
master the prince of devils, they would call the disciples devils. 
"Whosoever will live Godly shall suffer. " 

Ne'er think the victory won, 
Nor lay thine armor down: 
The work of faith will not be done 
Till thou obtain thy crown. " 

Then, beloved, if you do not suffer you have good cause for fear 
that you are not living up to your covenant —that you are not 
confessing Him and His word before men by word or act as you 
should do. If this is the case you are not overcoming the world, but 
are being overcome and silenced by the world. Of such, Jesus said: 
He that is ashamed of me and my words, in this adulterous and 
sinful generation, of Him will I be ashamed before my Father and 
before the holy angels. The present generation (church) is 
adulterous in that it is mixed up with and united to the world, while 
claiming to be betrothed to Christ. Under such circumstances it 
requires grace and strength to rebuke the Harlot mother or 



daughters, and to declare boldly for the true Bridegroom's rights 
and his words. But all who are thus ashamed of Him cannot be a 
part of His Bride. He is not ashamed of her. Yes, if faithful, you 
may expect it. "In the world ye shall have tribulation"; and you may 
expect it to come as it has always done— through the world's church- 
-the nominal systems. Thus Jesus and the apostles and the early 
reformers all found it, and thus some of us find it to-day. 

But it is not tribulation only, which we are to get, though that is all 
we expect of the world. No, Jesus says, in him we may have peace. 
We may have both the tribulation and the peace at the same time. 
We get a peace which so overbalances the tribulations, that we may 
say, we reckon the present afflictions and scorns of the world as 
light indeed, when weighed with the hopes of coming glory on 
which our peace is builded. 

Do any of the faithful in tribulation for Christ's sake yet lack the 
peace? It is because you lack faith to lay hold of the promises— the 
exceeding great and precious promises made to those who take up 
their cross and follow in His footsteps- suffering with him. To such 
we would say: 

Soul, then know thy full salvation; 
Rise o'er sin, and fear and care; 
Joy to find in every station 
Something still to do or bear. 

Think what spirit dwells within thee; 
Think what Father's smiles are thine; 
Think that Jesus died to win thee; 
IChild of Heaven, cans't thou repine? 

R348 : page 3 

But if you have peace without the suffering, while all men speak 
well of you, BEWARE! That is the peace of a sleep in which one 
dreams that he is filled and crowned and awakes to find himself 
empty. That is the peace of a dead calm on the ocean: 

Blest be the sorrow, kind the storm, 
That drives us nearer home. 

Unless you get your vessel into the winds, and be tossed about on a 
tempestuous sea, you may never reach the port for which you set 
out. Hence we say to some, Beware! to other, Take courage! and to 
all we repeat the words of Jesus: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee a crown of life. " 

Sure we must fight, if we would reign. 
Increase our courage, Lord; 
We'll bear the cross, endure the pain, 
Supported by thy word. " 



R348 : page 3 



FULL CONSECRATION. 

O sacred union with the Perfect Mind! 
Transcendent bliss, which Thou alone canst give. 
How blest are they this Pearl of price who find, 
And dead to earth, have learned in Thee to live. 

And thus while dead to human hopes I lie, 
Lost and forever lost, to all but Thee: 
My happy soul since it hast learned to die, 
Hath found new life in Thine infinity. 

With joy we learn this lesson of the Cross, 
And tread the toilsome way which Jesus trod; 
And counting present life and all things loss, 
We find in human death, the life of God. 



—Selected. 



R348 : page 3 

PAROUSIA WELL DEFINED. 

The Sabbath Advocate, in an article opposing our views relative to 
the personal presence of Jesus unseen, during the "harvest" or end 
of this age, in a recent issue said: 

"Some try to make it appear against our view of the personal 
coming of Christ by saying that the Greek word from which the 
word coming is translated is parousia, which means presence, and 
is sometimes so rendered, even in the common version. But this is 
an extraneous or overdone effort, for when the word parousia is 
used with reference to the Savior's coming it has the understood 
meaning of presence after having come; so when the coming of 
Christ is expressed by the word parousia, it means his presence 
after his having come; so it implies his personal and actual coming 
first in order to have his presence. " 

We admire the candor of the above statement. We could not ask to 
have it better stated. The writer admits our claim that parousia 
signifies presence, and always so when used in connection with 
Jesus' second coming. But he evidently thinks that he quite 
overthrows our argument when he says: "It means his PRESENCE 
after having come. " Why, brother, that is what presence always 
means; it is for this reason that we insist that the word coming is an 
improper translation of the Greek word parousia. Coming signifies 
an incomplete action-if Jesus is coming then he has not arrived; if 
he has arrived he cannot longer be said to be coming, but to be 
present; hence the force and importance attaching to the word 
parousia. The difficulty and hindrance of many in the appreciation 
of this word lies in their preconceived idea that presence always 
implies physical sight. Suppose your room were filled with gas; as 
you enter, your physical sight could discern nothing, but the 



presence of the gas would become known to you by the sense of 
smell. You might discern the presence of a friend by the sense of 
hearing, though entirely deprived of the sense of sight; or you might 
know of his presence if informed by good authority in which you 
have confidence or faith. 

Jesus manifests his presence now, to some of us; not to our natural 
organs of sight, hearing or smelling, but to the spiritual eye and ear 
of faith. God speaks to us through His Word about our Lord's 
presence, just as he tells us about all other spiritual things. If we 
have the hearing of faith, and walk by faith and not by sight, we 
may know of the Lord's presence thus, just as surely as we can 
know of the crown of life promised. If we have the eye of faith we 
can look about us and see the very things now transpiring which 
God's Word assures us will take place in the presence of the Son of 
Man. Thus, by two lines of proof, we may know: First, The positive 
statements of the prophets, and teachings of the Law shadows. 
Second, The fulfillment of things now as foretold would be in his 
presence. The character of this evidence proves also that only the 
faithful watchmen —the little flock-will be able to receive it, until 
he is revealed in judgments upon the nations. 

Let us look at some of the texts in which parousia (presence) 
occurs, and let them speak for themselves: remembering, that as the 
"devil goeth about" "up and down on the earth," unseen during the 
Gospel Age, so the new Prince or ruler of the world will be present 
and active and unseen during the Millennial Age. Present as the 
angels have been during the Gospel Age-(Heb. 1:14)— yet like 
them also unseen and unseeable to the natural eye except by a 
miracle. The reason of this similarity between our Lord, angels and 
devils is, that they are spiritual beings and not human. Let us 
remember that though we have known Jesus after the flesh— as a 
man— yet now know him so no more, but as the perfected NEW 
CREATURE-the express image of the Father's person, whom no 
man hath seen nor can see. Heb. 1:3 and 1 Tim. 6:16. 

One illustration of presence and power, manifest only by effects, is 
Electricity. It is present in that telegraph wire, and carries a 
message with rapidity and force. Your eye sees nothing, but put 
forth your hand, touch the wire, interrupt its course, and you will 
know of its presence and power. Again, the same invisible fluid, 
brought into contact with a "carbon" produces an "Electric light. " 
Again, the same invisible electric fluid unbridled in the clouds, we 
call lightning because, under certain circumstances, it produces a 
flash of light. It is there present, and is the same fluid, and has the 
same latent force before the flash indicated its presence and 
demonstrated its power. 

This is one of the illustrations used by our Lord to bring us to 
understand how he will be present in the end of the Gospel Age. He 
says (Matt. 24:27) that if any shall attempt to define a location, and 
say he is here in such a house, or in yonder desert, believe it not. He 
will come in no such way— but "as the lightning ...so shall also the 



presence (parousia) of the Son of Man be." Not— he will come like 
the lightning, but he will be like the lightning after he has arrived 
and is present. Luke 17:24 puts it yet more forcibly, saying: "As the 
lightning that lighteneth" (it is the electric fluid that lighteneth or 
causes the flash; then let us read: "As the electric fluid which 
causes flashes of light). ..so shall also the Son of Man BE in His 
day." He will be present in power and force, invisible, except as his 
judgments flashing out upon the corrupt systems of earth (State and 
Church) shall overturn and destroy them. 

Thus, as we have heretofore pointed out, the Lord says he cometh 
with clouds— a great time of trouble. The governments of earth 
never saw so many black, heavy clouds. In every kingdom the 
rulers and the ruled are fast approaching open rupture, in which the 
storm will be clearly recognizable. The lightning force will be 
found against the "rulers of the darkness of this world" (Eph 6:12), 
bringing light and knowledge to the poor, degraded and often 
oppressed subjects, thus preparing them for the new Prince of the 
power of the air (spiritual power)-the Christ-and for a better 
earthly government under the rule of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all 
the prophets -raised to human perfection. 

Already the light is flashing upon the waking ones in the church. 
They can see the light shining from the present Lord, making 
manifest various things which, during the darkness of this Gospel 
night, might have been before unnoticed-unfolding in a wonderful 
manner flash by flash the beauties of his Word. The clouds are 
gathering and the storm must soon burst, which shall, by its loud, 
crashing thunder awaken one by one the sleeping— those at ease in 
Zion. Thank God for that, even though they awake to find 
themselves in terror in the storm. The Millennial morn is already 
here, but it is early-not yet light except to the prospective waking, 
watching Bride, who receives the light of the Morning Star. (2 Peter 
1:19; Rev. 22:16.) It will be some time before sunrise, and the 
weeping must endure for the night, but joy cometh in the morning. 
When the sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings 
he will turn their mourning into dancing, and put off their sackcloth 
and gird them with gladness. Psa. 30. 

Matt. 24:37 says: "As the days of Noah were, so shall also the 
presence (parousia) of the Son of Man be. " This informs us that we 
may expect here in the end of this age, 

R349 : page 3 

during the PRESENCE of Jesus, a similarity to Noah's time before 
the flood. Now, note closely and see what resemblance will exist. 
The clear statement is, that as in Noah's day, the people did not 
know of the coming flood, and did not believe in such a thing, so 
when our Lord is present they will not know and will not be aware 
of the impending deluge of trouble. As then they knew not, but 
attended to the ordinary affairs of life, so here and now, people 
know not of Christ's presence. They complain of us for arousing the 



slumbering church by saying that Jesus is here, and that the testing 
and trial is now begun at the house of God, and that the nominal, 
sectarian institutions are even now spued from his mouth (Rev. 
3:16), and the true children of God called out. The parallel passage 
in Luke 17:26 says: "As it was in the days of Noah so shall it be 
also in the days (in the presence) of the Son of Man." 

Do we find that with the brighter shining truth our hearts are being 
established-our faith well founded and settled? If so, it is just what 
Paul expected. He wrote to the end that our hearts might be 
established "unblamable in holiness before God, even our Father at 
the PRESENCE (parousia) of our Lord." 1 Thes. 3:13. 

Peter tells us of some who, at the present time, would deny that 
there is such a promise as we have just pointed out, viz. : that Jesus 
would be present while all things would continue as they were— the 
World eating, drinking, planting, etc., unconscious of his presence. 
He says: "There shall come in the last days [of this age] scoffers 
walking after their own lusts [desires-plans] and saying, Where is 
the promise of his presence? for since the fathers fell asleep all 
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. 2 
Peter 3:4. Thus we see that there must needs be just such scoffing in 
the days of Jesus as was in the days of Noah. Ye overcoming, 
covenant-keeping saints, lift up your heads, your redemption 
draweth nigh. At his presence he first inspects his household and 
rewards his faithful, saying: Thou hast been faithful over a few 
things, I will make thee ruler over many things; and then he 
chastises his enemies. The inspection is now in progress; soon the 
new rulers will be made manifest, shining forth as the Sun in the 
kingdom of their Father. Brother, sister, seek with all diligence to 
make your election sure. Study to show thyself approved unto God, 
and be not only a student, but a doer of his will. 



R349 : page 3 

"AN ANSWER TO EVERY MAN." 

"Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give 
an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is 
in you, with meekness and fear. " 

Let us notice in this passage some things in connection with our 
hope. And while we give our principal attention to things relating to 
it, let us not overlook the importance of sanctifying the Lord God in 
our hearts, that is, set apart and "make the means of holiness." Let 
Him be the sacred presence to whom we shall, bring all the issues 
of the heart, and the pattern to which we shall make our whole life 
and character conform. As we are reasonable beings, we should use 
our reason for God-given purposes, notwithstanding that the "wise 
and prudent" assume to monopolize the freedom of its use. 



It is but reasonable to suppose that men will ask us a reason of the 
hope that is in us, especially as we are supposed by many, to have 
such a peculiar hope. It may not be amiss, then, first to state what 
hope in general is, and then what our hope in particular is; after 
which we will give a reason for entertaining such a hope. 

Hope, in general, looks to the future for some good, with, at least, 
some expectation of attaining it, or with the belief that it is 
attainable. It presupposes that the present position, condition, or 
whatever, is undesirable. 

For our present purpose, we will assume what is an obvious fact, 
that the condition of the world and of man is one that it is not 
desirable to have continue forever. The pains, and groans, and tears, 
and dying struggles, the separation and estrangement of friends, the 
sufferings caused by ignorance and wickedness; all are good and 
sufficient reasons for dissatisfactions and causes of unrest. But we 
have hope. 

When we look about us and see how selfish man is, without the 
knowledge and love of God, as the majority are; when we see 
human beings come into the world diseased from the first, 
physically and morally, and environed with evil influences, borne 
down with a load of woe too great to stand upright under, and 
finally sinking under its weight and disappearing in death; when, on 
account of this accumulation of individual distress and misery 
society becomes foul and corrupt, breeding moral pestilence, and 
growing "worse and worse;" when, on account of all this 
aggregated evil, governments become weak and tottering, when 
wide-spread ruin seems to be inevitable and certain, when all hearts 
fail and all cheeks pale, when skeptics speculate, and many 
professing Christians doubt, and all, most all, are perplexed; when 
the "whole creation groaneth" under the effects of the curse of sin 
we have hope. 

Our hope is that the curse of sin will be removed, that the reign of 

R349 : page 4 

evil will come to an end; that governments now under the control of 
the powers of darkness, shall be brought under the sway of the 
Prince of Peace; that where evil, in all its hideous forms now holds 
carnival, righteousness and peace shall have dominion; that all 
hearts shall be made glad; that the crooked shall be made straight, 
and the rough places smooth. 

We have hope that not only the living of this or the succeeding age 
shall see this condition of things, but that all who have ever lived 
shall see it together. 

That a great jubilee shall come, and all men shall be set free from 
the captivity of death. 



We have hope that the earth itself shall feel the change, and that 
instead of thorns and thistles and poisonous plants, healthful 
productions and life-giving fruits shall take their place. 

We have a hope that to insure all that and make it permanent and 
lasting, God will establish a government in the heavens which shall 
rule over all in truth and righteousness, that this government shall 
so thoroughly bring under subjection every hitherto evil and 
turbulent element, in fact melt them, that men will have no use for 
instruments of death, but shall fashion them into instruments of 
agriculture and the useful arts. 

We believe that the ministers of that government are being 
disciplined and educated for this high and important work now, and 
that this is the principal work which the Almighty is accomplishing 
in this world or age; that this special work is about complete, and 
that soon the new arrangement and order of things will commence, 
and that when fully inaugurated, all men will know what is duty 
and be able to perform it, having all hindrances, such as hereditary 
taint, and evil surroundings removed; man will be free to do the 
will of God, and from past experience with evil, willing to do it, 
that this will be the rule at least; that the rulers in this government 
will be composed of such as have been men, but who through 
sanctification of the spirit, and knowledge of, and belief of the 
truth, came into the possession of power, or privilege to become 
"SONS OF GOD," "NEW CREATURES," proper instruments with 
which God is to accomplish His grand and glorious designs for the 
sons of men in the ages to come. 

Now we know this is hoping a great deal, but we are "ready 
always" to give "a reason" of this hope "with meekness and fear," 
(fear lest we become a castaway). 

First, then, we will give briefly our reason for believing the Bible to 
be the word of God, for upon it all our other reason of hope is 
based. 

Certain Jews, called prophets, without knowing what was in the 
future, undertook to tell a long time beforehand what would come 
to pass. If they had been disposed to gratify a selfish or ambitious 
feeling, of course (supposing that they could prophecy at all, with 
such a nature) their prophecies would be the foretelling of events 
which they wished to have come to pass; whereas, much of the 
burden of prophecy is of a nature not at all in accord with the spirit 
of the Jew, and of such a nature that when it did come to pass it was 
rejected by the Jews. 

That their utterances, many, many years before were strikingly 
fulfilled, we shall presently show. We believe and assume that the 
general character of these men was good, as men, that "holy men of 
God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." —2 Peter 1:21. 
But God, knowing "what was in man," and how liable poor human 
nature is to warp and distort things to conform to its own 
understanding, did not commit all these sacred things to their 



understanding, for they did not understand their own utterances at 
the time, see Dan. 12:8; Zech 4:5, and 1 Peter 1:10,11,12. 

Then, too many of their prophecies, not being in accord with the 
hope of the Jews, could not have been written to gratify their 
ambition. If the prophecies had been uttered in accord with the 
spirit and expectation of the Jews, nothing, we 

R350 : page 4 

may well assume, would have been said about the humiliation of 
Christ, nothing about the ignominious character of His sufferings 
and death. 

One thing is certain, Christ was rejected by the Jews when he did 
come, and this was also foretold.- Isaiah 53:2,3; John 1:10,11. — 
and. put to death by them because he was not acceptable to them. 

That such a man did live and die, that such a man was "born in 
Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king; " that He did 
strikingly fulfill the predictions made hundreds of years before 
concerning such a character, we think very few, if any, will be 
found, who are informed on the subject, that will deny it. 

How marvelously he fills the picture drawn in the 53d chapter of 
Isaiah, and in the latter part of the 9th chapter of Daniel, also in 
Isaiah 7:14, and 61:1; and in Jeremiah 31:22, and Hosea 6:2. This 
last we understand to have, like many of the prophecies (and that is 
evidently one reason why they were not better understood by the 
prophets themselves and by the Jews) a double signification, that 
one phase of this prophecy applied to Christ in person, and that has 
been fulfilled in His resurrection, and is the pledge that the other 
phase of it will be fulfilled in subsequent resurrections. These 
passages referred to, we believe to have been fulfilled already, and 
are a reason for our hope, in that we believe the Bible. 

Now, let us notice, briefly, how signally prophecy has been fulfilled 
in regard to the Jews themselves. From the 15th to the 68th verse of 
the 28th chapter of Isaiah, is one of the most marvelous pictures of 
the condition of the Jews which has had and is having its 
fulfillment, that the mind can conceive. Also in Jer. 34:17. 

These, with many other prophecies relating to the Jews, have had 
their fulfillment, and so wonderful are they that the Jews, some of 
them at least, acknowledge it now— they have done so in 
conversation we have had. We understand that nearly all the 
prophecies relating to the downfall of the Jews have been fulfilled, 
and that those relating to their rise and establishment remain to be 
fulfilled, and really are beginning to be fulfilled. 

Thus far we see, and it is "the substance (foundation) of things 
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. " Without dwelling 
further upon the truth of the Bible we shall assume that it is the 
word of God, and found our hope upon it; this we are satisfied to 
do. Let us examine our hope then that the condition of the world of 



mankind will be improved. But first, there must be a universal 
desire for a change. Many have that desire now, but many have no 
such desire, they are satisfied with it as it is; "their eyes stand out 
with fatness," they have all they wish, but the oppressed of all 
nations now long for a change; but we understand from the Word, 
that the present governing power will become so burdensome, and 
so inefficient, and incapable of promoting the happiness of 
mankind, and really so conducive to evil that all men will clamor 
for its overthrow and desire its removal. Already this condition of 
things begins to be manifest. Already, agencies for the overthrow of 
governments are taking on organized forms and making themselves 
felt, to the dismay of kings and peoples. But the agencies which are 
being put in such active operation for the overthrow of the present 
governing power, are themselves so full of evil, that instead of 
bettering the condition of mankind, they will only make it worse, 
until the whole world will be satisfied that the wisdom of man is 
folly, and will long for a king who shall reign in righteousness. 

We think that the rapid increase of moral corruption (now so 
apparent to those who are "looking") will quickly ripen the harvest 
of iniquity that is now so nearly matured, and culminate the general 
ruin in a comparatively short time, and that then "the desire of all 
nations shall come. "-Hag. 2:7. 

That the condition of things generally will grow more distressful 
and appalling until the world shall be tired out, "dissolved, " (be 
"burned up") with the legitimate result of sinful rule. (God permits 
the "fire of his jealousy, " to turn the hearts of men to himself.) 

That Satan is now permitted to rule, see John 14:30; Eph 6:12, and 
2:2, also Joel 3:9-16. "Proclaim ye this among the gentiles (nations) 
prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw 
near, let them come up, beat your plowshares into swords and your 
pruning-hooks into spears," &c. "My determination is to gather the 
nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine 
indignation, even all my fierce anger, (the natural result of sin,) for 
all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. "-Zeph. 
3:8. 

See Isa. 13:6-12 and Zeph. 1:14-18. Read carefully, and may the 
Lord give thee understanding. Should some one say: "But these 
prophecies are concerning Judah and Israel," &c, we should 
answer: God's "wrath is revealed from heaven against all 
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men," and it is evident that 
when the prophetic eye was opened, the prophet saw in rapid 
succession God's dealings with sin and iniquity clear through to the 
end of his indignation, and recorded it in that mystic way: and it 
requires the same spirit in the minds of the readers to understand 
that rested upon the minds of those who wrote. The light that shines 
out from prophetic utterances is only recognized by the eye of faith; 
for "none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise (but not 
according to the wisdom of this world) shall understand. " Dan. 
12:10. 



This is some of our "scriptural reasons" for believing that a time of 
trouble will precede a time of righteous rule and restoration 
(regeneration). Matt. 19:28. Now, we know this is not the teaching 
of the "wise and prudent" (of this world or age), but God says he 
will "bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, and these 
things are hid "from the wise and prudent." 1 Cor. 1:19; Matt. 
11:25. We know that we who hold these views are nothing, 
according to the wisdom of this world, not having "even a name," 
but God has said he will take the "things which are not to bring to 
naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. " 1 
Cor. 1:28,29. 

Now, the wise (of this world) say the world is growing better and 
better. Let us look at that for a moment and see if there are no 
indications of storm. 

We will ask the questions, and you can answer them for yourselves. 
Can men leave their buildings open now more safely than formerly? 
Are there less locks and safes sold? Is there less murder and 
bloodshed than usual? Are there fewer prisons and convicts, less 
theft and arson? Are the instruments of war fewer and less 
formidable, are there less revolvers sold? Do men, by their actions, 
show that they love each other better than formerly? Do they 
legislate to benefit the poor more? Do capitalists make it easier for 
the laborer? Do they love the laborer (or his labor) and give him a 
nice, large slice from their loaf? Does the laborer love the capitalist, 
and do they work for each other's interest? Are the churches purer 
and better and less worldly, plainer and more simple, and true and 
good, so that the worldly man is rebuked by their good works, and 
has he confidence more than formerly in church members? Are 
there no grasping monopolies; if so, are there less of them, and are 
they working for the general good of mankind? Is it real easy to get 
honest, self-sacrificing men to hold the reins of government and 
stand at the helm of state? Are there less "election frauds" than 
when we were boys? Is purity and chastity— but we will go no 
further now in the slimy catalogue. Let those who think the world is 
growing better wade on through the sickening pool. Now, let us 
notice the scriptural reasons for hoping that there will be a better 
condition of things to succeed this. In Isaiah, second chapter, we 
read— but, says one, that was "concerning Judah and Jerusalem;" 
yes, we know it did concern them, and concerns them yet, and 
concerns us, too, now. May the Lord give thee understanding: "And 
it shall come to pass in the last days that the mountain (government) 
of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, 
and shall be exalted above the hills (will be the ruling power), and 
all nations shall flow unto it, and many people shall say, Come, let 
us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of 
Jacob; and He will teach us of His way, and we will walk in his 
paths, for out of Zion (glorified) shall go forth THE LAW, and the 
word of the Lord from Jerusalem, " and "He shall judge among 
many nations, and shall rebuke many people; and they shall beat 
their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks, 



nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn 
war any more." "In that day I will make a covenant for them with 
the beasts of the field and with the fowls of heaven, and with the 
creeping things of the ground; and I will break the bow and the 
sword and the battle out of the earth, and will 

R350 : page 5 

make them to lie down safely." Hosea 2:18. See also Isa. 11:6-16. 

"And I will come near to judgment; and I will be a swift witness 
against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false 
swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, 
the widow and the fatherless and that turn aside the stranger from 
his right, and fear not me saith the Lord." Mai. 3:5. Then through 
the judgment (swift retribution of this ruling power) abroad in the 
earth, they will "learn righteousness." Isaiah 26:9. 

Does some one say, "I wish I could live when that time comes?" 
You will, my friend, according to our hope; for "the glory of the 
Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for the 
mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. " Isa. 40:5. Yes, we hope for the 
World's "restitution," and why not when it is so 

R351 : page 5 

desirable and is spoken of "by the mouth of His Holy Prophets, 
from of old." Acts 3:21 E.D.; Eze. 16:44,63; Matt. 11:24,25. 

We can come to no other conclusion from these scriptures referred 
to, than that the nations of earth, including Sodom, are to live again, 
and that when restored will profit by past experience, and be 
ashamed of it; that it is the design of our Heavenly Father to restore, 
through Christ, all that was lost in Adam; that hence "there shall be 
a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust," Acts 
24:15; that this is the age of generation, and that the one to follow is 
the age of regeneration:-Matt. 19:28-that this generation all die on 
account of Adam's sin, but will all live again on account of Christ's 
righteousness. 1 Cor. 15:22;-Rom. 5:18,19. But not that all will be 
brought to the same kind of life finally, for those who will give up 
the natural with Christ and fill up the afflictions which are behind, 
shall be made "partakers of the divine nature. " That there is clearly 
a difference we can but conclude from 1 Cor. 15:23,48. Here Paul 
is evidently speaking of both resurrections; that is, of the dead, and 
of those "from among the dead," though we distinguish the former 
from the latter by the term restoration, and that is the word used in 
the revised N.T., and in the Diaglott in Acts 3:21 . 

We have hope that as Christ came to lighten "EVERY MAN that 
cometh into the world, " so every man will be enlightened; not one 
in a hundred or thousand, but EVERY ONE. John 1 :9; that Sodom 
and Tyre, who did not have as good an opportunity as Capernaum 
and Bethsaida, will, in the regeneration, find their condition even 
better than theirs. If any one disbelieves this we shall have to differ, 



for we would sooner believe Christ's words: Matt. 
11:21,22,23,24,25. 

This is a part of the "reason" of our hope, and this hope grows 
stronger the more we examine the subject and see the evidence 
brought in. Christ was raised from the dead, according to the 
Scriptures, and so we have the "first fruits of the spirit." 

Some, who are in the light, told us that if our reckoning was correct, 
favor would begin to be shown to the Jews in the spring of 1878. 
This was told as early as 1876, though no one at that time dreamed 
of the source from whence it was to come; but it came at the 
expected time through the "Berlin treaty." The strangeness of the 
matter (according to human reason) was that just at the proper time 
a Jew was PREMIER of England, a government upon whose 
dominions the sun never sets; and "who knoweth whether" he, like 
Esther, had "come to the kingdom for such a time as this?" Esther 
4:14. And now the Jews, for the first time since the destruction of 
Jerusalem, are permitted to return to their "sacred city" and worship 
as they please, and now we are told the temple is being rebuilt! 

But some one may say: "But they are not shown much favor in 
Russia and Germany." No; but that is also according to Scripture.- 
Jer. 49:5,6: "Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the Lord 
God of hosts, from all those that be about thee; and ye shall be 
driven out from men right forth, and none shall gather up him that 
wandereth. And afterward I will bring again the captivity of the 
children of Ammon, saith the Lord." Again, in Micah 4:6,7: "In that 
day, saith the Lord (and we think that day is dawning), will I 
assemble her that halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, 
and her that I have afflicted; and I will make her that halteth a 
remnant, and her that was cast off a strong nation, and the LORD 
shall reign over them in Mount Zion from henceforth, even 
forever. " These are but a few of the Scriptures bearing upon this 
point. We cannot, in an article like this, consider but a small portion 
of the evidence. 

But we have a still greater and more glorious hope, and that is the 
one in which all the others center and are bound up. It is the hope of 
being made perfect in Christ, of being made partakers of the divine 
nature. It is the hope of completing our adoption as sons of God. 
Eph. 4:5,6,7; John 1:12; 1 John 3:1. For this hope the world is 
anxiously waiting. Rom. 8:19. It is nothing less than the hope of 
"obtaining the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ." 2 Thes. 2:14. But 
before we can come into the possession of this hope there is much 
suffering and trial to be endured; there is the "dying daily" until we 
are dead with Christ. 

But we are willing, and do count all things but vile refuse, so that 
we may gain Christ and be found in Him. Eph. 3:8,1 1 E.D. Now, 
the following passage will enable us to test ourselves with regard to 
this hope, for it is a high calling, a glorious hope, and we must 
examine ourselves closely: 



"He that hath THIS hope in him purifieth himself even as He is 
pure." 1 John 3:3. The fine linen must not be mingled with other 
material, and must be kept clean and white. 

May we hold fast this hope till it shall be lost in full fruition. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R35 1 : page 5 



THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 

[CONTINUED.] 



THE MESSAGE TO SMYRNA. 

["And to the messenger of the assembly in Smyrna write" Rev. 
2:8.] 

The name Smyrna means myrrh. Our word myrrh is from the 
Arabic marra, to be bitter. The Hebrew word mara is the name 
given to the first water found by the Israelites in the wilderness. Ex. 
15:23. It was also the name chosen by Naomi in her affliction. Ruth 
1:20. 

The symbolic meaning of the title here would be, To the church in 
bitter affliction. This agrees perfectly with the condition of the 
Smyrna phase. The chronological location is evidently from the end 
of the Ephesus period or earlier, to the beginning of the reign of 
Constantine. It was the period covered by the terrible pagan 
persecutions. 

The message is sent by one who announces himself as "the first and 
the last; who was dead, and is alive. " 

This was in itself a message of comfort and hope to these suffering 
martyrs. It was as if he said: "Fear not, my faithful ones; I was 
before all these persecutors; I shall be when they are forgotten; I 
shall take care of you. I, too, was put to death by this same power. 
Fear not to follow in my steps. See! I have risen in glory, in power, 
in immortality. Follow me! I know thy works, and tribulation, and 
poverty (but thou art rich)." This is an interjection with an 
emphasis. It is as if he said: You poor? No, no; you are looking at 
the things which are seen. Look up; the kingdom of heaven is 
yours. This is the cross, that is the crown. 

He reminds them that he, too, has heard the blasphemy of those 
who claimed to be the favorites of the gods, and to whom he now 
applies the true symbolic and appropriate name by which they 
should afterwards be known-Satan, Devil, &c. Ver. 13; 3:9; 12:9. 
"Fear none of these things which thou shalt suffer; behold the devil 
(this pagan power) shall cast you into prison, that ye may be tried; 
and ye shall have tribulation ten days." This is, of course, symbolic 



time— a day for a year. It clearly refers to the most cruel persecution 
under Diocletian. It began Christmas day, A.D. 303. We extract the 
following from Wilson's Outlines of History: "During ten years the 
persecution continued with scarcely mitigated horrors; and such 
multitudes of Christians suffered death that at last the imperial 
murderers boasted that they had extinguished the Christian name 
and religion, and restored the worship of the gods to its former 
purity and splendor. " Through all this the faithful flock, as they 
looked forward to a martyr's death, could see above, spanning the 
heavens like a glorious bow of promise, the living words in letters 
of light: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown 
of life." "He that hath an ear"-listen. "He that overcometh shall not 
be hurt of the second death. " 

W. I. MANN. 

[The article in our last number headed THE SEVEN CHURCHES 
was also by Bro. Mann, unintentionally his name was omitted.] 



R35 1 : page 5 



AN INFALLIBLE TEST. 



Any view of a subject that harmonizes with, or naturally takes in 
all the known facts in the case, must be substantially true. The most 
difficult and abstruse problems in science are solved in this way. 
Any theory of Christianity, therefore, that is in harmony with all the 
plain declarations of Christ and the Apostles, and the customs of the 
primitive churches, is substantially true; but any theory that requires 
the suppression of plain passages of Scripture is dangerous. 

Now, let all Christian teachers apply the foregoing test to 
themselves, and when they meet with a plain declaration of 
Scripture which they cannot reconcile with their adopted theory, let 
them not suppress or ignore such passage, but at once correct their 
own false theory. If all who profess Christianity would faithfully 
apply this rule, it would soon result in the overthrow of all human 
inventions and false doctrines. 

D. WIDNER. 



R352 : page 5 

"THIS SALVATION." 

"Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and 
whosoever among you feareth God, to you is the work of this 
salvation sent. " Acts 13:26. 

These are peculiar words, spoken at a peculiar time, and under 
peculiar circumstances. It seems that Paul and Barnabas, in their 
journeying, had came to Antioch, in Pisidia, and went into the 



synagogue on the Sabbath day and sat down in the audience as 
listeners; but the rulers of the synagogue very courteously invited 
them to speak, if they had any word of exhortation for the people, 
to which Paul responded, and among the things spoken by him at 
that time were the words quoted above. 

We notice they are addressed to "children of the stock of Abraham, 
and whosoever among you feareth God. " The word fear, as used 
here, signifies to be in apprehension of evil; to be afraid. 

The law was very strict, and to transgress the letter of the law meant 
a curse. Every member of the stock of Abraham must have been 
conscious of his inability to keep the whole law, and so must have 
been fearful of the consequences. Many of them, no doubt, were 
anxious to keep it, and were terrified at the thought of their repeated 
failures; many of them, too, had an additional fear "taught by the 
precept of men, " and under the influence of both, must have 
realized something of the fear that hath torment in it. 

Now, to such, trembling under the terrors of the law Paul addressed 
himself. 

"The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the 
people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt. " 

They must have thought that such a statement was a strange 
introduction to his speech, and would listen out of curiosity to what 
was to follow. 

How little had they thought that their fathers were exalted while 
serving as bondsmen in Egypt, and yet it was so, as the subsequent 
unfolding of God's plan clearly shows, for their whole ritual and all 
God's dealings with them, from first to last, were the significant 
expressions of Deity by sign-words ("shadows") of his grand and 
glorious designs for the whole race of mankind in the ages 
following. 

Paul then goes on to touch the mountain tops of God's dealings with 
them, and in a brief outline brings them up to the time of Christ, 
and then adds, as we have said, "children of the stock of Abraham, 
and whosoever among you feareth God, to you is the word of THIS 
SALVATION sent." 

Your rulers knew him not ("He was in the world, and the world 
knew him not") nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read 
every Sabbath day, and yet "they have fulfilled them in condemning 
him" (27th ver.), but God raised him from the dead (30th ver.), "and 
we declare unto you glad tidings" (32d ver.) The promise made of 
God unto the fathers is beginning to be fulfilled; in fact, it is the 
same as though it were fulfilled, "in that he hath raised up Jesus 
again." 

Paul and Barnabas saw the hope of Israel and the hope of the world, 
and very wisely and carefully unfolding to their view the glorious 
things belonging to "this salvation. " 



Paul did not, in this discourse, tell them plainly all the nature of 
"this salvation," but only hinted at it, and 

R352 : page 6 

left it in such a shape as to excite their desire to hear more. (People 
seldom are aware how strong their own prejudices are, and how 
careful the preacher has to be, to not feed too much and too strong 
feed at first; but Paul well understood this, as is manifest in the way 
he presented the subject, and in the way he left it at that time). He 
evidently wished to set before them, as they could bear it, the 
importance of this salvation, and to have them understand that it 
was a very different salvation from anything they had conceived of, 
for it had been "brought to light through the gospel," and though it 
had been spoken of by the prophets, yet they "did not know the 
voices of the prophets." 

Some seem to think that they were to blame for not understanding 
the nature of Christ's coming and kingdom. No doubt they were to 
blame for the evil which they cherished in their hearts, but how 
otherwise could they be blamed for not understanding the nature of 
that salvation spoken of by the prophets, when the prophets 
themselves did not understand it? Peter, referring to this same thing, 
says: "Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched 
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, 
searching what (things) or what manner of time the spirit of Christ 
which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the 
sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow. " They were 
made to understand that "not unto THEMSELVES, but unto us they 
did minister the things which are now reported unto you by them 
that have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent 
down from heaven, which things the angels desire to look into."-l 
Peter 1:10,11,12, "This salvation" seems to be the salvation which 
Jude (3d verse) found it necessary to exhort the brethren to 
earnestly contend for, when he was writing to them concerning the 
common salvation. This salvation is once for all (only once) 
"delivered to the saints." It is a prize which will be held out to view 
but once; that is, in only one age; there is no "second chance" for it; 
only once can it be earnestly contended for. This is the salvation 
which Paul meant when he said to Timothy: "Therefore we both 
labor and suffer reproach because we trust in the living God, who is 
the Saviour of all men (to natural life the common salvation), 
specially of those that believe." 1 Tim. 4:10. 

In this statement we understand that a general and a special 
salvation are referred to, and the special is "this salvation" to which 
he was calling the attention of "whosoever among you feareth 
God." By "this salvation" "all that believe are justified from all 
things from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses." 
(39th ver.) 

This must have been good news to a people apprehensive of evil 
because of their shortcomings under the law, and at this point they 



must have been getting anxious to hear what Paul had to say further 
on the subject. Perhaps some of them were beginning to think that 
they could live very loosely, released from the servitude of the law. 

(Alas for poor, weak human nature; how readily it would cling to 
its moral corruption were it not for the apprehension of evil in 
consequence?) 

But Paul evidently anticipated such a construction, and said: 
"Beware, therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken of in 
the prophets." (40th ver.) 

We can imagine the look of surprise on the faces of those law- 
abiding fathers who had begun to think of the policy of believing in 
Christ, that they might be justified not "from" but in "all things." 

Is it not to be feared that many now get almost if not quite as 
limited a view of "this salvation?" To such let the "Beware, 
therefore, " of Paul ring out clear and distinct. 

Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish, for I work a work in 
your days, a work which ye shall in nowise believe, though a man 
should declare it unto you. (41st ver.) 

Here Paul ended his talk for that time, and it is quite certain that 
they had not yet seen the "offense of the cross," for the next 
Sabbath "almost the whole city" came out to hear him. But let us 
notice the prophecy in connection with the last sentence of Paul's 
speech, above referred to: (Don't lose the connection; the passage is 
in Isaiah 29:14.) "For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, 
and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. " 

What! Is it possible that "this salvation" is of such a character that 
the wisdom of their wise men fails to comprehend it? And cannot 
the understanding of their prudent men grasp it? No, indeed, it 
cannot; IT is (for the present) THE "stone of stumbling, and for a 
rock of offense to both the houses of Israel."— Isaiah 8:14. And the 
failure of their wise men to see (recognize) this, and the nature of 
the work itself, are facts, which Paul said they would not believe, 
though a man should declare it unto them. It is a pretty hard matter 
to conclude that the wisdom of their wise men has wandered so far 
from the truth that their counsel amounts to nothing, and is 
perished; but that is what the prophet said would come to pass at a 
future time, and is what Paul gave them to understand was 
imminent then, and is what we understand to have taken place in its 
full import now. The wisdom of their wise men has perished, and 
the understanding of their prudent men is hid. 

Wherein? does some one ask. In that their conclusions and teaching 
make confusion of His Word, and imply a failure of God's designs 
or "plan. " They allow that God provided for the salvation of all 
men; that is, he planned to accomplish that, but the subtlety of the 
enemy and the perversity of man were so great that his purpose is 
but partly accomplished; that is to say, that only a few will receive 
any benefit from the death of Christ. That though Christ came to 



"destroy the works of the devil," yet demons and lost spirits will 
forever exist in conscious misery, and that it is imprudent to teach 
otherwise. Is this not equivalent to saying that the plan of God fails 
of accomplishment; and is it not a confirmation of the prophetic 
statement that "the wisdom of your wise men shall perish?" 

The word teaches that "in the last days" (of this age) "evil men and 
seducers shall wax worse and worse" (2 Tim. 3:1,13); but their wise 
men tell us the world is growing better and better, and yet a late 
secular paper of some note said that crimes were becoming so 
frequent that they, in their weekly issue, could only make a 
statement of them, not having room for particulars. 

R353 : page 6 

It is a fact, not an assumption, but a solemn fact, that we are now 
living in a time when crime and corruption have assumed 
prodigious proportions, not only in the lower grades of society, but 
in what are called the upper grades. Even all the machinery of 
church and state seems to be so rotten that many are exclaiming, 
without knowing that their utterances are the fulfillment of the spirit 
of prophecy: "I don't know what we are coming to!" Thus already 
their hearts are beginning to "fail them for fear, and for looking 
after those things which are coming on the earth." Luke 21:26. 

No sane man to-day, unless he is trying to sustain a creed, fails to 
see (recognize) that thrones stand unsteady, and that throughout the 
world there is a feeling of distrust among all classes; there is 
"perplexity." Luke 21:25. Verily, the foundations of the earth do 
shake. But it is only the beginning of God's "controversy with the 
people. " Plain as these things seem to those who are looking, yet 
the "wise" (?) men say "peace and safety." 

"All things continue as they were from the beginning of the 
creation." 2 Peter 3:4. 

Not very long ago we were speaking in a public place about the 
application of the prophecy in Isaiah 2:4, and showing that it had its 
application in a coming age and under a different ruling power, and 
the teacher (preacher) present said that it was now, in this age. We 
told him we thought if so it should read in the last clause of the 
verse "and they shall learn war more and more" instead of "no 
more," for earth trembles with the thunder of cannon and shock of 
contending armies, and millions fall in this lake of fire and 
brimstone. Wonderful improvements in instruments of death are 
frequent. "Prepare war" (Joel 3:9,10) is the prophecy to apply now, 
and is beginning to have its fulfillment, but the understanding of the 
"prudent" (?) men does not discern it. It is a fact which the 
spiritually minded plainly see, that the portion of prophecy which is 
having and is about to have its fulfillment is as completely hidden 
"from the wise and prudent" of this time as it was from the wise and 
prudent at the time of Christ's first coming. Now, if the prophecies 
relating to earthly matters of this time are so utterly misunderstood 
by the wise and "prudent" men, shall we wonder that but few will 



see the grandeur and glory of "THIS salvation" until the 
accumulation of evidence shall be so great that the "sons of God" 
shall be MANIFEST? 

Some of our former friends may think we are not very prudent nor 
modest because "we use great plainness of speech," and may be 
ready to say: "No doubt ye are the men, and wisdom will die with 
you," to which we would reply that the wisdom spoken of above, 
and that God by the mouth of the prophet said should perish, the 
wisdom of this world (age) has died with us; we have no reputation 
for such wisdom and make no pretensions to it. What we have seen 
has been shown to us in the Word because we were simple "babes." 
Matt. 11:25. 

The next Sabbath Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and let the secret 
out to those who were simple enough to understand. In the 47th 
verse the eye of faith discovers "this salvation." "For so hath the 
Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a light of the 
Gentiles that thou shouldst be for salvation to the ends of the earth." 

In Isaiah 42:6,7 the same mystery is spoken of. "I the Lord have 
called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will give 
thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; to open 
the blind eyes, to bring the prisoners from the prison, and them that 
sit in darkness out of the prison house. " 

Let him that readeth understand. 

In Isaiah 49:6 that which the wise and prudent call an impossibility 
and absurdity, viz. : restitution is called a light thing for the Lord, 
and then he tells what he will also do. 

"It is a light thing that thou shouldst be my servant to raise up the 
tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel. I will also 
give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be for 
salvation to the ends of the earth. " 

"Therefore, having girded up the LOINS of your MIND, and being 
vigilant, do you hope perfectly for the GIFT to be brought to you at 
the revelation of Jesus Christ? As obedient children do not conform 
yourselves to the former lust in your IGNORANCE; but as HE who 
CALLED you is holy, do you also become holy in all your conduct. 
For it has been written, you shall be holy because I am holy. " 1 
Peter 1:13,16 (E. Diaglott.) 

"He that hath ears to hear let him hear." 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R353 : page 6 



"MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN." 

We desire to correct an error into which some of our readers have 
fallen, relative to this work, which we hope soon to put in press, 



and a notice of which appeared in our last issue. We wish you to 
understand that this work is not a revision of the book called "DAY 
DAWN, OR THE GOSPEL IN TYPE AND PROPHECY." It will 
be a totally different book, except that some of the same subjects 
will be treated, among others. We would have the new work and all 
our publications judged on their own merits, as in or out of 
harmony with the Word of God; therefore would not wish to have 
them confounded with others. 

Our object in calling our forthcoming publication, "MILLENNIAL 
DAY DAWN," is this: The pamphlet "Food for Thinking 
Christians, " published in England and in this country, and 
circulated to an enormous extent, contains a reference to a book 
called "Day Dawn. " The work we desired to commend to them by 
that notice was the old "Day Dawn," the edition of which is now 
almost exhausted. And we now desire that notice to apply to the 
"MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN." To secure to the readers of "Food" 
and others, a work in harmony with the teachings of that pamphlet, 
is the object in publishing our new work; and to associate the 
advertisement and the book we desire the readers to have, is our 
object in including in its name the old name. 

There is a book published called "DAY DAWNING," and we learn 
of one soon to be published entitled "DAY DAWN OR GOSPEL 
IN TYPE AND PROPHECY"- "REVISED EDITION," advanced 
sheets of which, we have received. Neither of these works are in 
harmony with the book "Day Dawn," advertised in "Food," nor 
with any publications issued from this office. We make this 
statement in order that none shall confound MILLENNIAL DAY 
DAWN" with any other. 

We still have a number of copies of old "DAY DAWN," cloth 
bound, at the reduced price of 50 cents each. 

R353 : page 7 

We have written, suggesting to the Christian brother who is about 
to call his new work, "Day Dawn," etc., that some change should be 
made in its title, as it is liable to be confounded with the original 
work of that name. Since the two works will be fundamentally 
different, each should stand on its own merit. 

Should the author persist in calling his forth-coming work by 
precisely the same name, he should not be surprised if the inference 
drawn, is, that he desires to appropriate the world-wide 
advertisement given the original "Day Dawn," both by its publisher, 
Bro. A. D. Jones, and through the WATCH TOWER publications. 
WATCH TOWER publications gave over sixteen hundred thousand 
(1,600,000) free notices and warm commendations of "Day Dawn" 
without money or price, because of the TRUTHS which it 
contained. (Not that we have ever considered it free from all error, 
but because of its many and fundamental truths.) 



We question both the justice and propriety of calling any new work 
by precisely the same name as an old one from which it so widely 
differs- the reputation of which name has been built up by those 
who agreed with the principles of the original. 



R353 : page 7 

THE CHILDREN OF CHRIST. 

We have heretofore noticed that one of the titles of Christ is "The 
Everlasting Father. " We saw that to be a Father at all, implies that 
there must be children. We looked to see where and when and who, 
these children may be. We found that Jesus is not the Father (life 
giver) to the church which is his body; but that "The God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, hath begotten us. " ( 1 Pet. 1 :3.) We 
found that Jesus for this cause was not ashamed to call US brethren, 
saying: "I will declare thy name unto my brethren." (Heb. 2:11,12.) 

We found, however, that when Jesus and his brethren, or, Jesus and 
his bride, or, Jesus and his body, are made ONE-the Christ 
complete: then that anointed ONE, will be the restorer of life to 
humanity. That ONE will be the Father (life giver) to the race. We 
found many Scriptures in harmony with this, and now notice 
another which we believe is explainable in no other way, viz: 
"Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest 
make princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 

R354 : page 7 

The context brings to our attention, the King of Kings-Jehovah; 
the King's Son, our Lord Jesus; and a number of the King's 
daughters, all pure and honorable women. The word King's is in the 
possessive singular form, and refers to Jehovah, though it is 
mistranslated in the plural. (See "Young's Concordance.") Chief 
among these her companions, is the Bride of the King's Son. 
Concerning this Bridegroom and his Bride, this Psalm principally 
treats. 

We read, "Unto the Son, He (Jehovah) saith, Thy throne, O God 
(mighty one) is forever and ever, a scepter of righteousness is the 
scepter of thy kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness and hated 
iniquity; therefore God, thy God (the mighty one above even thee,) 
hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows "-or as 
head over his brethren and fellow heirs, (vs. 6,7. and Heb. 1:8,9.) 

The "little flock" of overcomers, of this age, now "espoused to one 
husband, even Christ," will soon be "the queen in the gold of 
Ophir"-clothed in the glory, honor and immortality of the divine 
(gold) nature. She will be at the "right hand" of her Lord -the place 
of favor. 

She is addressed in her present espoused condition, and told how 
she may best prepare for her high calling and future station- 



"Hearken O daughter (of Jehovah) and consider, and incline thine 
ear"-Give attention to Jehovah's instructions— search the 
Scriptures-learn of him. "Forget also thine own people and thy 
father's house"— forget the world, its vanities, its smiles, its frowns, 
its praises and its scorn— Be dead to the world. "So shall the King 
greatly desire thy beauty. " Have respect only to His approval, His 
smile, His praise and His frown; "for He is thy Lord and worship 
thou him. " 

Another description of the "queen" is given: "The King's 
(Jehovah's) daughter is all glorious within: It is beauty of 
character). Her clothing is of wrought gold. She shall be brought 
unto the King in raiment of needlework. The virgins her 
companions (the "honorable women") that follow her, shall be 
brought unto thee. " The victors and overcomers of past ages, as 
well as those of the "great company" of this age, (Rev. 7:15) shall 
be brought into the King's blessings; but they follow the queen. 
"They without us shall not be made perfect." (Heb. 11:40.) 

Then follows the words we have under special consideration, 
addressed to the united one-the Christ; "Instead of thy fathers, shall 
be thy children, whom thou mayest make rulers (princes) in all the 
earth." 

The term "fathers" was a very common one among the Jews, and 
generally referred to the head or chief men of that nation, and to the 
Patriarchs of the preceding age, and would be but another way of 
saying Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the Prophets. This is a clear and 
forcible statement of what we have found taught by other 
Scriptures. We found that Jesus is the Head, Leader and Forerunner 
of all who ever reach the Divine nature as his bride and joint heirs; 
that the overcomers of the preceding age, though heirs of some 
"gifts," "callings" and "promises of God," which are sure to be 
accurately fulfilled, were not heirs of the "high calling. " 

It is readily seen who were the fathers; but how— in WHAT sense 
can they ever become the children of the Christ? We reply, they (as 
all mankind) will receive their restored, perfected human life 
directly from the glorified Christ, who in this respect will become 
their father or life giver. And if the Christ thus become their father, 
they are the children of the Christ. Thus the fathers become instead, 
the children. The promise toward these is, "whom thou mayest 
make princes (rulers) in all the earth. " What a grand position that 
will be for those tried and tested worthies. How necessary too, in 
harmony with the general plan, will be these "princes" of earth on 
the earthly plane, as the agency through which the spiritual 
company will bless all nations. 

Thus too, will be fulfilled God's promise to Abraham: "In THEE," 
and "in thy SEED shall all nations be blessed." (Gen. 12:3 and 
22:18.) The seed is the Christ, but Abraham was no part of that 
seed— but he as well (and as we have just seen, under and as the 
child of Christ) is to share in the work of blessing. This perfecting 



of the fathers, and making them the rulers on the human plane, will, 
to our understanding, be the beginning of the earthly phase of the 
kingdom of God. That kingdom shall ultimately fill the whole earth 
and include all men. Those not assimilating with it, will be cut off 
during the Millennial age-the second death. 

But does some one inquire: if the fathers become children, does it 
not imply that the children also, will partake of the Divine nature 
and lose the human? No, we answer, to be a father or to give life, 
does not imply that the children will partake of their fathers nature; 
for instance, Jehovah is the life-giver or Father of men, also of 
angels and also of the "new creatures" of which Jesus is the head. 
But these represent three different natures-human, angelic and 
Divine. To all of these, Jehovah is Father, yet only one of them is of 
his own Divine nature. (Luke 3:38; Job 38:7; Matt. 3:17; 1 John 
3:2; 2 Pet. 1:4.) 

In the case now considered, the Christ becomes the father not by a 
direct creation, but by restoring life lost, to a race already created. 
To be a restoration, it must become perfected in the same nature in 
which it was originally created— human nature. 

This making of the children princes in all the earth, calls to mind 
another scripture which harmonizes beautifully with it, viz: "A 
King shall reign in righteousness and Princes* shall rule in 
judgment"— to "act as magistrates"— Young. The Divine family are 
all Kings: Jehovah is the "King of Glory," the "King eternal." The 
entire company of Jehovah's anointed-The Christ- will be kings. 
"Thou hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests." (Rev. 5:10.) 
And their head and captain, Jesus is "King of Kings." 

Tell the whole world the blessed tidings, 
Speak of the time of rest that nears; 
Tell the oppressed of ev'ry nation, 
Jubilee lasts a thousand years. 

A thousand years, Earth's coming glory, 
'Tis the glad day so long foretold; 
'Tis the bright morn of Zion's glory, 
Prophets foretold in times of old. " 



*Jesus is called a Prince several times; but in both Greek and 
Hebrew the words mean, not prince but leader. 



R354 : page 7 



PALESTINE AND THE JEWS. 

Writing to the Jewish World, "a Russian Jew" says his brethren in 
Russia "are bent on emigrating at the earliest opportunity," but they 
do not wish to change the Russo-Jewish question to an American or 
Spanish Jewish question, but endeavor, with God's help to solve it 



once and for always in a manner promising to be permanent. " 
"Unmistakably," he says, "their goal is the colonization of 
Palestine. In almost every town in Romania, and in some of the 
principal cities of Russia, there have been formed Palestine 
Emigration Societies with funds of their own; and although the 
Russian government has not yet expressed its opinion on the 
movement there is a strong hope that it will not run counter to it. 
Long ago the wish had taken root among them, and having waited 
some time in vain for their Western brethren to take the initiative in 
the enterprise, they have at last of themselves taken the matter 
earnestly in hand. They have chosen Palestine, not on account of 
any wild dreams of ambition in the immediate future, but because it 
alone promises to supply the felt and universal requisite of a 
permanent abode, besides its possessing other qualities, such as the 
absence in it of undue competition, its proximity, to Russia, and the 
traditional friendliness of the Turkish government toward the 
Jews." 

Mr. Lawrence Oliphant, in a letter to the Times, dated 1 1th of 
February, also mentions the existence of the Romanian societies 
referred to, several of which have made appeals to him to aid them 
in their plans. He says: 

"The dominant idea of the Eastern Jew, whatever may be that of his 
co-religionist in Western countries, is to return to Palestine. This 
sentiment is not confined to the poorer classes, many of whom may 
wish to go there in order to share in the charity which their richer 
co-religionists dispense all over Europe for their support; but the 
desire to return to the land of their forefathers is extremely strong, 
even among the more wealthy members of the community, whose 
highest ambition is to become landed proprietors on the soil 
endeared to them by the most cherished traditions. They are 
deterred from doing so partly from fear that they might be subject 
to extortions from the local officials, and partly by their ignorance 
of agricultural pursuits. Nevertheless, more than one wealthy Jew is 
carrying on farming operations successfully in Palestine, and a 
colony was formed about five years ago near Lydda. " 

"In regard to Russia," he says, "The correspondent of the Jewish 
Chronicle, in a letter dated Jerusalem, 27th January, writes: 'The 
movement for emigration to this country appears to extend more 
and more in Russia. From divers places envoys have arrived here 
charged to secure eligible sites for their brethren, 

R355 : page 7 

who are to follow next spring. A Russian gentleman has assured me 
that many Jewish capitalists of his country were firmly resolved to 
settle at Jaffa, in order to erect factories there. I have seen letters 
from old rabbis of the strictest orthodoxy, declaring that whoever 
puts his hand to the working of the soil of the Holy Land acts more 
meritoriously than he who passed his time day and night with the 
study of the Beth Hamedrash.'" 



The Times supports his appeal to some extent in a leading article, 
from which we quote a sentence or two: 

"The Jew is in many countries not a stranger; in Syria and Palestine 
his race is at home. Palestine is a land of rocks and wilderness, 
which it would tax a wealthy empire to reclaim, but with intervals 
of the most fruitful soil, waiting only the husbandman to be 
converted from a waste into a garden. Religion forbids the Jew to 
ever forget Judea. He has always longed to see colonists of his race 
return to it. The men are available, through the savageness of a 
mob, to take up the Hebrew inheritance. Resources seem also fast 
flowing in, through the pity of civilized nations, sufficient to replant 
the Jew in the seat of his forefathers. Such is the scheme which Mr. 
Oliphant presents to us." 

We have before expressed our opinion that some portion of the 
Jewish people would be replanted in their ancient city and land 
without having been converted to belief in the claims of Jesus to be 
their Messiah, and would be in course of time subjected there to a 
final invasion and siege by their Gentile enemies, from which they 
would be delivered by "Him whom they had pierced." (Zech. 12:9- 
10.) It is not our province to say by what means this partial 
resettlement is to be brought about. But we watch and record with 
ever-increasing interest those events of our time which seem 
bringing it nearer the range of actual fulfillment. -Messenger. 



R355 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Bro. R. I have been reading in "Food" pp. 125 to 130, and 
cannot understand how a resurrected being will possess knowledge 
of past life, unless there be something more than body and life. I 
think there must be an unexplainable something which does not die- 
-which people generally call soul. 

Ans. Read it over two or three times very carefully with this 
thought, viz: Being, or individuality, or what some call soul, is that 
conscious existence which comes as a result of the union of life 
principle with organized matter. Let us illustrate: Suppose a steam 
pump; without the steam it is motionless. Turn on the steam and the 
motionless machine begins to perform its work— the water flows. If 
you shut off the steam, or break the pump, the water ceases to flow. 
If you repair it again and connect perfectly, water will flow again to 
the pump's capacity. The pump represents the human body. The 
steam represents life as a principle or power. And the flowing 
water, represents thought which is the result of the combination of 
life with the finest and most delicate physical organism -the brain. 

The illustration would be the same applied to lower animals than 
man, for we may suppose various sizes and qualities and capacities 
of pumps. 



Ques. Please explain more fully the method of counting the number 
of the beast and image. I could not fully comprehend this part of the 
January number. 

Ans. We gave several of the names of the Beast and Image. Each of 
those names will be found to contain exactly 18 letters, or three 
sixes, which written numerically, form the number 666. This 
corresponds with the number designated (Rev. 13:18.) and proves 
that we have a correct application of the symbols (Beast and Image) 
of this chapter. 

Read in the January number again, and be sure you see it clearly 
enough to prevent your being of those worshiping the Beast or his 
Image, or receiving his mark, or the number of his name. Those 
who are worshipers and marked thus, are not reckoned of the 
overcomers who shall sit with Christ in his throne. See Rev. 20:4. 

Ques. (No. 1.) A recent writer says, (not a WATCH TOWER 
writer,) on the 9th page of a pamphlet, that the text (Eph. 1:5.) "The 
adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself," means, that 
during the ages to come, Christ will be the Father, and the Church 
the Mother of the nations, by the law of re-generation. Eph. 1 :5 
does not seem to teach this to my understanding. Please give me 
your view. 

Ans. That the Christ (head and body complete) is Scripturally 
called the "Everlasting Father" of the human family in general, we 
believe, and have expressed in a previous issue, under the heading 
"The Everlasting Father. " The same is also treated in this paper- 
"Children of Christ. " However, we agree with your criticism of 
Eph. 1 :5. That verse, if read in its connection, will be clearly seen 
to teach, that we are children of Our Father Jehovah- through or by 
means of Christ Jesus. We refer you to the Diaglott rendering of 
this verse-see "Extract from a Letter," in another column (page 2). 

Ques. (No. 2.) The same writer says, that "The Papal Church 
system, as a counterfeit, represents the true church. As the 
counterfeit existed before her complete union (marriage) with the 
kings of the earth, and their joint reign began; so the true church 
exists before her complete union (marriage) with the true king of 
earth and their joint reign, begins. The union in either case involves 
the exaltation to power, in contrast with the former subjection and 
suffering. Additions were made to the Papal Church after her 
exaltation, and during her reign. If this has been so of the 
counterfeit- will it not be so of the true? There was a thousand 
years reign of the Papal system during which she was adding to 
herself, before she gave birth to her daughters in the Reformation. 
So there will be a thousand years reign of the true church," etc. 

What I would like to ask is— How do you understand this? How far 
is it safe to follow a counterfeit as a guide? Is not a counterfeit to be 
detected by its difference or variance from the genuine? If Papacy 
was exactly what the true kingdom should be, who can know that it 
is not the genuine? 



Ans. Your question is long but good. We must answer briefly. 

We long since called attention to Papacy as a counterfeit, and as a 
harlot "mother of harlots." But when did the harlotry begin? 
Certainly not until united with the Roman Empire. So also, there 
was a time when she began to be a counterfeit, and ceased to be of 
the true virgin of Jesus. The counterfeit, we think, consisted not in 
counterfeiting suffering as this writer would teach, but in 
counterfeiting our coming glory and reign. Yes, Papacy assumes 
that since her exaltation to power, she as the Bride of Christ, is 
reigning over earth. It is thus she counterfeits the true reign of the 
true bride soon to commence. 

This carrying of a type or counterfeit too far to make it prove a 
theory, is an error to which humanity seems very liable. Let us see 
how absurd it would be to follow the plan suggested by the article 
you quote. Suppose it for the moment:— Additions were made to the 
counterfeit church; therefore additions will be made to the true 
church when she is exalted. The members of the counterfeit church 
died, even the head (Popes) being displaced by death; therefore in 
the real kingdom the true church will be subject to death —yea, even 
the head of it (Jesus) also. The counterfeit abused the power she 
possessed; therefore the true will do so. The counterfeit finally 
became so corrupt that uproar and a Reformation movement, led to 
the establishment of reformation churches who opposed and 
Protested against the errors of the mother church; THEREFORE the 
true church will become corrupt, have the same experiences and 
similar daughters. At the end of her 1,000 years' reign Papacy got 
into terrible trouble, and lost her power and authority; 
THEREFORE- What? The legitimate conclusions are manifestly 
absurd. 

We would think it a poor plan to make genuine dollars like 
counterfeits in every respect. It would be far better to look for the 
original outline which the counterfeit in some respects had copied, 
and from it, form our ideas. 

One general mistake made in judging of the Papal church is to 
suppose that it is "Congregational," i.e., that the congregation is any 
part of the church. It is what is known as "Episcopal," i.e., there is a 
church hierarchy, which rules over the laiety. The Roman church 
represents the very extreme of Episcopacy. It recognizes three 
classes; first the hierarchy or church proper, which consists of 
Bishops, Arch bishops, Cardinals, and the Pope; secondly, the 
priests or brethren, who are the direct servants of the church; 
thirdly, the people, who are called the children of the church. 

This outline of their government, resembles what we are told of the 
true church glorified: First will be the Hierarchy-the overcomers 
with Christ at their head, all reigning. (So in the Roman church, 
Cardinals and Bishops have the Pope at their head- yet all are in 
authority.) Second, the "great company" before the throne, who 
serve— the second company not overcomers, who come to spiritual 



conditions "through great tribulation." (Rev. 7:14,15.) These will be 
brethren. (These correspond to the priests-the brothers-servants 

R356 : page 8 

of the Roman church or hierarchy.) Third, the people of earth, as 
fast as they come into harmony with the kingdom, will, we have 
seen, be regarded and called the children of the church or hierarchy. 
(So Papacy calls its adherents the children of the church.) 

Ques. Please explain David's words: "Let them go down quick into 
hell." (Psa. 55:15.) It seems to teach that there is at present a hell 
for the wicked; but David does not seem to have much love for his 
enemies. 

Ans. The word here translated hell is sheol, and signifies the 
condition of death or the tomb. Both good and bad people go to 
sheol (tomb); Jesus went there. David says, speaking prophetically 
for Jesus- "Thou wilt not leave my soul (me) in hell" (the tomb) 
Psa. 16:10, compare with Acts 2:27, where Peter explains. The 
Greek word there translated "hell" is hades, and has the same 
meaning as sheol— the tomb. David sees the doings of the wicked, 
and prays that they may soon die, and thus cease to work mischief. 
Had David prayed that they might go to a place of torture it would 
indeed reveal a dreadful condition of mind, and no wonder you 
might feel shocked. But remember that if it would seem wicked in 
David, it would be ten thousand times more awful for Jehovah to 
provide such an endless torture as some suppose. It must be modern 
theology that is at fault, for Jehovah, David, and Paul seem to have 
the same mind on this subject. Paul said, "I would that they were 
even cut off which trouble you"— i.e., let them go down quick into 
death, and Jehovah says, "I took them away as I saw good." The 
key is found in the fact that the age for the world's trial is the 
coming one, when all shall be made to know God and his truth 
under favorable circumstances. See Psa. 136:1 to 26. 

Ques. Dear Brother-Please explain 2 Thes. 1:9. 

Ans. Verses 7 to 10 should be read in connection. The last says it 
will be "in that day," which we understand to refer to the Millennial 
day— the seventh (1,000 year) day- "the last day" of sin, in which it 
will be forever wiped out. 

Now the saints may be troubled, and God may seem careless of 
their interests in allowing their enemies to prosper and oppose 
them. But there comes a time in which it will be different; the Lord, 
at his coming, will exercise his power; the saints will rest, and all 
ungodliness will be brought under subjection. In that day the 
knowledge of the Lord will fill the earth, and any who then fail to 
know (appreciate his character) shall be wilfully culpable, and any 
who accept not the "glad tidings" will themselves be to blame. All 
such shall be "punished with everlasting DESTRUCTION." 
Destruction means preservation in misery just as much as death 
means life in misery, and no class but theologians would so twist 



and turn words so opposite in their significance. Thus do they wrest 
the Scriptures, defame their Author, torment his children, and make 
infidels of the world-ignorantly (?), while boasting of their 
scholastic learning. 



DANVILLE, P.Q. 

Ques. DEAR BRO. R.:...I am laboring as the Lord's servant among 
Christians in general, making my church home specially with the 
Episcopal Church. Is not this right? Am I not doing as Jesus did 
when he went into the Jewish synagogues? If not right, why not?... 

Ans. We believe that every member of the body of Christ is, like 
the Head, anointed to preach the glad tidings. Not all publicly, but 
each according to his or her ability. We are to preach Christ by 
every word, look, and act of life. But what are we to preach with 
reference to the Christ now? Is there a special message at this time? 
Yes, it is harvest time, and the ripe wheat of the Gospel Church is 
to be separated from the tares, just as the ripe wheat of the Jewish 
church was separated from the chaff. Those thus gathered out are to 
complete the body of Christ. If you want to work in harmony with 
the Lord's plan, and if you find a field of wheat in the English 
church, even though mixed with tares, boldly make use of the sickle 
of truth. As you enter, being filled with the Spirit, you may be 
received and welcomed as was Jesus before the truth began to cut. 
Luke 4:15. But if you are faithful in proclaiming the truth, which is 
sharper than any two-edged sword, it will not be long before they 
will do with you as they did with Jesus. Luke 4:28,29. 

Thus Jesus forewarned us that we would be treated— Matt. 10:17; 
Mark 13:9; John 16:2; Matt. 10:24,25. He taught in various 
synagogues, carrying the same message, which always had the 
effect to draw the few and repel the many. The Jewish Church was 
not left desolate until five days before his crucifixion; so the Gospel 
church was spewed out of his mouth at the parallel point of time, 
1878, since which time the call has been, "Come out of her, my 
people. " As the disciples of Jesus met thereafter from house to 
house, but if bold for the truth, were no longer permitted in the 
Jewish synagogues, so we no longer meet with the Nominal Gospel 
church, which is now so overrun with tares, that the wheat cannot 
flourish. And wherever we find a grain of wheat still standing 
among the tares in the Nominal Church, we say by word and 
example, "Come out" where the storms of opposition, the sunshine 
of truth, and the showers of grace, may strengthen, develop, and 
ripen you. 



page 8 



BACK NUMBERS. 

As some have not understood, we repeat the notice, that the Oct., 
Nov. and Dec. issues of the WATCH TOWER are exhausted. And 
instead of re-publishing them as at first proposed, their leading 
topics will be treated in the forth-coming book Millennial Day 
Dawn. 



R356 : page 1 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1882. 

NO. 12. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R356 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The view is encouraging. The realization of our hopes seems to 
draw on apace with the gloom and perplexity of earth. Statesmen 
are alarmed at the fearlessness of anarchists. The representatives of 
Great Britain have been butchered in daylight in Ireland. In Russia 
the Nihilists are so bold and so numerous that the coronation of the 
present Czar has been postponed until now, and only with the 
greatest caution, are the arrangements now being made. Two 
attempts on the Czar's life have already been discovered and 
frustrated, one being to cause an explosion by use of electricity, and 
another prepared caps filled with explosives to be worn by Nihilists 
and thrown at the Czar during applause. The persecution of the 
Jews still continues in Russia and they are fleeing the country. The 
government has neglected to interfere boldly, probably because it 
hopes to thus appease the restless element of the population. 

Prussia which only a few years ago expelled the Bishops of Papacy, 
now feels the restlessness of socialism among her people, and is 
receiving back the Church of Rome with open arms, hoping thereby 
to maintain a stronger hold upon the people. 

France is threatened with serious difficulties through strikes- 
capital and labor coming more into conflict than heretofore. 

In this land, free from the extravagance and oppression of kings, 
there is no little trouble and perplexity. Capital and Labor are daily 
arraying themselves against each other more decidedly. Men of low 
estate, view with suspicion the rapid growth of large corporations 
and monopolies. Strikes are the order of the day and capitalists are 
sore distressed. Used to large incomes and intent on wealth and 
luxury, they feel that they cannot yield the laborer a larger share of 
the profits. Workmen covet a larger share of luxury and are 
groaning for what they cannot get until "Gentile Times" have ended 
and the kingdom of Christ is established in the earth. Yes, "the 
whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together". .."waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God" -waiting until the "little 
flock" is glorified and shall deliver them from the bondage of sin 
and death, into the liberty of sons of God. (Rom. 8:19-22.) 

We can sympathize with all these troubled classes-with kings in 
their supposed divine right to rule; with the restless peoples in their 
desires for liberty; with capitalists in their desires to have all the 
advantages which their wealth gives, and in their endeavor to 
maintain a superior social standing; and we can sympathize with the 
mechanic in his belief that all men are created free and with equal 
rights to the blessings of heaven; we can but agree to his logic also, 
that to obtain his rights from the world, he must insist on them. 

But while selfishness is the controlling motive among men, their 
different interests must necessarily conflict; and not until the 



kingdom of God is established can the rights of men be properly 
adjusted. 

The Church-both Papal and Protestant -is largely controlled by the 
influence of governments and wealthy men. It will rapidly become 
the tool and mouthpiece of these, and they all will go down 
together, fighting against God and liberty. (Rev. 19:19-20.) 

When these things now beginning to come to pass were published 
by us in 1876, men scoffed and asked if we were prophets. We 
answered no, but that God's Word as a telescope showed all these 
things and more, to the eye of faith. At the same time we showed 
that God's special favor was due to pass away from the nominal 

R357 : page 1 

Gospel Church though it would still continue to really consecrated 
individuals; and that the favor would return again in some form to 
the Jew in 1878 as foretold by Paul and the Prophets. (Rom. 11:25, 
Jer. 16:13,14.) At God's appointed time a Jew happened to be 
Premier of England; the famous Berlin conference happened to take 
place in that very year; and it happened that by that conference, 
Palestine was put under the protection of Great Britain; and since 
then it has been free to the Jew so that he may be a land-owner. 
Thus in the very year, it happened (?) that privileges and favors 
came to the Jew which he had not enjoyed for over 1800 years. 
Now they are being persecuted and driven out by various peoples, 
and many will go and are going to Palestine. 

Yet bear in mind, "Gentile Times" do not fully end as scripturally 
shown until 1914 A.D.; consequently their overthrow may be less 
rapid than would now seem probable. The trouble may be expected 
as birth pangs to a mother— each succeeding one more severe until 
full deliverance. This is Paul's illustration of it. (1 Thes. 5:3) It is in 
fact the birth of a new era or age; and its birth involves pain and 
death to the present age and its corrupt systems and customs. 

Let us remember, too, the words of Jesus, that "Jerusalem shall be 
trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be 
fulfilled. " Hence, if Gentile Times end in 1914, the Jews will not 
have an independent national existence before then. This furnishes 
ample time for their regathering and Jerusalem's rebuilding on her 
old heaps. 

As it has always been, so now the teachings of God's Word are not 
recognized even when thus strikingly fulfilled, except by those 
"taught of God." How true today- "Who hath believed our report 
(doctrine-teaching) and to whom is the arm (power) of the Lord 
revealed?" Only to a few-a little flock-his special favored friends, 
have the plans of the Great Architect been shown. 

As we look inward at the progress of truth, we find much to 
encourage and strengthen us. Among the hundreds of letters 
recently received one from the West tells how, from a torn fragment 
of ZION'S WATCH TOWER found wrapping a store parcel, 



nourishment and strength was gained, and an appetite for more 
produced-how by and by a letter from a friend in Massachusetts 
mentioned the same and gave our address. Now, they in turn have 
some to loan to neighbors. So it seems with all, who now hear the 
"glad tidings." Just as with the early church, all love to tell the 
story. It so warms and fills our own hearts that it becomes our 
greatest privilege and chief employ to— 

Tell the whole world the blessed tidings, 
Speak of the time of rest that nears; 
Tell the oppressed of every nation, 
Jubilee lasts a thousand years. 

It is wonderful, too, how ripe some seem to be for the message, by 
their promptness and obedience quite putting to shame some who 
have had far more instruction and privilege. We recall two 
instances of this sort reporting this month, the prompt obedience of 
whom, we can only attribute to full consecration to GOD. One 
brother in Texas, a Steward and Class-Leader in the M.E. Church, 
says he received and read "Food" very carefully. He felt convinced 
as to his duty, and had already resigned his connection with the 
church and become a free man in Christ, stepping out from the 
barriers of creeds to study the Word of God unbiased by human 
traditions. 

The other was a minister in the M.E. Church: He writes that he had 
received from some one, and read, the December and January 
numbers of the WATCH TOWER. Careful study of those papers 
and his Bible, convinced him that "the dear old Methodist Church is 
a part of the 'Image of the Beast;'" and while he loved it much, he 
loved Christ Jesus more and must obey God rather than men. He 
has cancelled his obligations to the M.E. Church and engaged as a 
servant (minister) of the Church "whose names are written in 
heaven." He says that Satan suggested that he retain his 
"parchment" as evidence of authority and right as a minister, but he 
gained the victory and concluded that a commission from the Lord 
was of superior value. 

Our efforts being mainly directed to the feeding of the sheep and 
lambs (those already in the fold— starving) we seldom learn of the 
effects of this "strong meat" upon the worldly. Three notable cases 
we might mention: One wrote to us from England, how, having lost 
all confidence in religious professors, he had become a scoffer and 
was on the downward grade. He received a copy of "Food," and 
became enraptured with the real beauties of God's character and 
plan. He donated $25 to the tract fund and has given and loaned 
many of the pamphlets to others where he feels sure they will do 
good. Two of other cases report this month; one had been, he 
writes, profane and unbelieving but the reading of "Food" had been 
greatly blessed to him and he will henceforth be a reformed man. 
We make an extract from the letter of the other. 



Reports from the brethren laboring in a public way, are 
encouraging. Bro. Sunderlin reports interesting meetings near 
Arlington, N.Y. Bros. Leigh and Spears have started on a trip down 
the Ohio river in a small boat belonging to the latter. They purpose 
(D.V.) to visit all the river towns between here and Cincinnati or St. 
Louis, spending about a week at each. This will require all summer 
or longer. The Lord bless them and their hearers, as also all the 
brethren holding forth the word of life-the glad tidings of great joy. 
We subjoin extracts from a few letters. 



NOTTINGHAM, ENG., April 13, 1882. 

MY DEAR SIR:— I should esteem it a favor if you would send me a 
dozen copies of "Food for Thinking Christians" and about the same 
number of "Tabernacle Teachings." Eternity alone will reveal the 
good these books are doing, and several of my friends here are 
hungering for more information upon these great themes. 

I lend my WATCH TOWER every 

R357 : page 2 

month, and look eagerly for each new one. May God continue to 
bless the work. Yours in Him, 

. (A Minister.) 



MULHOLLON, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I received the book safely. I am very glad to 
say that I am very much interested in the truth, and I feel thankful 
that it has been placed within my reach. I call you brethren because 
I feel you are such. These glorious teachings have brought me from 
the broad road to destruction and have placed me on the road that 
leads to life. I have been for a few years back a poor drunkard and a 
profane swearer, till about a year and a half ago, when, through 
God's loving kindness Bro. Keith came here and declared the 
glorious teachings of Gods Word. And I thank God that I now have 
been begotten of the spirit; and I am willing to present this life and 
this body a living sacrifice to God. I am willing to give my all for 
Jesus and the glad tidings. I thank God that I am what I am and he 
is helping me to understand His Word. 

With kind wishes, your brother, 
page 2 
ROSEVILLE, ILL. 



MY DEAR BROTHER:-I sincerely thank you for advice and 
encouragement in your last letter. My deepest gratitude, however, I 
owe to our Heavenly Father, for I begin to realize how he uses his 
agencies in the manifestation of his love. If Jesus condescends to 
recognize so unworthy an object as me, I will rejoice and continue 
to strive, so to run, as to obtain the prize of the high calling. 

The "Tabernacle Tract" and January number of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER were rich feasts of spiritual food to my hungry soul. My 
feelings can best be described by the language of the two Apostles, 
who unknowingly had talked with Jesus, on their way to Emmaus 
after his resurrection: "Did not our hearts burn within us." Oh what 
joy to the Christians' heart, is the hope that we shall reign with 
Jesus evermore. All the Tracts and papers you sent me I have tried 
to loan judiciously. The Tabernacle tract and January number of 
TOWER are so excellent, I want you to send me some of each; also 
about ten copies more of "Food." Enclosed find ($10.00) ten dollars 
to be added to the Tract Fund. May the Lord greatly magnify your 
efforts for good, and lead all his children to an action of duty, 
through the spirit of love and obedience. Hoping and striving for 
increased light and knowledge of the Scriptures and to be aided by 
your efforts, I remain your brother, through fellowship in the Spirit. 



R357 : page 2 

The colored minister who desired a Diaglott has been supplied. 
Four persons sent pay for him. We like this; it is the right spirit. As 
requested, the overplus was added to the tract fund. 



R357 : page 2 

"CHANGE YOUR MINDS." 

MATT. 3:2. 

(See Young's Concordance under word repent.) 

Stability of character and purpose are qualities which we all admire. 
We like the man upon whom we can depend. To know that a man is 
what is commonly termed fickle, is to make us distrustful; for the 
course which he will pursue to-day, is not an index of what he will 
be or do tomorrow. With such a man we cannot do business with 
pleasure, and so will have no more to do with him than we are 
obliged to. Of such a man it is said, "He has no mind of his own," 
he has no settled character; he is driven hither and thither by 
circumstances, so takes no root and withers away. Such a man has 
not much influence, because people do not know where to find him, 
nor what to expect of him. 

Again, the man who never changes is a hard man to deal with; you 
know where to find him always, to be sure; he is fixed; he has a 
purpose of his own, and if it is not like yours, the reason, in his 



mind, is, that yours is good for nothing. You need not undertake to 
move him, he is settled, he is established, he has become fossilized. 
The world moves on and leaves him behind. You may go to the 
spot where you left him, though it be a decade after, and there you 
will find him glorying in his unchangeable nature. "He is wise in 
his own conceit." Not willing to "receive instruction," he is not 
bothered with having to change his mind; such a man will have to 
learn by some other mode than precept. Let us be glad that our 
Heavenly Father has provided more than one mode of instruction. 

Now, both these characters are wrong, they are extremes, and it is 
hard to tell which is the most to be shunned; perhaps the latter, for 
he may be always wrong, while the former will be right at least part 
of the time; but a not over sanguine temperament would better 
comport with limited knowledge, and a sufficient 

R358 : page 2 

amount of firmness would meet and repel evil assault. 

Change of mind is a necessary operation with all finite creatures, so 
far as we know, because their knowledge is imperfect. An 
important part of man's work in this world should be, at proper 
times, to change his mind. Show us a man who never changes his 
mind, and we will show you a man who never makes any additions 
to his knowledge, or else is a bigot, which is usually about the 
same. 

There is but one character in the universe who never changes his 
mind, i.e., the Almighty, Allwise, and Eternal God. Because his 
knowledge is perfect he need not change his mind, or perhaps more 
properly, he need not change. "But," says some one, "the Bible says 
he repented because he had made man. How is that?" Though that 
is a little irrelevant, we will stop a moment to consider it, as it is 
often brought up by skeptics. How could God's change of conduct 
toward man be expressed to him, in the childhood of the race, in 
other and better language? Some have said in explanation that it 
meant that he changed his purpose; but this answer was not 
satisfactory for the reason that it did not change the meaning, but 
only the word. 

Let us use an illustration; our Heavenly Father provides them in 
abundance. Suppose that a little boy having no knowledge of 
horticulture should see his father planting apple-seeds, and after 
awhile should see him trans-planting the young trees; he might 
inquire, Father, what made you plant your apple-seeds there? Why 
didn't you plant them where you wanted them to remain? The father 
might reply, I did want them there then, but now I do not; I have 
changed my mind; now I want them to stand where they will have 
more room, etc. It would be difficult to explain to the child-mind 
the broad plan of the father, but he can be made to see clearly that 
there has been a change. In this illustration the father changed one 
part of his plan as it related to another part of the same plan, i.e., 
there was, to one not understanding his plan, an apparent change of 



purpose, and one, too, not in harmony with the original design, and 
yet it was all in the mind and design of the father from the first. So 
with our Heavenly Father. He communicates with us according to 
our understanding, and if our hearts were right, we should not so 
readily misunderstand him. He speaks of things as they seem to us, 
and not always as they really are, and we do the same, and think it 
all right enough when we do it. He speaks to us of the sun's rising 
and setting, and we do too, whereas we know that it is only 
apparent; let us reason the same with this word repent, and we shall 
have no further trouble. So we increase in knowledge and grace, we 
shall understand him better, and in just the proportion that we grow 
in knowledge, we change our minds, or "repent"; at least that is 
what we should do. By this we do not wish to be understood as 
saying that we should ignore all that we have passed over, or that a 
change of mind involves a condemnation of all our former 
opinions, but that our minds should change something as the trees 
change from small to large, from a few to many branches, and from 
blossom to fruit; and in doing this we gradually put away the 
former things; for the tree had to pass through its sappling 
condition, before it could extend its far-reaching branches. So we 
pass through the transitions of mind and character. 

There are special seasons when important changes should take 
place both in the physical and moral world. This time in which John 
was speaking was one of those seasons. The fullness of time had 
come and God had sent his Son into the world to realize to the 
world the signification of the "types and shadows" of the Jewish 
ceremonial. For many centuries these shadows had been indicating 
"good things to come"; but now they were to be lost in the glory of 
the brighter and better day. 

He whom they pointed to was present. The passover lamb was to be 
superseded by the lamb of God, of whom the former was but the 
figure. 

At the time John made the proclamation above referred to, the 
Jewish church were more strict to observe every particular of the 
ceremonial law than perhaps at any time in their history; they were 
scrupulous to pay tithe of mint and anise, plants like or identical 
with our dill and caraway; when we consider that their tithe was a 
tenth part, we can see how nice they were to observe the letter of 
the law where it did not so directly affect the heart and life. They 
could be strictly scrupulous in regard to the slightest ritual 
performances, while having but little remorse for the grossest 
immoralities. It is not at all likely that they understood the deep 
spiritual import of most of the forms that Paul calls "shadows of 
good things to come. " At this juncture John makes his appearance 
and exhorts them to "repent (change their minds; see Young's 
Concordance, and Emphatic Diaglott, reform) because the royal 
majesty of the heavens has approached." In these forms, or in the 
observance of them, they thought they had eternal life; (John 5:39) 
but now he who was to bring light and immortality to light had 



come; now John had given them more definite instruction upon 
these weighty matters, and with increase of knowledge there should 
be a corresponding change of mind, so he makes the announcement 
in accordance with the facts. 

We think the nominal Christian church of to-day occupies, in many 
respects, a similar position; each different section or sect being very 
strict to observe the letter of their law, and thinking that in them 
they have eternal life; but that law, or those laws, instead of being 
God's requirements, are the formulated laws of the leaders of the 
various societies, supposed to be based upon God's law or word; 
they have built upon this foundation, but with hay, wood, and 
stubble. (1 Cor. 3:12.) 

Now some seem to think when you speak to them about this matter, 
that it is of no particular consequence if they are only upon the right 
foundation. Jesus showed that it was important to be founded upon 
a rock (Matt. 7:24,25), and Paul shows that it is important also to 
build with good material. Some seem to think that if they are only 
saved, that is enough, but would not reason so about their earthly 
matters; though they might think it fortunate to escape from their 
burning house, yet they would think it better to have a house that 
would not have taken fire; thus showing that "the children of this 
world are wiser in their GENERATION. " If a member of any one 
of these societies should be arraigned for misdemeanor, the law of 
that society ("Discipline," "Regulations," or whatever) is the 
standard by which the misdemeanor is measured and weighed. 

During the time of the church's wanderings, through the dark ages, 
while walking in adulterous union with the world, the light that was 
in it "became darkness," and how great was that darkness. Man 
came to use the word of God as a medium of worldly gain, and 
when once begun, there seemed to be no limit to which the enemy 
would lead in distorting the truth, for the truth had to be the means 
of giving acceptability to the counterfeit. So now the nominal 
Christian church is in a condition strikingly similar to that of the 
Jewish church then, i.e., "rich and increased in goods, and having 
need of nothing," according to their opinion, but as the Lord sees, 
"poor and blind and naked, " and their doing similar to that 
described in Mai. 1:13. 

So the proclamation of John comes with equal if not greater force" : 
"change your minds," "reform because the royal majesty of the 
heavens has approached. " 

But, says some one, what has our church to repent of? Do we not 
teach that men must repent of their sins to be saved? Yes, but what 
idea do you give them of salvation, and of their friends who do not 
obtain the salvation which they are told about? Is not the salvation 
which you tell them of, embraced in the idea of songs of praise to 
God, and word- worship and glorification of his wondrous majesty, 
and possibly some idea of learning more of his glorious attributes? 
All this is included in the "great salvation," but it is a meagre 



representation of it from the Bible standpoint as we (we say it 
humbly) view it. Then those who do not attain to this salvation, it is 
said, God will miserably torment without end of duration. 

Now we cry aloud that the effulgent glory shed abroad by the 
approach of "the royal majesty of the heavens," throws such light 
upon his word, that we repent, and call upon all who hold such 
ideas of God and salvation to "change their minds" and actions 
accordingly. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 

[TO BE CONTINUED.] 



R358 : page 3 



OUR PATH TO GLORY. 



page 3 



We journey through a desert drear and wild, 
Yet are our hearts by such sweet thoughts beguiled 
Of Him on whom we lean, our strength and stay, 
We scarcely note the sorrows of the way. 

Thoughts of his glory— on the prize we gaze, 
And in it see the hope of coming days; 
Beacon of hope, which, lifted up on high, 
Illumes with heavenly light the tear-dimm'd eye. 



Thoughts of our gathering-of that joyful day, 
In patient hope we tread the narrow way; 
The dawn draws nigh, and from the watch-tower see 
Millennial day dawn-and the shadows flee. 

Thus while we journey on, our Lord to greet, 
Our thoughts and meditations are so sweet 
Of Him on whom we lean, our strength and stay, 
We scarcely note the sorrows of the way. 

B 



R359 : page 3 

THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 

THE MESSAGE TO PERGAMOS. 

"And to the messenger of the Assembly at Pergamos write." Rev. 
2:12. 

Per is an article of emphasis, frequently equivalent to very. Ga or 
gee [g hard] is earthy. Thus the name Perga [Acts 13:13] very 



earthy. Pergamos means earthy height or elevation. It was the name 
given to the citadel of Troy. 

The Pergamos of John's day, and to which literally the message is 
addressed, was a celebrated city of the Roman province of Asia. 
Here parchment was first perfected. It had a library of 200,000 
volumes; also a famous temple of Esculapius, the mythological 
deity who presided over medicine. 

The Pergamos period dates from the time that Constantine 
professedly embraced Christianity; which, being thus popularized, 
soon became the nominal religion of the people. The church of this 
period was exceedingly exalted, but only from an earthly point of 
view; she was "exalted in the earth." 

Persecution having ceased, the policy of the Emperor became the 
policy of both priests and people; and the nominal Christian church 
soon filled with the popular time-serving crowd. Masheim tells us 
that while the great zeal of many good men, the purity of their lives, 
the many translations and expositions of the Scriptures made at this 
time, and the intrinsic beauty and value of Christianity as contrasted 
with Paganism must have had their influence; yet it is evident that a 
desire to please the great emperor and his successors, and to be on 
the popular side, were the chief reasons for the sudden and great 
increase of the nominal church. 

Many pagan philosophers finding that it would be policy to join the 
ranks of the rising religion, set about paving an easy way to it by 
trying to discover correspondencies between Christianity and 
Paganism, and so to blend the two together. They succeeded only 
too well. Many sought "to form to themselves a middle kind of 
religion, between the ancient theology and the new doctrine that 
was now propagated in the empire; and they persuaded themselves 
that the same truths which Christ taught had been for a long time 
concealed by the priests of the gods under the veil of ceremonies, 
fables, and allegorical representations." [Mosheim.] As the old 
theology had a number of chief gods, with many demi-gods of both 
sexes, the Pago-Christians [if we may coin a word] set themselves 
to reconstruct the list for the new theology. At this time, therefore, 
the doctrine of three Gods was invented -God the Father, God the 
Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Also the Goddess Mary. To make 
the list as respectable in numbers as the long line of pagan deities, 
they canonized the dead apostles and an unlimited number of 
martyrs, angels, etc., real or imaginary. 

Mosheim says of this period: "The public processions and 
supplications by which the Pagans endeavored to appease their 
gods, were now adopted into the Christian worship, and celebrated 
in many places with great pomp and magnificence. The virtues 
which had formerly been ascribed to the heathen temples, to their 
lustrations [ceremonial cleansings by water, etc.], to the statues of 
their gods and heroes, were now attributed to Christian churches-to 



water consecrated by certain forms of prayer, and to the images of 
holy men. " 

"The propensity of rude and uneducated converts [?] from 
Paganism to cling to the festal rites of their forefathers proved to be 
invincible, so that it seemed to be necessary to adopt the old usages 
to the new worship, rather than to abolish them altogether." [Encyc. 
Brit.] 

We feel safe in asserting that all the vile doctrines that have 
saturated the papal church, and that still permeate Protestantism had 
at least their origin in this period. 

The philosophy of Plato was engrafted, a parasite upon the 
Scriptural stock. This vile fungus, planted by Satan in Eden [Gen. 
3:4], watered by the Egyptians, and brought to an increase by a 
pseudo-Christianity, has borne an abundant harvest of errors, and 
exhaled an influence more deadly than the repas tree. Purgatory, 
Eternal Sin, Eternal Torment, Mariolatry, Saint Worship, 
Transmigration, Mohammedanism, Swedenborgianism, and 
Mormonism are some of its legitimate fruits, which could not have 
existed without it. 

The Pergamos message opens in the words, "These things saith He 
who hath the sharp sword with two edges." The speaker is Christ 
himself. It seems as if the little company of faithful ones, beset on 
every side by the enemy, were earnestly looking amid all the noise 
and strife for their Leader, when, suddenly, the great Captain 
appears by their side, and waiving his sword on high, shouts, 
Attention! Company! 

The two-edged sword is the Word of God. [Eph 6:17; Heb. 4:12.] 
This weapon is formed both for offensive and defensive warfare. It 
is sharp, and while one edge is presented toward the enemy, there is 
another toward him who wields it. Christ has given it to the church 
to be used in his service: woe to him who handles it unskillfully. 
Our Lord's words are a warning to those of that age who were 
exercising this spiritual weapon. 

"I know thy works." They were many. The faithful of this period 
were very zealous, and were hard workers against much opposition. 

"And where thou dwellest, where Satan's seat is." The home and 
stronghold of Paganism; which, in course of time, with a change of 
little else than name and names was rechristened Papacy. 

"Thou holdest fast MY NAME, and hast not denied my faith." 
Their fidelity is more particularly noted because of their adverse 
surroundings. At this time there were many teachers, and more 
controversy than ever before. Light was darkened by words, and 
truth with sophistry. During this period also arose the old dispute of 
"who should be greatest?" The bishops, or Patriarchs, as they 
preferred to be called, of Rome, Antioch, Alexandria, and 
Constantinople, had acquired a degree of pre-eminence over the 
others, and there was a long-continued rivalry between them; the 



supremacy being finally divided between Rome and 
Constantinople. The nominal church was split in two, chiefly over 
the question of image- worship; the idolaters ranging under the 
bishop of Rome, who received the name of Pope [Latin, papa-the 
father], while the image-breakers, as they were called, formed the 
Greek Church under the Patriarch [chief father] of Constantinople. 
A remembrance of this controversy will help us to understand the 
passage which follows: 

"Thou holdest fast MY NAME... even in those days in which 
ANTIPAS was my faithful witness; who was slain among you, 
where Satan dwelleth." Anti, in Greek, means opposite or against; 
papas is father. In the usual manner of forming words, Anti-pas 
would evidently mean against the father, or opposed to the Pope or 
Patriarch; as we use the name anti-christ, the opponent of Christ. It 
is clear, then, that our Lord here commends the faithful hand who, 
"holding fast" the endearing name of our "Father," in obedience to 
the command, "Call no man Father," opposed the development and 
establishment of the Papacy, with its attendant heresies of a class of 
holy [?] and Rev. [?] fathers [Matt. 23:9], who, being called by the 
church— or the almighty dollar— or the love of honor and ease, as the 
case may be, profess a superior sanctity, privilege, and authority for 
the exposition of God's Word. 

"But I have a few things against thee. Thou hast there them that 
hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling- 
block before the children of Israel, to eat things offered to idols, and 
to commit fornication. " 

Num. 22 and onward tells the story of Balaam. The kings of Midian 
and Balak, king of Moab, found themselves unable by force of arms 
to subdue Israel. They hired Balaam to curse God's people. He 
found it impossible, but knowing why they had the Lord's favor and 
protection, he advised Balak to lead them into sin; which 
succeeding, brought upon them a plague which destroyed 24,000 of 
them. 

From what has been said, the spiritual meaning of the Balaam 
teaching should be easily seen. The blasphemous doctrines of 
eternal torment, and the endless existence of sin and sinners; also 
the fiction of the short line from the death-bed to heaven, and 
kindred fancies, have always been a "stumbling-block" to the 
church. The homage given to pagan rites, ceremonies, festivals, 
etc., Christianized [?] such as prayers to the dead, sacred places, 
days, and persons; union with earthly powers and with those who 
do such things, would in our opinion be Baal-am service. 

The doctrine of the Nicolaitans, noticed in the Ephesus message, 
found its development in this age; and has been a burden to the 
church ever since. Nicolas means a conqueror of the people. In the 
church of Rome the laity or people are as much the subjects of the 
Pope, both in spiritual and temporal things, as any of earth's 
conquerors ever dreamed of demanding. This, in the face of Christ's 



plain statement that there is but one Lord, one Master, one Father, 
"and all ye are brethren." [Matt. 23:8-12.] The command "Search 
the Scriptures," was intended for every one; the commission to 
"preach the good news" to all who have received the Spirit; and if 
any one has not the Spirit of Christ he is none of His, and can only 
be a blind leader of the blind. 

"Repent, or else I will come unto THEE quickly, and will fight 
against THEM with the sword of my mouth. " Notice thee and them 
in this passage. The words are evidently used like you and them in 
1 Thes. 5:1-4. The Lord speaks directly to his church as thou or 
you; but of the world, as they or them. He came to his own, and 

R360 : page 3 

in a sense delivered them out of Babylon; bearing them up on 
eagles' wings [Rev. 12:14], and carrying them into the wilderness; 
"into her place, where she is nourished."... from the face of the 
serpent, Satan. To them-Babylon, he comes with the sword, and by 
the sword they are cut into two— the Roman and Greek churches. 

"He that hath an ear, let HIM hear what the Spirit says to the 
churches." 

"To him that overcometh, to him will I give of the hidden manna. " 
The manna recalls the story of Israel in the wilderness. Hidden 
would point as an index finger to the golden bowl full of manna 
laid away in the Ark of the Covenant as a memorial of the 
faithfulness of Jehovah, who led and "nourished" his people in the 
wilderness. It is a pledge to the Pergamos church that he who 
watched over literal Israel in their journeyings would care for them 
in the weary march that was about to begin. 

The manna, of course, typifies spiritual food, the word of God. 
Perhaps some were enabled to see a deeper meaning, that it referred 
not only to the written word, but to the living Word; the true Bread 
of Life who came down from heaven to give life to the world. [John 
6:47-51.] 

It was a promise in the face of desolation and death, of a life that 
should be hid- from all the power of persecution -with Christ, in 
God. 

"I will give him a white stone, and upon the stone a new name 
engraved, which no man knoweth but he that receiveth it. " 

What a blessed assurance to the church during those 1260 years of 
trial, outcasts from the world, branded as heretics by the church, to 
realize that God's seal was upon them; to remember that "the Lord 
knoweth them that are his." 

The signet or seal— evidently referred to— was the emblem of 
authority. See Gen. 41:41-42; 1 Kings 21:8; Esther 3:10-12; 8:2-8, 
etc. To present any one with the signet ring was to invest them with 
all the power and authority of him who owned it. This is, therefore, 



one of the exceeding great and precious promises of joint heirship 
with Christ, given only to the overcomers. 

The color of the stone would indicate the purity of the reign. "A 
scepter of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom. " However 
precious the jewel, it was made much more so on account of its use; 
it was therefore the symbol of that which was most highly 
esteemed. See Haggai 2:23; Sol. Song 8:5-6. 

The name on the seal is significant. We believe it is the name 
assured by our Lord on taking unto him his great power and 
beginning his reign. A name now revealed to the members of his 
body, since the reign has begun. [See article of Bro. Jones in March 
No. ZION'S WATCH TOWER, page 4.] A name peculiarly 
comforting to the persecuted saints during the reign of Anti-christ- 
the name of our beloved 

KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. 

W. I. M. 



R360 : page 4 

ANASTASIS.--RESURRECTION. 

"For since through a man there is death, through a man also there 
is a resurrection (anastasis) of the dead; for as by ADAM all die, so 
by the ANOINTED also, will all be restored to life." 1 Cor. 
15:21,22. Diaglott. 

Recognizing death as a reality, we have long seen, and often 
pointed out, that a resurrection of dead ones, is God's remedy for 
the removal of this sin-curse. Not until very recently, however, did 
we recognize the full force and deep scope of the word resurrection. 

We have been accustomed to regard it as meaning the giving to a 
dead person of a spark of life-the very faintest spark of life, such as 
the act of Elijah to the widow's son, (1 Kings 17:22) or the act of 
Paul to the young man who fell from a window, (Acts 20:9,10) or 
the act of Jesus to Jairus' daughter, to the son of the widow of Nain 
and to Lazarus. (Mark 5:41,42, Luke 7:14,15, John 11:43,44.) We 
had considered and called these, resurrections of the dead. But an 
examination proves that these restorations of a faint spark of life, 
are never called a resurrection in Scripture. An examination of the 
Greek word from which resurrection is translated (Anastasis) 
proves that its meaning is broader and fuller than we had supposed, 
and that we have been in the habit of misusing it, when applying it 
to such partial restorations of life as above mentioned. 

Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon defines the word anastasis to 
mean- "a setting up again"-"REBUILDING" - 
"RESTORATION." Let us then look at the resurrection in the light 
of this standard definition, and also, in the light of our text. 



Mankind is the subject of Paul's discourse. Mankind as a race, had 
forfeited all right to life by the disobedience of Adam. The 
existence forfeited, was the one given by God to our representative, 
Adam. It was a perfect being or existence, and all the imperfections 
under which we as a race now labor, have come as a result of sin, 
and are a part of the death penalty. We are now, and have been for 
6,000 years a dying race, growing weaker and weaker and dropping 
faster and faster into the tomb. Adam in his perfection did not lose 
the last spark of life for 930 years. We, less perfect, are born with 
but a spark, the average duration of which is 30 years. This 
condition in which we now are, is Scripturally called death, even 
before we enter the tomb. We are all walking in the valley of the 
shadow of death and are now far down below the mountain tops of 
life and perfection. (Psa. 23:4; Matt. 8:22; 2 Cor. 5:14.) 

Now let us ask the question— Where was our race when it began to 
fall— when death began to oppress, degrade and conquer? The 
answer is: Man was perfect, on the mountain tops of life, and not at 
all in the valley of death; not only perfect in being but in full 
communion with his maker who considered his handiwork "very 
good. " Then as death means a falling from all this perfection, 
resurrection means "a setting up again"— "rebuilding"-"restoring" 
of humanity from every vestige of death to the perfection of their 
nature as represented by their head, Adam. 

Now notice our text closely, and see the second clause, explaining 
the first, defines resurrection (anastasis) to mean restored: 
"Through a man there is death"— "by Adam all die." Then it states 
the remedy provided: "Through a man also (Jesus) there is a 
resurrection of the dead"- "by the anointed will all be restored to 
life. " To restore life means to give back, or offer a thing which was 
lost or taken away. The thing lost by our race was perfect being. 

But while resurrection means to restore, there is nothing connected 
with this word which limits it in time. All of the race shall be 
resurrected, but not necessarily all in a moment; on the contrary 
Scripture teaches us, that there are "times (years) of restitution," 
and another shows us that it will be the work of a thousand years. It 
will be seen then that the resurrection ("rebuilding-setting up again 
-restoring") of humanity will be in process, but will not be 
complete until the thousand years are ended. [This may furnish 
another explanation of the first clause of Rev. 20:5, to those who 
think there is a shadow of proof of that clause being genuine; and 
not as we believe an interpolation.] 

But Paul proceeds in the consideration of the anastasis— restoring, 
upbuilding, perfecting; he explains that there are two conditions of 
perfected ones. In answer to the question- With what body do they 
come to life again?— he explains (vss. 36-38) that as with the 
development of grain, so with mankind, the body sown is not the 
identical thing which springs up, though the same nature will be 
found in that which springs up, and the same identical personality, 
able to recall its former degraded condition, (Psa. 22:27; Ezek. 



16:61; Zech. 12:10.) and to glorify God for the blessed change. But 
we inquire; will there be any difference in the resurrection- will all 
be raised alike? Paul replies that there will be a difference: As in 
the sowing there are different kinds of seed, so in the resurrection 
there will be different kinds of bodies, just as we see it illustrated in 
nature; when we sow wheat we expect wheat to spring up and so 
will every seed develop its own kind. The large majority of the race 
are sown (die) human seed; a few- "a little flock" have changed 
their nature, been begotten of God. They are sown spiritual seed, 
and in the resurrection, God will give "to every seed its own body 
as it hath pleased him." (vs. 38.) The human seed will have a 
human body, but the spiritual seed will have a spiritual body; "as is 
the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, 
such are they also that are heavenly." (vs. 48.) 

According to the illustration given, the human being will rise in a 
body like that which went into decay and death, but not formed of 
the very same atoms of matter that composed it. (vs. 37,) "Thou 
sowest not that body that shall be. " But to those begotten of God- 
of the spiritual seed, Paul says, "as we have borne the image of the 
earthy, (human nature —but having given that up to become 'new 
creatures') we shall (when born in the resurrection) bear the image 
of the heavenly"— the spiritual body. 

Again some inquire, what is a spiritual or heavenly body like? It 
doth not yet appear what we shall be (like), but we know that... we 
shall be like 

R361 : page 4 

him (Jesus; not as he was, but as he is) "for we shall see him as he 
is." (1 John 3:2.) 

We can form a tolerably clear idea of what the race in general will 
be when perfected (resurrected), knowing by experience that were it 
not for the imperfection it would be "very good." 

And though we cannot fully comprehend what the new creature 
shall be when perfected (resurrected), because "it doth not yet 
appear, what we shall be" in all particulars, yet our Father's word 
informs us of some of the qualities of those "new creatures" "of the 
Divine nature" when perfected. He says: "It is sown in corruption, it 
is raised in INCORRUPTION; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in 
GLORY; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in POWER; it is sown 
an animal body, it is raised a SPIRITUAL BODY." [1 Cor. 15:42- 
44, Diaglott.] Thus we get a very meager view of the excellent 
glory of the new creatures— like Christ Jesus, the express image of 
the Father's person; "whom no man hath seen nor can see." (1 Tim. 
6:16.) No wonder Paul said it doth not yet appear; no wonder God 
has not given us a more full account of the future glory; with the 
little glimpse we have, it almost over-awes us. We ask ourselves 
how searching must be our trial, if we would be accounted worthy 
of such divine honors? "What manner of persons ought we to be in 



all holy conversation and God- likeness" -"He that hath this hope in 
him purifieth himself even as he is pure." 

This perfecting, Paul shows, is not what the world is to get, but is a 
special thing. In 1 Cor. 15:42 he says, before giving the foregoing 
description -"Thus is THE resurrection of THE dead" i.e. the 
CHIEF perfecting of the CHIEF class of the dead. This CHIEF 
resurrection (anastasis-perfecting) began with Jesus, the head of 
the church which is his body-the head of THE CHRIST. Having 
proved himself worthy of this great glory by obedience even unto 
death, he was made perfect-MADE PERFECT through (by or on 
account of the) suffering" of death. (Heb. 2:10.) Jesus' resurrection 
was the first, no one before him had ever been raised completely 
out of death's control into perfection either of human or divine 
nature. He was "a first-fruit of those having fallen asleep." (vs. 20.) 
This is called "His (Jesus') resurrection, " because if members of his 
body we shall share the same with our head. It is Scripturally 
illustrated by natural birth; Our head was born-delivered over 1 800 
years ago; the body is not yet fully delivered. We, "the feet of him," 
are still in the condition in which we "groan within ourselves 
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption" in full of the entire 
body of the Christ. (Rom. 8:23.) (Will God cause to come to birth 
and not deliver? Will he deliver the head and not complete the 
work? (See Isa. 66:9.) The "little flock" of overcomers of the world- 
-the blessed who shall "have part in the first (chief) resurrection" 
(anastasis— lifting up to perfection) and who shall "reign with him a 
thousand years," (Rev. 20:6.) will have part in "His resurrection" 
and experience the same changes and perfecting which he 
underwent, when God highly exalted him above the angels next to 
himself in power and glory- "the right hand of power." 

Such is our, and such was Paul's hope. For it we suffer the loss of 
all things and do count them but dross that we may win Christ and 
be found in Him (as members of the body of Christ). ..that we may 
know him (fully) and the POWER of HIS RESURRECTION." This 
desirable sharing in the power of HIS anastasis-raising to 
perfection, we hope to attain by sharing "the fellowship of His 
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any 
means, (by all these earthly sacrifices) we might attain unto the EX- 
anastasis (the out-resurrection) from the dead"-the chief perfecting. 
Phil. 3:8-11. 

Let us consider next, the 

ORDER OF RESURRECTIONS. 

We have already seen that the best or chief perfecting-that of the 
Christ, comes first, and the bringing of mankind to human 
perfection follows during the Millennial age: But let us follow 
Paul's argument on this point and note that this is his argument 
exactly. After telling in the words of our text that "by Adam all die, 
so by the Anointed also will all be restored to life," he adds-"But 
each one in his OWN rank; Christ a first-fruit, afterwards those who 



are Christ's at his parousia (presence)." Here are two ranks, or 
orders of anastasis, Christ (the anointed head and body) first. 
Theirs, as we have seen, is the first and chief anastasis, the first to 
come to perfection and that the Divine perfection. Afterwards, 
during his presence, another class or order will be perfected. His 
presence will continue during the Millennial age, for he comes to 
reign and to put down all authority, all opposition to right and to 
bring all things into harmony with God and His laws. Then "he 
must reign" -must be present until all of this work is accomplished; 
and he shall reign a thousand years. (Rev. 20:6.) consequently that 
entire age is the time of His presence. During his presence he shall 
bless mankind with truth and knowledge and restore all things. 
Then all, who during that blessed reign, will, may come into 
harmony with him and "Hail Him Lord of all," thus becoming His. 
This class we understand to be referred to by Paul when he says— 
"afterwards those who are Christ's at (during) his presence." These 
shall be raised up to the perfection of their (human) nature. 

The raising up, the perfecting, may be either an instantaneous, or 
gradual work so far as the meaning of the word anastasis is 
concerned. We have seen that the perfecting, or the raising of the 
world in general to full perfect human being, will require a long 
period. During that period they will learn valuable and lasting 
lessons in overcoming evil under the superintendence of able 
helpers and teachers. But there are two general exceptions to this 
rule; these two have learned these lessons in the present life under 
the dominion of evil. They have been made perfect through 
discipline endured here, and being thus prepared, are counted 
worthy to attain their perfect condition in the instant of return to 
life. 

The first of these classes and the chief, are the members of the body 
of Christ, who have fought a good fight and finished their course of 
training and work of sacrifice, by obedience even unto death, and 
there is prepared for such, a crown of righteousness- the reward. 
The anastasis (raising up to perfection) of this class, though not 
coming to all of them at the same instant, will be an instantaneous 
perfecting to each one. The dead in Christ shall rise, be perfected, 
first; then we which are alive and remain, shall share in the same 
anastasis, the same perfecting, without sleeping for a single 
moment in death. 

We shall be changed or translated in a single moment, lifted in the 
twinkling of an eye, instantly, out of the earthly tabernacle or house 
(which will dissolve in death) into our house (body) from heaven- 
our glorious spiritual bodies, whose glory doth not yet appear. But 
both the raising of those who sleep in Jesus, and the 

R361 : page 5 

changing of the living members into new conditions, as well as the 
resurrection of Jesus, together constitute the first (chief) anastasis. 
"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the chief, first resurrection- 



-perfecting; on such the second death hath no power, but THEY 
shall be priests of God and of Christ and shall reign a thousand 
years." (Rev. 20:6.) 

The second class, though less notable are highly esteemed of God, 
and in their sphere were overcomers and fought the good fight 
though a different one from ours of this Gospel age. We refer to the 
Prophets and Patriarchs of preceding ages. Though they never had 
our "heavenly" -"high calling"-though never invited to change 
their nature from human to Divine, yet they were faithful and laid 
hold of the earthly promises set before them. Moses verily was 
faithful as a servant over all his house (of servants) but Christ was 
faithful as a Son over his own house, whose house are we, if— (Heb. 
3:6.) 

All those ancient worthy faithful ones, died in faith without 
receiving a fulfillment of the promises made them, yet were 
confident to the end of life, trusting God to give them at some time 
the things promised them. [Abraham had been promised all the land 
of Canaan, but had never received so much as to set his foot on, yet 
he died trusting God for what he had promised. Acts 7:5.] Instead 
of at once giving to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets 
the earthly kingdom and dominion promised them, God let them 
rest; they "fell on sleep," while he developed the Gospel Church 
through the "better promises," even the heavenly -that it should be 
a kind of first fruits of his creatures. (Jas. 1:18.) Hence Paul, 
referring to these ancient worthies, states that God having provided 
some better thing for us, (the Christ) they without us (our 
instrumentality) shall not be made perfect. (Heb. 11:39,40.) 

The anastasis of the Christ must take precedence to that of all 
others, because it is through The Christ that all things are to be 
restored. We believe, however, that the anastasis or perfecting of 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Prophets and overcomers of past ages, 
will be a rapid or instantaneous perfecting of the human nature. 
And we understand that it is as perfected men ruling over imperfect 
men, that these of the fleshly seed, will bless all the families of the 
earth as the agents of the spiritual SEED which is Christ-the 
express image of the invisible God. (Col. 1:15; Heb. 1:3.) Through 
the Christ primarily, the blessing of restoration comes. 



R362 : page 5 

EUROPEAN ARMIES. 

It is the theory of a large number in the nominal church, that the 
Millennium of peace, when nation shall not lift up sword against 
nation, neither shall they learn war any more, is drawing near, and 
is to be brought about by present Christianizing influences. We also 
claim it "nigh, even at the doors," but to be accomplished by a 
totally different process, viz: by the setting up of that kingdom for 



which we were ever taught to pray, "Thy kingdom come (that) thy 
will may be done on earth as it is done in Heaven. " We believe 
also, that the setting up of the kingdom, involves first, the presence 
and exaltation of the new King (the Christ complete, who will 
dethrone and bind the former Prince of the power of the air -Satan, 
and accomplish the final overturning (Rev. 20:2; Psa. 149:8; Ezek. 
21:27.) and the complete destruction of the present evil, unjust and 
oppressive governments and institutions. By the tumult of 
contending factions, he will dash them in pieces as a potter's vessel. 
Psa. 2:9; Jer. 13:14. 

We seldom mention the outward evidences which support our 
views, and expectations. It has been our desire to direct your 
attention not so much to "the things which are seen," but mainly to 
"the things which are not seen" by the natural eye but discernable 
only by the eye of faith-in the Word of God. This knowledge it is, 
which enables us to see things which are coming to pass, but which 
are not yet discernable by the world. It was this favor of seeing 
further into the future than the world could look, which Jesus 
referred to, saying that the spirit of truth would guide us into truth 
and show us things to come. (John 16:13.) It is both a comfort and a 
strengthener of faith, to see how Scripture is being gradually 
accomplished. Therefore we give below some interesting and 
carefully collected facts regarding the present condition of 
European nations. 

The peace footing of the standing armies of Europe, is as follows: 
Russia 715,000, France 498,483, Germany 427,274, Austria- 
Hungary 252,535, Italy 202,271. Those of the lesser powers, 
Turkey, Spain, Norway, etc., etc., aggregate 643,000 and Great 
Britain has an army of about 250,000 men. Thus it will be seen that 
Europe has a standing army of about 3,000,000 men, besides a navy 
which numbers 250 iron-clad and several hundred wooden vessels. 

In addition to these regular armies there are reserve forces of drilled 
men, ready for immediate call in case of war, as follows: In Russia 
2,252,126, Germany 1,500,000, France 1,230,000, Austria-Hungary 
(army and navy) 1,220,000, Italy 664,105. Great Britain and 
smaller powers about 2,500,000. This gives the enormous army of 
over 12,000,000 men ready for immediate action, composed only of 
trained soldiers in the prime of life. Truly it has been said "Europe 
is a huge standing camp." "All Europe stands ready for war." 

How dreadful, how heart sickening the sight; 12,000,000 men 
trained in the use of the most devilish instruments of death, stand 
prepared to slaughter one another at the beck and nod of Emperors, 
Czars and Kings. 

And yet it seems that in our Father's sight, 

'Tis well that men should learn the evils now of war by bitter taste; 

That when hath been o'erturned these governments of evil men, 

All then might come to love the peaceful reign, 

Of Him who's called "the Prince of Peace. 



And yet some tell us that these are Christian governments; and all 
their Kings claim the right to rule-to be of God's authority and 
appointment. This idea of God's appointment was given by Papacy. 
Papacy placed in power the ancestors of most of those now 
reigning; Papacy claimed that in so doing it represented God, and 
that in fact it was "the Kingdom of God" and had the power and 
right to appoint the rulers of earth. The earthly governments still 
cling to the claim of divine appointment and use it as a mighty 
chain to bind the people under them. Their proclamations are 
signed, as for instance, King William of Prussia "By the grace of 
God." 

Papacy, claiming infallibility, cannot but sustain the general 
principle of their appointment, and being now without temporal 
power, dare not offend one of these rulers. 

Protestants unthinkingly and ignorantly uphold the decisions of 
Papacy on this matter, not seeing that thereby, they acknowledge 
the anti-Christ. This is just as the Word of God foretells-viz: That 
in the struggle between the people and their Papal appointed rulers 
just at hand, while the people will be struggling for freedom and 
their God given rights, the nominal churches will unite with the 
governments which they appointed and recognize, to help keep the 
people in thraldom. (Rev. 19:19-20.) 

How absurd anyhow to say that the present governments are of 
God's appointment, or Christian governments in any sense. Surely 
everything indicates, that they are Satan's governments -appointed 
and sustained by their prince "The prince of this world. " (John 
14:30 and 12:31.) This their actions clearly demonstrate. Being the 
Kingdoms of Satan, they must be demolished to give place to the 
Kingdom of God. How great will be the change, when these, give 
place to a righteous pure government under the true prince-the 
"Prince of peace." "In his day the righteous shall flourish." (Psa. 
72:7.) 

Mankind now groans under these evils, Satan and Anti-Christ 
appointed governments; but the groaning will soon be over. Satan 
will soon be bound; (Rev. 20:2) his earthly empires overturned 
(Ezek. 21:27.) and the kingdom will be given unto the people of the 
saints of the Most High under Christ. (Dan. 7:27.) The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now— waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God. (Rom. 8:22,19.) 

The church now is commanded to be subject to the powers that be 
for "The powers that be are ordained of God." (Rom. 13:1.) Yes, 
God, during the "present evil world" (age) not only permits Satan to 
be its prince, (John 14:30) but also permits the earthly governments 
of his appointing. He leaves his church and all men for a time under 
their control, assuring us through His word that shortly the prince of 
this world shall be bound, and "the kingdoms of this world shall 
become the kingdoms of our Lord and his anointed"-during the 
sounding of the Seventh Trumpet. (Rev. 20:2 and 1 1:15.) 



The Church must not resist the powers that be except in matters of 
conscience. But now that "Gentile Times" have nearly ran their 
ordained course, their overthrow is at hand. To this end God is 
raising up His great army, the masses of the world, to overturn all 
forms of evil and oppression. His army here, as in the overthrow of 
Jerusalem A.D. 70, will know not God, yet will fulfill His purposes. 
(Rev. 19:19.) God's army is now being marshaled and His church 
should stand aloof from both the governments that be, and their 
opposers. We should remember that "we are not of this world"- 
"our citizenship is in heaven." (John 17:16. Phil. 3:20.) 

The time for the fulfillment of Joel 3:10-16 is nigh at hand and the 
sooner it comes the sooner will another (Isa. 2:2-4) be 
accomplished. But first look not for these. First must be gathered 
from the earthly plane-the little flock -the bride of Christ. And in 
this gathering of the little flock from out the mass— the mass called 
by men the church, there will be a shaking, rooting and complete 
overturning of that mass so full of tares-corrupt with worldly pride. 
Thus saith the word of God: Judgment must begin at the house of 
God. 



R362 : page 5 

"THE WAGES OF SIN IS DEATH.'' 

How clear and simple is this statement. How strange it is that so 
many who profess to receive the Bible as the Word of God persist 
in contradicting this positive statement, and affirm that they 
believe, and that the Bible teaches, that the wages of sin is 
everlasting life in torment. 

They realize that this is an awful thought, and affects the interests 
of every human being— because all have sinned and come short. Yet 
it is what they have been taught from infancy. It is what their 
church creed still teaches, and they are taught that it is one of the 
first steps to infidelity and perdition to doubt the eternal torment of 
all who are not true Christians. They suppose that, since their 
church creed teaches it, it must be one of the fundamental teachings 
of Scripture. 

A very large majority of Christians (We say it with sorrow and 
shame) have never searched the Scriptures which are able to make 
them wise. (2 Tim. 3:15.) They have merely learned a few texts, 
which, construed in the light of their church creeds and instructions, 
tend to convince them that those creeds are in harmony with the 
Bible, and that eternal agony awaits a large majority of our race, 
foreseen and foreknown and pre-arranged by our Creator and 
Father, who, despite this terrible plan, they must call a God of love- 
-who, despite his malevolence, must be worshiped and adored as 
the benevolent, loving One, the Author of every good and perfect 
gift. This One they must thus worship and try, or pretend, to love, 



lest they be of that eternally tormented multitude. No wonder so 
many draw near to God with their lips, while their hearts are far 
from him. No wonder that some who come to lose the fear of such 
torment, become blasphemous infidels, denying all things sacred, 
and regarding all religion as fraudulent, when they lose their dread 
of this fundamental teaching of the religion of to-day. 

R363 : page 5 

The difficulty is that the traditions of men are given the authority 
which belongs only to the Word of God. God says that he gave us 
our existence, and has the power to deprive us of it if we do not use 
it properly; (Ezek. 18:4; Eccl. 9:5,10; Psa. 145:20; and 146:4,) that 
the wages which he will pay to sinners will be DEATH-the 
extinction of life; and the wages he will pay to those who use life in 
harmony with his will, will be, everlasting life-life unceasingly. 
"The soul (being) that sinneth it shall die," but none other. (Ezek. 
18:20.) Again we read, "I have set before you life and death"- 
blessing and cursing; "therefore choose life." (Deut. 30:19.) Choose 
it by complying with the condition, on which God says we may 
have it. "I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the 
Lord God; wherefore turn ye and live." (Ezek. 18:32.) 

Nor can any one find a reasonable objection to death- 
EXTINCTION of being-as the punishment for sin. Man (as a 
perfect being when created) was capable of appreciating good and 
evil, and of developing a character in harmony with the one he 
chose. God gave him this free agency, telling him which is His will, 
and which is best, and what the consequences of his choice will be 
to himself. He said to Adam regarding a forbidden thing, "In the 
day thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt DIE." (Gen. 2:17, margin.) 
So he tells us that the wages of sin is death; that we must shun sin if 
we would avoid its penalty. 

R363 : page 6 

All of God's plans and laws are the very best, and any other course 
than obedience is sure to bring some evil consequence. The 
interests of humanity are so much in common, that evil and its 
consequences in one member produces more or less evil and 
distress to others. It is a wise and blessed provision God has made, 
that none will be allowed to live whose misuse of life would be an 
injury and source of misery to themselves and others. And who 
would not admit that God's dealings with the sinner as thus 
explained by His Word, are not only Just, but Merciful? 

One cause of much of the confusion on this subject, arises from the 
fact that death happens alike to saint and sinner, hence many 
conclude-It must be some other kind of death than the death of the 
individual as we see it all about us, that the Scriptures refer to as the 
wages of sin. And giving their imaginations full play, they conclude 
that the DEATH which is the wages of sin, must be a life in 
torment, or, as some describe it— a death that never dies. In 
attempting to explain this, modern theologians fall into grievous 



errors, and begin to talk mysteriously about a number and variety of 
deaths. They must find as many beings to die as they find deaths. 
Hence, they not only tell us that there are many deaths, but that man 
is a combination of a number of beings. They explain that what 
God said to Adam, and what happened to him when he had sinned, 
was spiritual death; that nine hundred and thirty years after was 
physical death, and that then he was liable to eternal death-a 
condition of torture -a death that never dies. 

We will first state our objection to this theological division of death 
into three, and proceed to explain the question under discussion 
from our standpoint. We object first to the division of a man into 
three parts- spiritual man, physical man, and something after 
which survives both of the former. The supposition that man could 
lose spiritual being arises from a confusion of thought concerning 
human and spiritual beings. Scripture teaches us that human beings 
and spiritual beings are different orders of beings, there being far 
more difference between a man and spiritual beings (angels, etc.), 
than between a fish and a horse. Adam, as a human being, was "of 
the earth, earthy." (1 Cor. 15:47.) And this was God's design in his 
creation— viz. : to make a different order of beings from angels- 
spiritual beings, which he had already created-an order of beings 
adapted to the earth by nature. That God had succeeded in making 
man different from angels -spiritual beings-is evident from the 
fact that he called him "very good," and gave him dominion over 
earth and all earthly things. (Gen. 1:26; Psa. 8:6.) 

If, then, Adam was human and not spiritual by nature, he could not 
lose spiritual nature or spiritual life; and those who hold that he did 
lose it, are unable to point to a single Scripture which so declares. 
We suggest to make it forcible to your minds, that it would be as 
reasonable and as sensible to talk of a fish dying to a horse's life or 
nature, as to say that man died to a nature totally different from his 
own. 

Adam died only as a man. From the time he sinned and was driven 
from the Garden of Eden, he gradually began to die as a man; he 
began to lose those grand perfections of mind and body which 
constituted him the superior and ruler of the lower animals. This 
dying process continued by reason of his strength and perfection for 
a long time— 930 years— then the dying process was complete- 
Adam was dead— lifeless. So far as he knows or feels he is "as 
though he had not been" created. 

Thus, in him was illustrated God's word— the wages of sin is death. 

But the query comes— would not Adam have died anyhow, whether 
he had sinned or not?-if not, how could he ever go to heaven? We 
reply, no; if Adam had not sinned, he had not died, but would have 
lived on, on earth. God never promised anywhere in his Word to 
take Adam to heaven. Adam had no such hope or desire. His desire 
was in harmony with his earthly or human nature— to live on the 
earth and to enjoy it. And this, as we have shown, was God's will 



also— to make an earth to be inhabited, and to make a creature to 
inhabit and use and rule it in harmony with God's will. 

It should be clearly held in mind, that while God does purpose and 
is to accomplish the lifting of a "little flock" of humanity from the 
human nature to a spiritual-the Divine nature,-as new creatures- 
yet this is not a change of God's original plan, when he said let us 
make MAN. God's plan relative to having the earth peopled with a 
race of perfect MEN, still continues, and will, ere long, be 
accomplished. It is only during this Gospel Age since Jesus was (at 
resurrection) highly exalted to the DIVINE PLANE of being, that 
God is calling out from among men, some to become partakers of 
the Divine nature, and sharers of glory as spiritual beings-joint 
heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord. The condition upon which we 
may claim those promises as ours, is, that becoming dead to earthly 
aims, hopes, motives, and pleasures, we render the human nature 
(not its sins) a living sacrifice. 

But another inquires— if Adam would not have died had he not 
sinned, does it not prove that he possessed immortality? Not at all, 
(You will see the distinction between immortality and everlasting 
or continuous life by reading "Food," pp. 11 and 134,) his life 
would have been continued by allowing him to continue to feed on 
the trees of life in the Garden of Eden. There was nourishment in 
their fruit which sustained human life. God executed the penalty, 
death, by separating man from those nourishing trees; Adam's life 
forces were exhausted in labor, and the products of the cursed earth 
were insufficient to supply the waste. The earth was cursed for 
man's sake- that it might not sustain his life. 

But now the previous question. If physical death is the penalty or 
wages of sin, why is it that all-saints and sinners alike-die? We 
answer in the words of the apostle, death is passed upon all men in 
that all have sinned. The reason you die is because you are a sinner- 
-you were born a sinner. It was not your fault that you were thus 
born, but it resulted from a law which God established in the 
creation of the race to which we belong. It was a part of his law or 
plan that this race should propagate its species. Thus Adam was to 
multiply and fill the earth with beings perfect and sinless like 
himself -in God's sight "very good" men. But when Adam began to 
decay and to lose his grand perfections as a part of the penalty of 
disobedience —dying— he began to lose the ability to produce sinless 
and perfect offspring. A pure, perfect and sinless race could not 
come from a sinful and decaying head, and thus when Adam 
sinned, all his unborn posterity partook of the evils or wages of sin- 
-death. 

At first glance it seems unjust and harsh that we should be 
condemned and punished for an act in which individually we had 
no share. But when we take God's explanation of it, all is clear and 
satisfactory: He condemned all through, or on account of one man's 
sin, in order that he might have mercy upon all and redeem all by 



one sacrifice, which he had purposed in himself, before the 
foundation of the world. (Rom. 5:18,19; and 11:32.) 

As we have before shown, had each man been given a trial, such as 
Adam had, the probabilities are, that more than half of the billions 
of his children would have done just as he did. And each one who 
did so, would have been condemned to death, and to redeem them 
all, would have made necessary the death of just as many 
substitutes or ransoms; causing pain and death to as many sinless 
(willing) redeemers. All of these redeemers must have first come 
down to earthly conditions, and become men, that they might taste 
death for the sinner and pay his penalty. 

But how much wiser and better was the plan which God took. He 
condemned all through one representative, that he might justify 
through another-a representative redeemer. "Oh, the depths of the 
riches, both of the knowledge and wisdom of God." 

The reason, then, that all die, is, that by nature all are sinners. And, 
though the ransom of believers has been paid by the death of Jesus, 
yet those believers are not yet saved from 

R364 : page 6 

the penalty of sin (death), but are merely assured by God's promises 
that their ransom has been paid, and in His due time, they will be 
saved out of death by a resurrection. 

The advantages which now accrue to believers are not actual for 
they share the miseries of the curse with the world, but they are by 
faith, "For we are saved by hope" only, and not in fact. (Rom. 
8:23,24.) We have a basis of hope for future life, in God's promise 
of a resurrection, which none but believers in those promises can 
have. Thus we have hope as an anchor which keeps us from the 
drifting doubts of the world. We have more also as believers in the 
efficacy of Jesus' ransom. We realize that while before as sinners, 
God could not recognize us at all, now as those whose sins have 
been paid and canceled by Jesus' death, we can come to God as 
sinless— "justified from all things." (Acts 13:39.) We can again, as 
Adam did before sin, call God Father, and be recognized by him as 
human sons. (Luke 3:38.) 

But, as we have seen, the penalty of sin— death— is allowed to 
continue until the full close of this Gospel or Sacrificing Age. 
During this age so many of the believers as desire may join 
themselves to Christ in sacrificing their humanity, and become 
thereby sharers with him of Divinity. When this work shall be 
accomplished -which pays in full the ransom price of the world- 
then comes the time for SALVATION in the actual sense. The 
church— the new creatures— will be the first to be saved from death. 
Theirs is called the first (chief) resurrection, because they are raised 
to the divine— spiritual plane. Blessed and holy are all they that have 
part in the first (chief) resurrection. This first (chief resurrection) 
began with our head, Jesus, and will be completed in raising to the 



same condition the church, which is his body. As Paul aimed, so we 
also aim to have a part in that chief resurrection, for only the "little 
flock" -his body-are of it. (Phil. 3:8-1 1.) 

Then will follow the actual SALVATION of the world from death, 
by a resurrection. (See article "Resurrection. ") So we see that death 
is not complex but a simple thing. The man died, and God's plan is 
to save him from death by paying his ransom, and then giving him 
back his life, in hope, that being better able to appreciate its value, 
he will "choose life and live" in harmony with God's laws. 

At some future time we will answer and explain the various 
passages supposed to conflict with the above explanation of sin's 
wages. 



R364 : page 6 

THEORETICAL vs. PRACTICAL CREEDS. 

Who has not been struck with the difference between the practice 
and theory of those who adhere to the creeds of the various sects. 
They preach positively and repeatedly that crimes and sins will be 
surely punished in everlasting torture from which there is no chance 
of escape, and no hope of mercy or pity ever helping them. They 
preach that "Straight is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth 
unto life, and few there be that find it, "-and that therefore, the great 
mass of mankind are on the broad road, which they say, leads to the 
irrevocable doom of eternal torture. 

And yet those who profess this, contradict it by their acts. Parents 
whose children are walking any but the narrow way, are careless 
and seemingly indifferent. Ministers who preach thus, eat, drink 
and are merry, and feel content to preach on "The beauties of 
nature"— "Anti Mormonism, " or "Longfellow our great poet" -all of 
which seems very inconsistent with their professed belief. But they 
all have a way of solacing their minds by saying: God will do right; 
he will have mercy on my sons and my daughters, and all my 
relatives and my friends. The great centre of hope seems to be that 
sometime, perhaps just the moment of death, they will say or think - 
-may God forgive my life of sin. 

A forcible example of this was recently furnished in the case of 
"Jesse James," the notorious outlaw, robber and murderer, who, for 
a number of years, at the head of a band of his kind, has been the 
terror of Missouri. He was very recently shot, and it is said never 
after spoke and was conscious but a short time. He was buried from 
a Presbyterian Church, three ministers officiating. They detailed 
some of his honorable and manly (?) traits of character, and hoped 
that God would have mercy upon him -for possibly in his 
conscious moments after being shot, he might perchance have said, 
"God be merciful to me a sinner. " 



Now we object, not to the benevolence which could desire for Jesse 
a place more tolerable than that the church has drawn and painted 
for the sinner, but we do ask in the name of common sense— Where 
is the consistency of such conduct? 

We see their difficulty to be an endeavor to make peace and 
harmony, between the traditions of men framed into church creeds 
in the dark ages, and enlightened common sense and reason of to- 
day. But how sadly they fail to reach any reasonable conclusion. If 
they could but leave human creeds and take God's Word, allowing 
it to interpret itself, how it would all become clear and plain, and 
grandly harmonious and consistent. 



R364 : page 7 

HUMAN TEACHERS NECESSARY. 

"He gave indeed the Apostles and the Prophets, and the 
Evangelists, and Shepherds, and Teachers, for the complete 
qualification of the Saints for the work of service; in order to the 
building up of the body of the Anointed one; till we all attain to the 
unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God to a full 
grown man (till the body is complete)— to the measure of the full 
stature of the Anointed one." Eph 4:11-13. 

This teaches us that we may be saints (consecrated ones) before we 
have come to full harmony with God's plans, or reached our full 
development in knowledge and faith. It also shows us that it is the 
will of God that we should not continue babes in Christ but should 
"grow in grace and knowledge, growing up (as members) into him 
in all things, who is the head of the body, even Christ; (Eph. 4:15,) 
striving and aiming continually for the perfection of knowledge and 
faith-stature of the anointed pattern, our head. This increase and 
growth must not stop until we ALL (the entire body) have been thus 
schooled "for the work of service. " 

To assist us, God has provided helpers-Apostles, Prophets, 
Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers. Those whom God selected for these 
positions in the primitive Church, were not selected because of their 
learning or worldly wisdom, nor because of their natural gifts; but 
evidently, largely because of their entire consecration to his will 
and service. 

In selecting his ministers, Jesus passed by the "Theological 
Seminaries" -their "Schools of the Prophets," and their Doctors of 
Divinity, and their students too, and chose unpretentious "Israelites 
indeed. " Among those chosen, being some rather illiterate 
fishermen. Thus he has ever chosen the weak things to confound 
the mighty. "Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. " It 
should be remembered too, that God has always provided his 
church with ministers and helpers. It may help us also, to remember 
that Jesus always gives his ministers their commission, which may 



be known and read of all the saints-viz. His spirit of self sacrifice 
for the sheep, and ability to feed them by expounding to them the 
Scriptures harmoniously. 

That God does set apart or raise up teachers for the Church, is not 
only evident from the Scripture (1 Cor. 12:27-31 and 2 Tim. 2:2.) 
but also from his dealings. It is a fact that during this Gospel age, it 
has pleased God to make use of some men far more than others in 
the work of teaching and edifying the body of Christ. Jesus was a 
teacher sent of God. The disciples were sent to preach and teach 
and baptize. And while we believe that every consecrated member 
of the body of Christ is a MINISTER in some sense, and all are 
"anointed to preach the glad tidings," yet there are various members 
adapted to different parts of the work, just as there are different 
members and offices in the human body, which Scripturally is used 
to illustrate the body of Christ-the Church. 

The head of the body is gone from earthly to spiritual conditions. In 
him centres all the knowledge and wisdom which must direct the 
affairs of (his flesh) the members on the earthly plane. This is 
accomplished by delegating various qualities of the head to some 
members of the body. The highest offices entrusted by our head to 
members of the body for the use of the entire body, are the qualities 
of the Eye, the Ear and the Mouth. The two former are channels of 
information, and the latter of expression. These correspond with 
certain of the chief offices in the church. First the Eye to see: John 
and Paul were two members of the church, who enjoyed more than 
any others perhaps, this grand quality of the head. It was a gift in 
which they greatly rejoiced. Jesus received a wonderful revelation 
from the Father relative to coming events (Rev. 1:1.) and true to his 
body, he sent and signified it to John who thus stood as the eye of 
the Church and through him we can see as fast as due, the 
unfoldings of that revelation. Paul too, had this gift or office in a 
remarkable 

R365 : page 7 

degree, being in visions and revelations of the Lord more abundant 
than they all. (2 Cor. 12:2-4. Gal. 1:12; 2:2.) 

Paul is the clearest eye the Church has ever had. Though he was not 
permitted to make known what he so clearly saw, (2 Cor. 12:4) yet 
it is evident that the things seen, so deepened and widened his own 
knowledge of God's plan and love as related to the past, present, 
and "ages to come," that his writings have a rich depth, fullness, 
and golden coloring, possessed by no other New Testament writer. 
He seems to come to the very verge of those glorious revelations 
while explaining Rom. 1 1 :25-33, concerning the plan of God 
relative to the casting off of fleshly Israel and their future 
restoration to his favor through the agency of the church-when the 
church is complete —when they shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy. How anxious he seems to tell plainly all about those future 



dealings-what was not due to be clearly known until now. "O the 
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. " 

Note again the value of the sights shown to that celebrated eye of 
the church— concerning the development of the body of Christ and 
its future work in coming ages-Eph. 2:6,7 and 3:3-6. Yes looking 
through those Apostolic eyes of the body (church) we can see 
wonderful things. 

But several "gifts" were bestowed upon some of the Apostles: The 
ear quality was another gift less honorable than the eye, yet very 
desirable. This gift was possessed to some extent by nearly all the 
Apostles, and by some of the members of the body throughout this 
age. It is the gift or quality of understanding and appreciating the 
Word and plan of God. It was by the exercise of this gift that Paul, 
Peter and the others were able to point out the fulfillment of 
Prophecies, and to have understanding of the deep things of God. 

The mouth (utterance) is another quality belonging to the head 
which is delegated to members, for the benefit of the body. This gift 
though possessed by perhaps all of the Apostles, was specially 
notable in Peter and James. Paul, though a great reasoner and 
possessed of the eye and ear qualities was inferior to Appollos and 
some others in oratory. (See 1 Cor. 14:3; Acts 18:24; 2 Cor. 11:6.) 

These qualities belonging to the head, are still in and with the true 
members of the true body of Christ. God is still pleased to use some 
such channels through whom the whole body is to be blessed and 
edified; yet we should always remember that their honor consists in 
doing greater service for the body and head than other members. 
Now, as in Paul's day, "to each is given the manifestation of the 
Spirit, for the benefit of ALL," (1 Cor. 12:7) and not alone for 
themselves individually. And, as even Paul, who possessed the 
chiefest gifts in chief measure, guarded himself, lest after having 
preached to others, he himself should be a "castaway" from the high 
calling; so now, it is no positive assurance of our final victory, that 
we have been used as ministers of the body. 

But there are other good positions with honor, in the body of Christ. 
There are members which belong properly to the body and not to 
the head, viz: the hands and the feet etc. The feet make progress 
and represent the mission work of Evangelists. The hands care for, 
protect, assist, and feed the body, and thus answer to the work of 
Pastors; then the trunk of a human body represents the mass of the 
church. The working together of the whole system is to build itself 
up and to strengthen the laborers-the hands and feet, and to prepare 
the entire body for the doing of the will of the head. So the entire 
body of Christ builds itself up and grows strong by the use of the 
spiritual food; and it imparts its force and strength to those 
members which minister to it— viz: Prophets, Teachers, Evangelists, 
and Pastors. 

This Scriptural insight into the proper condition and active office of 
the various members of the body of Christ, forces the conclusion 



that the real members of the real body are very few. That it was the 
design of our Father that the body should be formed of such real 
members, and that every member should contribute to the 
upbuilding of all, is very clear. And it is none the less clear, that all 
the real members are thus performing their part, as fast as they 
perceive their ability and privilege. 

God is not merely expressing how he would like to have the body 
grow, but how it must grow, and is growing up to the full stature of 
the anointed one. It behooves us each then, to examine ourselves, 
and thus see if we are abiding in the anointed body, and as active 
living members, contributing to the general health and activity of 
the body. 

The great worldly organizations, claiming the name of Christ, yet 
refusing his headship, leading and control, and the teachings of his 
word, has nothing in common with the real followers in Jesus' 
footsteps. They have their heads and prophets and pastors, but not 
the true (Isa. 9:15; 29:9-13 and Jer. 23:16-32.) They have large 
flocks but they are not all sheep. They have their teachers, but the 
time has come when these great flocks of nominal sheep will not 
endure sound doctrine; but after their own desires, they gather to 
themselves teachers having itching ears (for the world's applause) 
and they turn away their ears from the truth, and are turned unto 
fables. (2 Tim. 4:3-4.) But let us watch that we be not deceived by 
all their form of Godliness, lacking the power, (2 Tim. 3:5) which if 
possible would deceive the very elect. But let us faithfully endure 
afflictions and fully accomplish our service. 

The true body of Christ is indeed a mystery from the world's 
standpoint -a visible company with no visible head; a company 
bound and cemented to each other by no visible bond or interest, 
but by the invisible spirit (mind) of their head, which unites them in 
a labor of self-sacrifice, each member doing according to his ability 
to bless and benefit the body and honor the invisible head. 

In this body are still to be found the representative qualities of the 
head. They have eyes, for they look through the eyes of the 
Apostles at the plans and works of God, and have not left these for 
the traditions of men. The true church has ears; it is still being 
blessed with members specially used to unfold to it the prophecies 
and dark-sayings, and to direct it to the "meat in due season." It still 
has those who esteem it a privilege to serve, and feed, and care for 
the body as pastors. And it still has faithful ones (and equally 
members of the body and beloved of the head) who, though not 
thus special workers, are nevertheless, strengthening the hands and 
the knees and glorifying the head by supporting these by their 
means and by their prayers, and by their influence. 

Oh that each might fully value his privilege and opportunities as 
body members. All cannot be the eye, nor all the ear, nor all hands 
nor feet. Some are honored with one service, and some with 
another; (1 Cor. 12:14-20.) yet let us each remember to seek 



earnestly the best gifts, but rather that we may prophecy-expound 
the Word. (1 Cor. 14:3.) 

Let us remember that the basis of all promotion from a lesser to a 
higher opportunity of work in the body, will be the faithfulness with 
which we use our present abilities. Again let none despise his office 
of Steward of this world's goods. If this is your opportunity use well 
your office, and perhaps you will be promoted by our head and 
become a dispenser of spiritual things. [We commend the plan 
suggested by Paul to all, even the very poorest; those who have 
never learned to give, have failed to rightly appreciate one of our 
choice privileges and pleasures. Read 1 Cor. 16:2, and 2 Cor. 8:1-8; 
and 9:1-9.] 



R365 : page 7 

A CRITICISM CRITICISED. 

A gentleman who read in "Food" concerning the first clause of 
Rev. 20:5. -"The rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand 
years were finished"-that this passage is spurious, and not found in 
any MSS. written previous to the fifth century— possibly 
questioning the correctness of our statement, or at least desiring to 
have additional testimony, wrote to the "Bible Banner," a Second- 
Advent publication, inquiring the correctness of this statement. 

In reply Eld. D. T. Taylor published the following in the "Banner" 
of May 4th, 1882: 

The words, "But the rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished," Rev. 20:5, are omitted, and not 
found in the Sinaitic Codex, which was probably made A.D. 331- 
350. It is the oldest N.T. MSS. known. But Tischendorf says its 
omission is "a mere error." The Alexandrine MSS., written about 
A.D. 450, has the text, and merely omits the words "but" and 
"again." The Vatican MSS., made about A.D. 350, omits no part, 
but contains the entire text, as now in our Bibles. Hence it is not 
true, as some writer has said in the "Banner," that this verse "is not 
found in any MSS. written previous to the fifth century. 

We must answer this, and if we answer it satisfactorily we hope our 
opponent will give a proper retraction to his remarks above quoted, 
at an early date. 

First then, the brother says: "The Alexandrine MS. -A.D. 450-has 
the text. " We reply, that any one understanding the subject, knows 
that 

R365 : page 8 

the fifth century commenced with the year 401, and ended with the 
year 500. Just so the fourth century began with the year 301 and 
ended with the year 400. So too, we say since 1801 that we are now 
living in the nineteenth century and may properly use the 



expression until the end of the year 1900. Now we admit freely that 
the text is found in 

R366 : page 8 

the Alexandrine MS., but we still claim, and every scholar will 
support us in it, that if the Alexandrine MS. was written in A.D. 
450, or any time after the year 400, it was not written previous to 
the fifth century. 

But it is claimed, that the passage is found in the Vatican MS. of 
about the year 350. This we most positively deny. Every authority 
on the subject bears witness that this Vatican MS. supposed to have 
been written about the middle of the fourth century, contains the 
New Testament only so far as Heb. 9:14, "from which verse to the 
end of the New Testament it is deficient; so that not only the last 
chapters of the Hebrews, but the Epistles to Timothy, Titus, and 
Philemon, as well as the Revelation are missing. " [We quote from 
C. Tischendoerf, perhaps the best of all authorities on ancient MSS 
ofN.T.] 

While the above mentioned is the MS., which is generally 
understood by the name "Vatican MS.," yet as a matter of fact there 
was more than one MS. of the New Testament in the Vatican 
Library; but none but the one above, is sufficiently ancient to 
constitute it an authority. The Emphatic Diaglott is principally 
compared with the "Vatican MS. No. 1209," the ancient copy; but 
for the lacking book of Revelation the Vatican MS. No. 1 160 is 
used, the author giving it a preference over the "Alexandrine MS.," 
though it was written about the eleventh century. (See "Diaglott" 
note to Rev. 1:1.) 

But even if brother Taylor got mixed on the two Vatican MSS., he 
is still at fault, for Vat. MS. 1 160 does not contain the disputed 
clause. See Diaglott note on Rev. 20:5. 

But it is claimed that Tischendoerf, the finder and translator of the 
very ancient and most authentic of all Greek MSS., excuses the fact 
that this clause does not appear in his "Sinaitic MS." by saying that 
it is doubtless "a mere error." To this we reply that we fail to see 
what weight this has on the subject. The finder of a book knows no 
more than any one else about whether or not the omission of this 
clause was a "mere error." We claim again, that the absence of this 
clause from all MSS. written prior to the fifth century, as well as 
the fact that it would contradict other Scriptures, which teach that 
the "Restitution of all things" is due at the coming of Jesus and 
before he shall finish his reign— prove the disputed clause to be 
spurious-an interpolation. (Acts 3:21.) 

The Syriac-Peshito version of the New Testament (the mother 
tongue of Jesus and the Apostles) was written in the latter part of 
the first or early part of the second century, and is therefore of 
earlier date than any Greek MS. extant. This most venerable 
authority, also repudiates the disputed first clause of Rev. 20:5. 



page 8 

THIS is the last number of Vol. III. All readers who have not 
subscribed since July last, should notify us at once whether they 
desire the paper continued or not. This applies also to names on the 
"Lords' Poor List." 

LEAFLET SUPPLEMENT -We send you a sample of some 
matter for free distribution, as a supplement. Order as many as you 
want, we will print 100,000 copies. They are on thin paper, 
convenient to enclose with letters. May they be a part of the hail of 
Isa. 28:17. 



R366 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Do those who die in childhood ever obtain spiritual bodies? 

Ans. If the child was begotten of the spirit it will be in the 
resurrection, born of the spirit to perfect spiritual being. If not, it 
still retains the human nature, and in due time will have a part in the 
restitution of all things and may with all mankind, if it will, reach 
full human perfection. 

Since the begetting of the spirit is through the word of truth, (James 
1:18.) it follows that children who cannot understand at least the 
first principles of the doctrines of Christ, could not be begotten by 
those principles, or influenced to a consecration-sacrifice of their 
human nature. 

Ques. Does not the "Greek Church" as well as the Church of Rome 
have a place in prophecy? 

Ans. God of course could have given us a history of all the 
governments of earth. Yet as a matter of fact he has confined his 
prophetic declarations to a few-as outlined in Daniel's image and 
four great beasts. The declarations relative to present governments 
being almost exclusively confined to the nations of Europe— the 
remnants of the Roman Empire. 

Probably for similar reasons God has measurably confined those 
prophetic utterances which apply to religious systems, to that 
system which was given the seat of the beast (Rev. 13:2.) —The 
Church of Rome and her daughters (Rev. 17:5.) and passed by 
almost unmentioned, the other, and some of them larger, religious 
systems, such as Confucianism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism and 
the Greek Church. 

Ques. Please explain Rom. 6:10. "He died unto sin once." 

Ans. The Diaglott reads "by sin;" Murdoch's Syriac "for sin." We 
think the signification is that Jesus died for, or on account of, or by 



reason of sin. So it is also with those who as members of the body 
of Christ, are sharing in his death, (vs. 11.) With the body as with 
the head, it is not a dying to sin in the sense of presenting cut off 
sins as a sacrifice to our Father. No, Jesus "knew no sin" and his 
death was a sacrifice, giving up, not of sins, but of a sinless nature 
for the sins of others. So too with his body— we were sinners even 
as others, but we were redeemed, bought with a price, even his 
precious blood (life); and now with every sin stain cancelled, we as 
he did-present a sinless offering. (In God's estimation sinless and it 
should be so esteemed by us.) We present this sinless nature to 
share in his death-thus having fellowship in his sufferings and 
death which fills up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, 
and complete the World's ransom price. 

Read succeeding vs. 11-13. Reckon that the dead or sinful nature 
was buried when Christ died for your sins; reckon that as justified 
human beings you became alive when he rose; but go further and as 
justified beings present yourselves to God (living sacrifices) and 
yield your members to God as his instruments in doing all of his 
good work. 

Ques. Please explain Phil. 3:21. "Who shall change our vile body 
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. " Does not this 
Scripture contradict the thought which you have so often expressed, 
viz: that the bodies of saints will be in the resurrection spiritual 
bodies, and totally "new creatures "-not formed in part by and out 
of the earthly bodies of the human nature? Does not this Scripture 
positively assert that the new body will be merely this vile body 
changed? 

Ans. The body to be changed, here mentioned, does not refer to our 
personal bodies, for then it should read "change our vile bodies that 
they &c. " But it is our vile body; one body (the body of Christ) 
composed of many members that is spoken of. 

It will help, in this as in every case if we examine the context. Paul 
is drawing a contrast between two classes claiming to be Christians. 
He sets himself as at the head of those who are living properly, and 
exhorts all true followers of Jesus running for the prize to follow 
and imitate him, and concludes by saying, "Brethren be followers 
together of me," vss. 15-17. This company constitute members of 
the true body of Christ, because they follow in his footsteps of self- 
denial. 

On the other hand he mentions the false ones saying, vss. 18 and 
19, "For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell 
you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: 
Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly (appetite) and 
whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things." 

Now contrast with this body which falsely claimed to be a body of 
Christ, but which sought and gloried in and minded the very earthly 
things to which Jesus was crucified— contrast these, I say, with the 
aims, joys, and mind of the true body. Paul details the experiences, 



&c, of the true body in vss. 7-15. (Read carefully.) He says that the 
true body instead of glorying in earthly things and pampering 
earthly desires, counts all earthly glories and honors and gains as 
loss and dross, and casts them away as detestable compared to the 
glories and joys anticipated in the future with its head. Then he 
concludes his argument by assuring them that though this true body 
of Christ has become very poor, miserable, outcast, and vile, from a 
human standpoint, yet the time is coming when they will be owned 
and accepted to a condition of glory as his body by the true head. In 
consideration of this coming change from a condition of 
degradation to glory, he exhorts "Therefore my brethren... so stand 
fast in the Lord my dearly beloved." (Ch 4:1.) 

We give here, Murdoch's translation from the "Syriac," "Our 
concern (interest) is with heaven; [We are not minding earthly 
things,] and from thence we expect our vivifier, our Lord, Jesus the 
Messiah; who will change the body of our abasement that it may 
have the likeness of the body of His glory. " 

Ques. Please explain 1 Kings 17:22. 

Ans. The Hebrew word here translated soul, is nephesh; it signifies 
being, or life, or existence. Now read it: "the child's life came into it 
again"; and all is clear. The word soul has been shrouded in 
mystery by theologians, and helps to deceive themselves and others 
with the idea that it is an intelligent person which lives in a man. 
There is no excuse however for any one who has even a slight 
knowledge of the Hebrew, or is possessed of any of the "helps" of 
our day— there is no excuse for such persons making this mistake, as 
this same word nephesh, is repeatedly used with reference to the 
lower animals and fish, &c. But this is hidden from the general 
reader by the English translation. The translators, when nephesh is 
used in referring to fish and lower animals, generally translate it 
"breath" or "life," and sometimes where nothing else will make 
sense they translate it "breath" 

R367 : page 8 

or "life" in connection with mankind. But wherever the mystifying 
word soul can be used to give seeming support to the teachings of 
theology, it has the preference. 

Ques. What about baptism now; should it still be performed? 

Ans. Baptism into Christ, we regard as no longer possible since 
Oct. '81. All however who previous to that time had performed the 
real baptism into death; (consecration) we would still urge to 
perform the outward illustration of it, i.e., immersion into water. 

It should, however, be remembered that the "Baptism of John" was 
an outward sign of repentance and turning (being converted) to 
God. This symbol of sin washing, may still be performed on any 
who desire it. This last form is all that is generally recognized by 
Christian professors of today -"Knowing only the baptism of 



John." Very few know of the higher baptism into Christ's death, and 
thus into membership in his body. 

Ques. If God never cursed man for sin, why was it necessary for 
Jesus to die? 

Ans. God did curse man. The words of the curse were: "Dying, thou 
shalt die." We cannot make this subject more plain than we have 
done in "Why evil was permitted. " Read it again. Those who are so 
anxious for truth as to be willing to sacrifice other things to get it, 
are the ones for whom God prepared it. If thou searchest for her as 
men search for silver, then shalt thou find the knowledge of God 
and his plans. (Prov. 2:2-11.) 

Ques. Isa. 13:9-13. This will be answered with other similar 
statements in "Millennial Day Dawn. " 

Ques. Relative to explanation of Matt. 25:46 in March WATCH 
TOWER, permit me to inquire the Greek word there translated 
punishment and its critical definition. 

Ans. The word is kolasis. Young defines it to mean restraint; 
Liddell and Scott say it means pruning, and B. Wilson in the 
Diaglott renders it "cutting-off. " These are the best authorities on 
Greek. Thus it is clearly evident that the punishment referred to is- 
everlasting restraint or cutting off from life, of which they had 
proved themselves unworthy. 

As to when this destruction is due, read more particularly March 
number and see it to be at the close of the Millennial age. 

Ques. Do you claim that the Bible does not teach that there are 
three persons in one God? 

Ans. Yes: On the contrary, it does tell us that there is one God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ of whom are all things (or who 
created all things). We believe then in One God and Father, and 
also in one Lord Jesus Christ whom God hath highly exalted, and 
given a name above every name. But these are two and not one 
being. They are one only in the sense of being in harmony. We 
believe also in a spirit of God called also the spirit of Christ and 
spirit of truth. But it is no more a person than is the spirit of devils 
and the spirit of the World and the spirit of Anti-Christ. The one 
represents the influence or power or will of God, and the other the 
power or influence or will of Satan and of the World. The biased 
views of the New Testament translators has led them to translate it 
when they could, as though it were a person. More on this again. 



R367 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY, 1882. 

NO. 1. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



page 1 

THOSE who cannot send money, but who send their subscriptions 
in stamps, will please send one and two cent stamps during July and 
August. Usually we prefer three cent stamps, but are short of ones 
and twos now. 

—Foreign subscribers will please remember that foreign stamps are 
useless to us. 

—Subscribers who remove, should mention old as well as new 
address. 



-MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN is progressing as rapidly as 
possible, but is not yet ready for press. We still have the old "Day 
Dawn"; paper covers, 25c; cloth, 50c, the reduced prices. 



BRO. BOYER has prepared and mailed to our readers in Great 
Britain, letters of introduction wherever two or more reside in the 
one town. Each of London's five districts are treated as distinct 
cities, and listed accordingly. This was requested by many, and we 
doubt not will be beneficial to all, enabling them to assemble 
together and edify one another. The Lord bless, comfort, and 
strengthen you, and build you up in the most holy faith. May the 
Comforter comfort your hearts with an understanding of the 
exceeding great and precious promises. Be strong in the Lord-in 
his truth, and in the power of his might— yea, be strong. 

SOME want the June ZION'S WATCH TOWER in tract form, 
others want January and February numbers. We cannot do this yet. 
We have neither the time nor means to do all that you and we could 
wish, to spread the truth. We are doing all we can. 



-THE outlines of six sermons have been in greater demand than 
we had expected. They are not designed for any except those who 
have fully determined to give a part of their time to public 
preaching. Some who wrote for them, we thought, had 
misunderstood this, and we did not send to all, but endeavored to 
judge who could use them to profit. If we have made any mistakes, 
please correct us. Those who received them, but will not use them, 
will please return them to us, as we have very few left, and there 
will be use for more than we have. 



R367 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

This is the first number of a new volume. It opens our fourth year. 
Thanking our Father in heaven for progress made in the pathway of 



light, and in the understanding of his Word, given during the past, 
and looking to him as the fountain from which comes all truth and 
every good gift, for continued supplies during the year now begun, 
we go forward. We expect, according to his Word, that the light 
will not oppose, but harmonize with past light; that it will not be 
light of a different character, but more of the same sort. 

And still new beauties may we see, 
And still increasing light. " 

No previous year ever had so favorable an outlook. Though 
opposition on every hand increases, so do the encouragements. The 
spread of truth and liberty among God's children more than 
compensates for the stigma and opposition. The persistency of 
Satan in spreading error is more than compensated for, in the 
brighter shining of the truth in contrast. "Praise God from whom all 
blessings flow. " 

More interesting letters, show that the interest in the study of the 
Scriptures is increasing. The light from our Lord's presence is 
breaking upon the sight of others of God's children, and the effect 
upon one and all is, rejoicing, with growth in grace, knowledge and 
love of God. As we come to see light in God's light, it lifts us up 
above earthly things, and more than compensates for the loss of 
human friendship, which it surely involves. 

During June two ministers came to see the force of the truth so 
clearly as to ask for a supply of "Food" for their congregations, and 
one reports that he never saw people so hungry. He expects to 
withdraw from the M.P. Church, and thinks that a number of his 
congregation will follow. The other minister is a Lutheran. 

Many from North, South, East and West are asking for preaching. It 
is impossible to fill those applications which come from afar, but 
we make notes of such and will remember you when we can. We 
cannot remind you too often that we are all commissioned to preach 
the glad tidings: —"Go ye also into my vineyard"— is to every 
consecrated one. Go, do all you can, and seek at the fountain 
wisdom and grace by which you can do more and be further used in 
blessing those around you with the heavenly light. 

There is a disposition on the part of all, to be together and have the 
comfort and support of fellow travelers in the narrow way. But, 
beloved, this does not seem to be God's plan; we are scattered, so 
that we may let our light shine. If we should get to one place, we 
would probably be scattered as were those mentioned in Acts, 8:1. 

If you feel the "glad tidings" filling your heart, and wish that others 
could also hear the message? Gather from this that you may and 
should, let your light so shine as to glorify your Father in heaven. 
God is able and willing to use you, if you will let him. See then at 
once that your consecration is complete, and begin at once to tell 
the message the best you can, praying for more ability, and digging 
for it in God's Word, and you will become daily a vessel of greater 



honor as you are daily more filled with the spirit of truth and used 
by our Master. But remember that to be used of the Lord, we must 
be very humble— "Broken and emptied vessels for the Master's use 
made meet. " "The Lord abhorreth the proud, but giveth grace [His 
favors] to the humble." 

Dear Bro. Sunderlin is again sick and confined to his bed. He writes 
to give his love to you all; says he will continue his last article 
sometime, if the Lord will. He rejoices even in pain, in the 
knowledge that "all things shall work together for good." Other 
brethren report progress of the truth against much opposition from 
the world, flesh and devil. Brethren and sisters, we hope all these 
dear ones have your sympathy and prayers; as Paul expresses it, 
"Brethren, pray for us, that utterance may be given us." (Eph 6:19.) 

Bro. Keith sends word that he is enroute for his Michigan trip 
which was before interrupted: He will be with us at Pittsburgh 
shortly. Bro. Lawver of Missouri, starts about July first, for a trip 
through Kansas and Texas. Letters, requests for preaching, may be 
addressed to this office. 

The Chicago friends will be glad to know that Bro. McCormack is 
about to remove there. Chicago is a good field, and our Brother and 
his wife remove there in the hope of being used by the Master for 
the blessing of the household of faith, by disseminating the truth. 
When he calls on you, receive him well-he is a brother in Christ. 
Let meetings be commenced at once, and the Lord bless you. 

The subject of the holy Spirit has been much inquired about, and 
we devote much of our space this month to its examination, which 
we trust will be of interest and profit to you. 

We have about twenty- five questions yet unanswered, and as space 
is limited, they must come gradually. We like them; they indicate 
thought and study. However, many are already answered, if you 
would reread papers and pamphlets which you have. Never give 
away back numbers; frequent reference to them is necessary. Loan, 
but do not give away. 

page 1 

We make a few extracts from the many encouraging letters 
received— 



KIRKWOOD, MISS. 

DEAR SIR:-I gratefully acknowledge the reception of your letter. 
In reply I would inform you that I was brought up a 
Congregationalist, but when I entered upon my profession I took 
holy orders in the Protestant Episcopal Church. I have been more 
than forty years in the ministry. I have regarded the P.E. Church as 
the most liberal and scriptural of all the Protestant organizations. 
Still there have been some points, held in common by all, of which 
I have had my doubts and misgivings, such as the day of judgment 



and the eternal punishment of a large portion of the human race 
who had no opportunity of being benefitted by the Gospel. The 
reading of your publications has dispelled my doubts on those 
points. I have been deeply interested in the discussion of these 
points and of many others also, particularly the restitution. I have 
been struck with the aptness and cogency of the interpretation 
which extends throughout the publications. There are some points 
upon which I am not yet altogether satisfied, but presume that 
further investigation may clear my vision. I am now reading the 
Prophecies and Revelation with more interest than ever before. I am 
watching with intense anxiety the present movements of the Jews, 
and the ominous condition of Europe. Most of my reading for the 
last few months has been your publications, and I may say, with a 
most absorbing interest. 

Hoping that we may all attain to glory and immortality as the bride 
of the Lamb, I remain, 

Yours in Christ. 



SUNDERLAND, ENG. 

MY DEAR SIR:-I see that by last number of the WATCH 
TOWER that the pamphlets are indeed bearing fruit, 
notwithstanding all the opposition, not only in America but here. 
Now, could you not arrange some plan by which we, who rejoice in 
the same blessed truths, might have the opportunity of at least 
corresponding with each other, on this side of the Atlantic? You see 
there may be 

page 2 

others only a short distance from me who, like myself, are yearning 
to find some with whom they may hold sweet communion on our 
blessed hope. May I ask for a few copies of the "Tabernacle" to 
send after "Food" to Australia? 

With kindest love to all who are looking for the glorious hope, I 
remain, dear brother, yours faithfully. 



A brother writing from Sunderland, England, says: 

We are not idle here, since I last wrote; we have now a Bible-class 
every Monday at 7 P.M. "The Food" we keep circulating in "good 
ground," so far as human judgment can discern; and it is delightful 
to hear their expressions of surprise and gladness at our kindness in 
thinking of them. One brother here tells me he lent the "Food" and 
"Tabernacle" to one of their ministers, and the subjects have laid 
hold of him. 

I have greater pleasure now than ever in reading the dear old Chart, 
having (thanks to my American brethren) struck a new vein of 



hidden treasure. Strange, is it not, that the light should work West 
first? 

The WATCH TOWER is never idle; it is regularly read by several, 
and is returned to the shelf, carefully patched at all the foldings. 

Remember us in your prayers as we do you. 



R368 : page 2 

THE PROPHETIC ASPECT 
OF THE JEWISH PERSECUTION. 

The following is extracted from a letter in an English paper by Mr. 
Charles Reade, the well-known novelist, whose remarkable 
conversion occurred last year: 

"The Jewish nation, though under a cloud, will eventually resume 
their ancient territory, which is so evidently kept waiting for them. 
The prophecies are clear as day on two points: That the Jews are to 
re-possess Palestine, and, indeed, to rule from Lebanon to 
Euphrates; and that this event is to be the first of a great series of 
changes leading to a vast improvement in the condition of poor 
suffering mankind and of creation in general. Now, we have here in 
prospect a glorious event as sure as the sun will rise to-morrow. 
The only difference is that the sun will rise at a certain hour, and 
the Jews will occupy Syria and resume their national glory at an 
uncertain day. No doubt it is the foible of mankind to assume that 
an uncertain date must be a distant one. But that is unreasonable. 
Surely it is the duty of wise and sober men to watch precursory 
signs and lend their humble co-operation, should so great a 
privilege be accorded to us. 

"This sudden persecution of the Jews in the very nation where they 
are most numerous— may it not be a precursory sign, and a reminder 
from Providence that their abiding city is not in European Tartary? 
I almost think some such reminder was needed; for when I was a 
boy, the pious Jews still longed for the Holy Land. They prayed, 
like Daniel, with their windows opened toward Jerusalem. 

"Yet now that the broken and impoverished Saracen would cede 
them territory at one-tenth of its agricultural and commercial value, 
a cold indifference seems to have come over them. I often wonder 
at this change of sentiment about so great a matter, and in so short a 
period, comparatively speaking, and puzzle myself, as to the 
reason. 

"Two solutions occur to me. 1. Dispersed in various nations, whose 
average inhabitants are inferior in intelligence and forethought to 
themselves, they thrive as individual aliens more than they may 
think so great a multitude of Jews could thrive in a land of their 
own, where blockheads would be scarce. 2. They have for centuries 
contracted their abilities to a limited number of peaceful arts and 



trades; they may distrust their power to diversify their abilities, and 
be suddenly a complete nation, with soldiers, sailors, merchants, 
husbandmen, as well as financiers and artists. 

"But it is now proved that sojourning among inferior nations has 
more drawbacks than living at home. True, the Russian yokel has 
for years been selling to the Jews his summer labor in winter, and at 
a heavy discount; but the improvident Russians have turned like 
wild beasts upon them, and outwitted, lawfully, have massacred 
them contrary to law. Palestine can be colonized effectually from 
Russia alone, where there are three millions of Jews trembling for 
life and property; and the rest would follow. As to the second 
objection, history is a looking-glass at our backs. Whatever Jews 
have done Jews may do. They are a people of genius; and genius is 
not confined by nature, but by will, by habit or by accident. What 
have these people tried and failed in? Warriors, writers, builders, 
merchants, lawgivers, husbandmen; and supreme in all! In this 
history repeats itself. 

"They shall be great in the arts of peace and war, and their enemies 
melt away before them like snow off a dyke. Should they seem to 
require help from any other nation at starting, blessed will be the 
nation that proffers it; and the nation that persecutes them will be 
made an example of in some way or other. Therefore, if by any 
chance this recent outrage should decide the Jewish leaders to 
colonize Palestine from Russia, let us freely offer ships, seamen, 
money— whatever we are asked for. It will be a better national 
investment than Egyptian, Brazilian or Peruvian bonds." 



R368 : page 2 

THE FINISHED MYSTERY. 

"In the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin 
to sound [i.e. in the forepart of his sounding,] the mystery of God 
should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets." 
Rev. 10:7. 

Looking backward, who cannot see that our heavenly Father has 
been pleased to keep some part, and that the very cream or riches of 
his grace, measurably hidden? In the Patriarchal and Jewish ages 
only a mere fragment of God's plan was revealed, and that the 
inferior or earthly part of his plan-the part properly belonging, to 
those who are to be inheritors of earthly blessings. 

Thus, the Apostles tell us of "The mystery of Christ which in other 
ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now [since 
Pentecost] revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets," "even the 
mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but 
now is made manifest to HIS SAINTS. To whom God would make 
known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery." Eph. 3:4,5; 
Col. 1:26,27; and 1 Pet. 1:10-12. God's plan was complete and 



perfect from before the foundation of the world, and needs no 
adding to; but he has kept his plans covered and hidden from the 
world, and has revealed them only gradually to his church— his 
saints. Thus while the unfolding of the mystery of God commenced 
in the days of the Apostles, it will not be finished until the end of 
this Gospel Age-under the sounding of the seventh trumpet as 
shown in the Scripture cited above. 

We claim no new revelations, for to our understanding the 
revelations of God to his saints are completed and finished by the 
records of John on Patmos. But while God's revelation, in the sense 
of utterance ended eighteen hundred years ago, yet revelation in the 
sense of understanding those utterances has continued down 
through the age. 

It is revelation in this sense, that Jesus referred to when about to 
leave the disciples. After having told them many precious things in 
parables and dark sayings, he said, "I have yet many things to say 
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now: howbeit when he the spirit 
of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. " "He shall teach 
you all things and bring all things to your remembrance, 
whatsoever I have said unto you." John 16:12,13; and 14:26. Thus 
during this age the true followers of Christ have been led into a 
more and more full understanding of God's truth, and a fuller 
unfolding of the mystery of God, which was entirely hidden from 
past ages and is to be finished under the seventh trumpet's sounding 
in the end of this age. 

As our readers are aware, we understand that we are now living in 
the days of the voice of the Seventh Angel. The evidence has 
already been furnished (and will appear again -in the forthcoming 
Millennial Day Dawn,) that these trumpets mentioned by the 
Revelator and by Paul (1 Cor. 15:52; and 1 Thes. 4:16; and Rev. 
11:15), are symbolic of a series of events. The sixth of these, we 
believe, ended Aug. 11, 1840, since which we have been living 
under the "seventh trumpet," or "last trump," or "trump of God," 
which continues until the kingdoms of this world, by a great time of 
trouble, become the kingdoms of our Lord. (Rev. 11:15.) This, 
prophetic Scriptures show, will not be fully accomplished until 
A.D. 1914. This is called the Trump of God, probably because 
during its period of time God exercises his great power over the 
nations, breaking them in pieces, and grinding to powder the 
abominable systems of error which have so long flourished and 
made desolate and void God's Word of truth. And another thing, 
God, during this period, will finish the mystery by letting his saints 
(Col. 1:27) come to a full appreciation of his glorious plans. It is 
thus that we account for the great, beautiful and harmonious light, 
and the strengthening food now being given us as members of the 
body of Christ, of which Jesus is the glorified Head. 

But there is another sense in which the word mystery is used in 
Scripture. It is used in the same sense as the word church. Thus the 
true and false churches are called, "The mystery of God, " and "The 



mystery of iniquity. " This is altogether fitting, since the true church 
is the very embodiment of God's plan, and the false church an 
embodiment of error and Satan's plan. The mystery of iniquity 
began in Paul's day, and developed into Papacy and her daughter 
organizations —which system of errors is to be consumed and 
destroyed by truth in his presence. (2 Thes. 2:7,8.) The mystery of 
God began in our Head— Jesus— and is being added to by every true 
member of the vine or body whose names are written in heaven. 
This is the mystery of which Paul says-"This MYSTERY... is 
Christ (the anointing) in you." Col. 1:27. 

"This is a great mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the 
church." Eph. 5:32. The mystery commenced when God was 
manifest in the flesh of Jesus. The world could not see how he 
could be any different from other men; yet the spirit of the Lord 
God was in him, anointing Jesus with power in expounding the 
truth, and in sacrificing himself, etc. So, too, the same anointing 
abideth on all the true church, and as he was, so are we in the 
world— a mystery to the world which "knoweth us not, because it 
knew him not." (1 John 3:1.) The world does not recognize in the 
saints, "sons of God"— "new creatures," "partakers of the divine 
nature." 

R369 : page 2 

Very shortly now, this mystery of God, this company of divinely- 
begotten sons, will be FINISHED-completed: "The church of the 
first born" of which Jesus is the head, will soon cease to be, God 
manifest in the flesh. The entire company shall be glorified 
together, and "shall shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their 
Father." (Matt. 13:43.) They shall arise in power and strength to 
bless all the families of the earth. "The Sun of Righteousness shall 
arise with healing in his wings "-for the Jew first, and also for the 
Gentile. 

It is for the completion of this church that we ourselves groan 
within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to-wit, the redemption of 
the body of Christ; the ending of the mystery part of God's plan, in 
the full glory of Millennial brightness and joy. It is for this event 
also that the world's release from pain and death waits. The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now, waiting 
for the manifestation of the Sons of God. Rom. 8:19-24. 

The necessity of the vailing of God's mysterious purpose with 
reference to the church is very evident. If the religious rulers of the 
Jews had known that Jesus was really the anointed of God, they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. (1 Cor. 2:7,8.) And had 
the rulers of the world and of the nominal church, recognized the 
Lord's anointed body during this age, they would not have had the 
privilege of suffering with their Head. 

Again, Paul tells us that God gave him wonderful revelations 
concerning the mystery, "To make all see what [are the conditions 
of] fellowship of the mystery." (Eph. 3:3-6,9.) And it is to Paul as 



our Lord's instrument that we are indebted more than to any other 
Apostle, for a clear record of the conditions on which we may 
become members of this mystery band, and as such be in due time 
revealed in glory of power. He tells us that we must have 
fellowship in the sufferings of Christ, if we would have share in His 
coming glory. We must with our head become dead to the world, its 
ambitions, its prizes, if we would become heirs of the glory which 
God hath in preparation and reservation for this mystery church of 
which Jesus is the Head. 

We believe that we are just on the eve of the finishing of this 
church, or mystery. You and I, my brother, are, by our covenants, 
candidates for a crown of life and a position in the throne of the 
coming kingdom. Let us make our calling and election to that high 
position sure, by so running our race as to be approved of God, as 
living sacrifices for the gospel of truth. We have full little enough 
time to fulfill all our covenant; let us lay aside every weight and all 
besetting sins, and run, with patience, the race for the prize of our 
high calling, that when the church is complete— the mystery 
finished, we may be among the glorified members. Then no longer 
the mystery— we shall be Jehovah's agents in blessing all the 
families of the earth. 



R369 : page 3 



BE VIGILANT. 



Up, then, and linger not, thou saint of God, 
Fling from thy shoulders each impeding load; 
Be brave and wise, shake off earth's soil and sin, 
That with the Bridegroom thou mayest enter in— 
Oh, watch and pray! 

Clear hath the voice been heard, Behold, I've come- 
That voice that calls thee to thy glorious home, 
That bids thee leave these vales and take swift wing, 
To meet the hosts of thy descending King;- 
And thou may'st rise! 

'Tis a thick throng of foes, afar and near; 
The grave in front, a hating world in rear; 
Yet flee thou canst not, victory must be won, 
Ere fall the shadows of thy setting sun:— 
And thou must fight. 

Gird on thy armor; face each weaponed foe; 
Deal with the sword of heaven the deadly blow; 
Forward, still forward, till the prize divine 
Rewards thy zeal, and victory is thine. 
Win thou the crown. 



-Selected. 



R369 : page 3 

"HEAR, O ISRAEL! JEHOVAH OUR GOD 
IS ONE-JEHOVAH." 

Our readers are aware that while we believe in Jehovah and Jesus, 
and the holy Spirit, we reject as totally unscriptural, the teaching 
that these are three Gods in one person, or as some put it, one God 
in three persons. The doctrine of the Trinity had its rise in the third 
century, and has a very close resemblance to the heathen doctrines 
prevalent at that time, particularly Hindooism. * The only text in 
Scripture which was ever claimed to prove, or affirm, that the 
Father, Son and Spirit are one, is a portion of 1 John 5:7,8. This 
appears only in Manuscripts written since the fifth century, and is 
acknowledged by all Trinitarians to be a "forgery. " So undisputable 
is this, that the translators of the "Revised Version" recently 
published, omit the clause without note or comment, though those 
Revisors were themselves believers in Trinity. 

Like some other doctrines received by Protestants through Papacy, 
this one is received and fully endorsed, though its adherents are 
aware that not a word of Scripture can be adduced in its support. 
Nay more, any one who will not affirm this unscriptural doctrine as 
his faith, is declared by the action of the Evangelical Alliance to be 
nonorthodox— a heretic. 

However, it behooves us as truth seekers, to deal honestly with 
ourselves and with our Father's Word, which is able to make us 
truly wise. Therefore, ignoring the traditions and creeds of 
uninspired men and corrupt systems, let us hold fast the form of 
sound words received from our Lord and the Apostles. (2 Tim. 
1:13.) 

Let us inquire of these "standards" and "authorities" of the true 
church, what is truth on this subject. Paul answers clearly and 
forcibly— There is "one God and Father of all." (Eph. 4:6.) And 
again he says, (1 Cor. 8:5-6.) "There be gods many and lords many, 
but to US there is but one God, the Father, of whom are [or who 
created] all things, and we in him: and one Lord Jesus Christ by 
whom are all things, and we by Him." We believe this exactly: All 
things are of our Father; he is the first cause of all things; and all 
things are by our Lord Jesus. He "the beginning of the CREATION 
of God," (Rev. 3: 14.) has been the agent of Jehovah in all that has 
since been done- "Without him was not anything made that was 
made." (John 1:3.) Jesus' testimony is the same; his claim was that 
he was "a Son," an obedient son, who did not do his own will, but 
the Father's who sent him— "Not my will but thine be done." Again 
Jesus said he could do nothing of himself- "The Father that 
dwelleth in me, He doeth the works." (John 5:19 and 14:10.) True 
he said, I and my Father are one, but he shows in what sense he 
meant they were one, by praying that just so His disciples all might 



be one. (John 10:30 and 17:11.) It is a oneness which results from 
having the same mind or spirit; it is the same oneness that should 
exist between a heart union of man and wife; they twain are one. 

It is far from honoring the Master, as many appear to think they do, 
when they contradict his direct teachings, affirming that Father and 
Son are one and the same being, equal in all respects. No, says 
Jesus, "My Father is greater than I." (John 14:28.) And he also says, 
he is not only his Father but ours:-"I ascend to my Father and your 
Father, to my God and your God." (John 20:17.) A more correct 
translation of Phil. 2:6 settles the question of the Father's 
supremacy, in harmony with other scriptures, such as 1 Cor. 15:28 
and John 14:28. The Emphatic Diaglott translation is, "Who though 
being in a form of God, yet did not meditate a usurpation, to be like 
God. " The idea here, is the very opposite of equality, as conveyed 
in the King James translation: Jesus did not claim equality, nor 
aspire to a usurpation of God's authority. That was Satan's claim 
and effort. Isa. 14:12-14. He said, "I will exalt my throne above the 
stars of God... I will be like the Most High. " 

Jesus said: Ye call me Lord and Master and ye do well, for so I am; 
but call no man on earth Father, for one is your Father, which is in 
heaven. (Matt. 23:9.) Peter also carries the same thought, saying, 
"The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten us." (1 
Pet. 1:3 andEph 3:9-11, Gal. 1:3,4, Rom. 16:25-27.) How clear 
and harmonious are these words of our standards, and we could 
quote much more in perfect harmony. 

Briefly stated then, we find the Scriptures to teach that there is but 
one Eternal God and Father- who is "from everlasting to 
everlasting" (Psa. 90:2 and Rom. 16:26,27.)-that 

R370 : page 3 

the beginning of his creation, since called Jesus, was inferior to the 
Father, but superior to all subsequent creations, in which work he 
was the active agent of Jehovah. A redeemer was needed for 
mankind. In harmony with the Father's wish, but not of compulsion, 
the first created Son of God had his life principal miraculously 
transferred to the womb of Mary, was born and grew to manhood— a 
perfect man. Hence his life principle was not derived from the 
human channels, and was not that forfeited by the sin of Adam. 

He was a fully developed, perfect man, according to The Law, at 
the age of thirty years; and immediately consecrated himself as a 
man to the Father's will, offering himself a living sacrifice on our 
behalf— at baptism. The sacrifice was accepted, and he was imbued 
or filled with the holy Spirit of the Father. (Matt. 3:16,17.) The 
power of God came upon him there. (Acts 10:38) This power of 
God in him was that to which he continually referred. It was the 
same power that was afterward manifested through Peter, Paul and 
others, though in Jesus' case it was more marked, because he being 
a perfect man, could receive the spirit without measure, whereas all 



imperfect members of his church, may have a measure of the spirit 
only. 

When Jesus' sacrificial ministry was over— ending at the cross,— he 
had finished his work. When he arose he was no longer a human 
being, but a "new creature" perfected. We understand that since his 
resurrection, Jesus is a partaker of the divine nature, hence he must 
be of the same essence as the Father. 

This, the present highly exalted condition of Jesus, we understand 
Paul to teach, was given him as a reward of obedience to the 
Father's will. See Phil. 2:8,9. 

This Scripture implies that Jesus' present glory is greater than that 
he possessed before becoming a man, otherwise it would not have 
been an exaltation. Now, having the divine immortal nature, he 
could not die. 

He is immortal, and consequently could not die now, which proves 
that it is a higher plane than that our Lord occupied before he 
endured the cross, becoming obedient unto death. It was the risen 
Jesus, not the sacrificing one, that claimed power of his own, 
saying, "All power in heaven and in earth is given unto me. " 

How straightforward and simple is the scriptural statement, 
compared with human traditions. For instance, into what a muddle 
of contradictions do they find themselves, who say that Jesus and 
the Father are one person. This would involve the thought that Jesus 
acted the hypocrite, and only pretended to address the Father in 
heaven, when he himself was the same Father on earth. Such must 
conclude too, since we read that God tempted not, neither is 
tempted of any, that the temptation of the devil (Matt. 4.) was only 
a sham and a farce. So with the death of Jesus, if God is immortal 
he cannot die, and if Jesus was the Father, then he must only have 
pretended to die. Then all the statements of Jesus and the prophets 
and apostles relative to Jesus' death and resurrection are false, and 
they false witnesses in testifying that God raised Jesus from the 
dead, if he never died. 

If they admit that Jesus really died, they take the other horn of the 
dilemma; for believing that their three Gods are one in person, 
when the person Jesus died, they must all have died. If they all died, 
who raised them to life? This, too, would conflict with the 
statement of Paul (1 Thes. 1:10.) that the Father raised up Jesus 
from death; for if the Father and Son are the same being, then the 
Father was dead. 

Shall we thus contradict the Apostles and Prophets and Jesus 
himself, and ignore common sense and reason, in order to hold on 
to a dogma handed down to us from the Dark Ages by a corrupt 
church? I tell you nay. "To the law and to the testimony; if they 
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in 
them." (Isa. 8:20.) We thus see that Father and Son are two separate 
and distinct persons, though one in mind, purpose, aim, etc. 



THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

But next we inquire, What saith the Scriptures relative to the holy 
Spirit? The nominal church, both Papal and Protestant, affirm that 
the holy Spirit is a person, and in the same breath they also say that 
these three persons are at the same time one person— a great 
mystery. Yes, truly it is a mystery, such as is characteristic of that 
Babylon, confusion system. But to those who turn away from 
Babylon's traditions to the Word of God, all is clear and plain. We 
suggest, that whatever definition of the term holy Spirit will meet 
all known conditions and harmonize all passages of Scripture 
bearing thereon, may be understood to be the true meaning. We 
shall first give our definition and explanation of the term holy 
Spirit, and then glance at a number of Scriptures bearing on the 
subject, which are supposed by some to conflict with the views we 
entertain. These texts were sent to us for explanation by a Baptist 
minister of Philadelphia, and may reasonably be supposed to be 
pointed. 

We understand the Scriptures to teach that the holy Spirit is not a 
separate and distinct person, but that it is the divine mind or 
influence— the motive power of Divinity exercised everywhere and 
for any purpose, at His pleasure. God exercises his spirit or energy 
in a great variety of ways, using various agencies, and 
accomplishing various results. 

Whatever God does through agencies is as truly his work as though 
he were the direct Actor, since all those agencies are of his creation; 
just as a contractor for a building is said to build a house, though he 
may never have lifted a tool towards it. He does it with his 
materials and through his agents. Thus, when we read that Jehovah 
-God-created the heavens and the earth, (Gen. 2:4.) we are not to 
suppose that he personally handled it. He used various agencies— 
"He spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. (Psa. 
33:6-9.) It did not spring instantly into existence, for we read that 
time was used in creation— six days, which we think from other 
Scriptures, were each seven thousand years long, or in all, forty-two 
thousand years. 

We are told plainly that all things are of, or from, the Father-by his 
energy or spirit; yet that energy was exercised through his Son. The 
Son of God, afterward called Jesus, was used in the creation of the 
world. (John 1:3; Heb. 1:8-12.) And when we turn to Genesis, we 
find it stated that the power which created was God's Spirit: "The 
Spirit of God brooded over the face of the waters. " (Gen. 1:2.) 
Hence it is a reasonable inference that it was the spirit or mind of 
Jehovah, active through his Son— the plan of God, executed by the 
Son. 

Another way in which God's Spirit was exercised was through the 
prophets; They "spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit"-by 
the mind or power of God, (2 Pet. 1:21.) though generally they did 
not understand the import of the words they used. 1 Pet. 1:12. That 
is, God used them to express his mind, though his mind, his spirit, 



his thoughts, were not in them. Though they expressed it, they 
could not understand his mind. (1 Pet. 1:12.) God's spirit acted 
upon, but not in, them. In that servant age (Heb. 3:5, Gal. 4:4-7) the 
faithful servant carried the Lord's message as it was laid upon him; 
but the sons of God during this Gospel age are brought into 
fellowship with their Father and made acquainted with his plans, 
thus receiving of his mind or spirit. And having his mind, they 
become co-workers together with him in carrying out his plans. 
"The servant," though faithful, "knoweth not what his Lord doeth," 
but the confidential son is made acquainted with the plans and 
partakes of his spirit in the work. 

The masculine pronoun he, is often applied to the holy Spirit, and 
properly, because God, whose spirit it is, is recognized as 
masculine-indicative of strength. It is called the holy Spirit, 
because God is holy, and because there are other spirits— powers, 
influences, similar in operation, which 

R370 : page 4 

are evil. God is true and righteous, hence the Spirit of God is called 
the "Spirit of truth." It is thus contrasted with the spirit of error, or 
the influence which error exerts. (1 John 4:6.) Satan is recognized 
as the chief or prince of evil during the present time, and his 
influence or spirit is exercised in his servants, in much the same 
way that the spirit of God works in his children. This is "the spirit 
which now worketh in the children of disobedience. " (Eph. 2:2.) 
The number seven is often used to represent perfection or 
completeness. So we read of the seven spirits of God. (Rev. 1:4, 
and 3:1.) And in like manner we read of seven wicked spirits. 
(Matt. 12:45.) The spirit or influence of evil proceeds from the 
"father of lies"; and the spirit or influence of truth proceeds from 
the heavenly Father. (John 15:26.) 

Man is to some extent independent of either of these influences. He 
has a mind or spirit of his own, (1 Cor. 2:11.) but he is so 
constituted as to be subject to influences from without, either good 
or evil. In the present time God permits evil to triumph to some 
extent, for the testing and development of the "body of Christ," and 
also for the discipline of mankind in general. 

Now the spirit of evil oft transforms itself into an angel of light 
(truth), and what wonder if he puts forward the children of 
disobedience, in whom the spirit of error works, and palms them off 
for saints? (2 Cor. 11:14,15.) What wonder if, under the guise of 
greater honor to Jesus, he succeeds in deceiving many into 
unscriptural doctrines; thus beclouding the mind and covering many 
glorious truths. During this age, when the human mind is 
surrendered to God, it instantly, under the influence of his spirit of 
truth, begins to change into 

R371 : page 4 



a holy or God-like mind. Thus we are transformed (made new 
creatures) by the renewing of our mind by the holy Spirit of God. 
Thus we are changed from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the 
Lord. (Rom. 12:2; and 2 Cor. 3:18.) This is termed the begetting of 
the spirit: that is, it is the beginning of the divine life. As in Jesus' 
case, the moment of consecration is the moment of the beginning of 
the divine life. Such, God says, he recognizes as sons. In 
surrendering the mind, the whole being is surrendered, since the 
mind is the controlling power. 

Those who resign themselves are "led of God," "taught of God," 
and can "serve the Lord in newness of spirit." They will have a 
"spirit of meekness" and the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of glory can give unto them the "spirit of wisdom" and 
revelation in the knowledge of him, the eyes of their understanding 
being enlightened; that they may know what is the hope of his 
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the 
saints. (Eph 1:17,18.) 

By contrast too we can see that Satan is the adversary of God and 
his saints, and his plans to usward, his spirit-influence, would be 
exercised to oppose the church. He does not oppose openly, but 
under guise of the Spirit of God. As the "spirit of fear" he attacks 
many, and if they follow him, they never make progress, but 
become unfruitful in the knowledge and love of God. The spirit of 
fear says, it is a great mistake to think that Christ died for all, and it 
is presumption to believe that all will eventually be released from 
bondage to death. The same spirit of fear says, your own sins are 
not forgiven; you are still a miserable sinner. Thus does the spirit of 
"error," and "fear," and "bondage" give the lie to the statements of 
the spirit of truth, which says, "There is now, therefore, no 
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after 
the flesh but after the spirit. Rom. 8:1. 

As the spirit or mind of God leads to peace, joy and faith in the 
promised glories, the spirit of error leads to faith in unpromised 
things, joy in earthly pleasures, and peace in slumber; as we read it 
is a "spirit of slumber," and alas, how many have been deluded into 
this condition. Because the influence of the spirit of error is exerted 
in this underhanded way, it is called a "seducing spirit;" and the 
Apostle assures us, that "The spirit [of truth] speaketh expressly, 
that in the latter times some shall depart from the [true] faith, giving 
heed to seducing spirits. (1 Tim. 4:1.) To what extent Satan has 
succeeded in seducing God's children, and supplanting truth with 
his spirit of error, all must judge by noting the testimonies of the 
word of truth. "The spirit of the World" is another name for the 
spirit of error, the world being largely under the control of the 
prince of this world: This spirit or influence works in the children 
of this world. And the spirit or influence of the world, is one of the 
mighty levers wherewith the prince of this world opposes the spirit 
of truth. 



Alas, how great an influence and how strong, is exercised by these 
evil spirits or influences. -The spirit of bondage-of fear-of the 
world-of pride, of Anti (against) Christ. Hence the injunction, that 
we test or try, the spirits-prove them; not by their claims and 
outward appearances, but by the word of God. "Beloved believe not 
every spirit, [influence— doctrine] but try the spirits, whether they 
be of God"-and know "the spirit of truth" from "the spirit of error." 
(Una 4:1 and 6.) 

Those having the mind or spirit of God, are said to be heavenly or 
spiritually minded, in contrast with those who have the spirit of the 
world -the worldly or carnally minded. The spiritually minded are 
so transformed, so entirely different from their former earthly 
minded condition, that they are called new creatures or new 
creations. However, the new mental creation, is still identified with 
the human body-the body of its humiliation. But when the earthly 
house is destroyed, we have a building of God— a new house— a 
glorious spiritual body, in harmony with, and fit for the indwelling 
of the new mind. (2 Cor. 5:1.) As in Jesus' case, the new body will 
be received in the resurrection; not by all, but by those now 
mentally or spiritually begotten of the spirit of truth. 

The resurrection is the birth of the new creation. Jesus was the first 
born. (Rev. 1:5.) Thus we reach the perfect spiritual condition- 
spiritual beings, mind and body. Thus we shall be like unto the 
angels and like God. God is a spirit-a Heavenly Intelligence, or a 
spiritual being, with superior capacities and qualities. Such things 
as pertain to the heavenly condition and can be seen only by the eye 
of faith through God's word, we call spiritual things. 

Now we are prepared to understand Paul's teaching in 1 Cor. 2:9- 
16. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the 
heart of man (the natural man) the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by His 
Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of 
God." That is, having the mind or spirit of God, that new mind 
prompts us to search into the deep things of God-to study that we 
may know and do his will, as obedient sons. Having the mind or 
spirit of our father, we will take heed to his word and plans, that we 
may work in harmony with him. "For what man knoweth the things 
[mind, plans] of a man, save the spirit [mind] of man which is in 
him? Even so, the things of God, knoweth no man, but the spirit of 
God." 

"Now we have received the spirit [or mind] of God, that we might 
know the things that are freely given to us of God." But "the natural 
man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are 
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are 
spiritually discerned. " They are understood only by those who have 
the spirit or mind of God. These learn, not by comparing spiritual 
things with natural things as the natural man does, but by 
"comparing spiritual things with spiritual. " 



"He that is spiritual judgeth all things"; he is able to understand and 
properly estimate both human and spiritual things, and as a result of 
the comparison, he sacrifices the former, counting it but dross that 
he may win the latter. "Yet he himself is judged of no man." No 
natural man can understand or judge of the motives which prompt 
the spiritually minded "new creature" to sacrifice things valuable to 
the natural man. Hence we are counted as fools by the worldly 
minded. (1 Cor. 4:10.) 

This mind or spirit of Christ is the same as the spirit of God, for 
Christ sacrificed his own spirit, and was filled with the spirit of 
God. "For even Christ pleased not himself. " (Rom. 15:3.) Jesus 
said, "The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are 
life." That is, they express the mind of God, in giving heed to 
which, is life. It is for this cause that Jesus said, "Search the 
Scriptures." We are not to merely read them as a duty, but, as a 
privilege. We must search them diligently, to the intent that we may 
know the spirit or mind of God. If we would be filled with the spirit 
of God we must drink deep of the fountain of truth-his Word. Our 
earthen vessels are very imperfect and leaky, and it is easy to let the 
spiritual things slip, (Heb. 2:1.) and very soon the spirit of the 
world, which is all around us, rushes in to fill the vacuum. 
Therefore, it behooves us to live very close to the fountain, lest the 
spirit of God be quenched, and we be filled with the spirit of the 
world. 

But if constantly filled from the fountain of truth, we will not 
receive the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of [from] God. 
And it is thus that we may know the things which God hath in 
reservation for us —even the deep things of God. Thus, we see (vs. 
16) that what the natural man could not know, we, receiving the 
mind, influence, or spirit of God, may know. Therefore, "Let the 
same mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus," for "if any 
man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his. " (Rom. 8:9.) 

The holy Spirit or mind should not be confounded with the fruits of 
the spirit or the gifts of the spirit. Its possession always yields fruit- 
-patience, meekness, charity, etc. In the beginning of this age its 
possession was often accompanied not only by fruit, but also by 
miraculous gifts of teaching, tongues, miracles, etc. (1 Cor. 12); but 
these have largely passed away, as well as their necessity —the gift 
of teaching being one of those remaining needful to the body. 

Believing that the foregoing is a consistent and correct statement of 
the Bible teachings on this subject, which the scriptures quoted, we 
think, prove, we proceed to examine the texts supposed to conflict 
with this understanding; and we will see that they do not oppose, 
but sustain the above. It should be born in mind, however, that the 
translators of the Scriptures from Greek into English were 
trinitarians, and naturally translated as much in harmony with their 
belief as they could. 



OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 

Before proceeding to the texts suggested by our brother, we will 
examine three which we think important, which he has not 
mentioned. 

(a) "Quench not the spirit." (1 Thes. 5:19.) To quench signifies to 
extinguish, as to extinguish a fire or a light. The Greek word from 
which it is translated occurs eight times in the New Testament, and 
in every other text it refers to quenching fire or light. Carry the 
thought with you -By reason of having God's holy mind or spirit, 
we are called "the light of the world" (Matt. 5:14); but if we should 
be seduced into worldliness by the spirit of the world, our light 
would be quenched, or extinguished. "If the light that is in thee 
become darkness [be extinguished], how great is that darkness?" 
(Matt. 6:23.) 

R372 : page 4 

(b) "Grieve not the holy spirit of God whereby ye are sealed unto 
the day of redemption. " (Eph. 4:30.) To seal, is to mark or to 
designate. The children of this world may be distinguished by 
certain marks, and so may the "new creatures." The mark of the one 
class is the spirit (mind) of the world; in the other class the seal or 
mark is the spirit (mind) of God. From the moment of true 
consecration to God, the evidence, or marks, or sealing, may be 
seen in words, thoughts, and actions. These marks grow more and 
more distinct daily, if we keep growing in grace, knowledge, and 
love. In other words, the spirit (mind) of God, becomes OUR mind 
or spirit, if the same mind be in us that was also in Christ Jesus our 
Lord. Hence, our new mind is a holy or God-directed mind. 

In this text the Apostle urges that we do nothing which will wound 
our conscience. "Grieve not the holy spirit [mind] of God [in you] 
whereby ye are sealed," etc. 

(c) The spirit of truth- "shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever 
he shall hear, he shall speak, and he will show you things to come. " 
(John 16:13.) The disciples, as Jews and natural men, had been 
looking at things from an earthly standpoint, expecting a human 
deliverer and a human kingdom. Jesus had talked of the kingdom, 
but not until now had he explained that he must die, and must then 
leave them to go into a far country to receive the kingdom and to 
return. (Luke 19:12.) Comforting them, he assures them of another 
who would lead them and teach them-a Comforter that the Father 
would send in his name, or as his representative for a time. They 
must not get the idea that the coming Comforter is to be another 
Messiah, or Leader, or a different Teacher; hence he says: "He shall 
not speak of himself"; that is, he shall not teach independently and 
out of harmony with my teaching. "But whatsoever he shall hear, 
that shall he speak. That is, the same things which I have taught, or 
which have been heard, he will elaborate and teach more fully— 
"He shall glorify me, for he shall 

R372 : page 5 



receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." "All things that the 
Father hath are mine (His plans and my plans are all one); 
therefore, said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto 
you." The new teacher will not turn your minds from me to himself- 
-but all the teachings of the coming Comforter will be in harmony 
with my teachings— and to show you more fully that I am the 
Messiah. Neither might they doubt the truth of the Comforter's 
teachings, for it is the Spirit of truth, and proceeds from the Father. 
(John 15:26.) This Spirit of truth will be my messenger to 
communicate to you my matters, and shall show you things to 
come. 

It has been so-the Spirit of truth has been showing to the church 
during this age more and more of the coming glory and glorious 
work of Christ, and the depth of the riches of God's plans to be 
fulfilled in him. Thus, he has been glorified in the Church. 

Objection 1. "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom 
the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and 
bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto 
you." (John 14:26.) 

The fact that the Father sends the holy Spirit shows that it is under 
his authority, just as your powers are under your control. (See 1 
Cor. 14:32.) Ghost is but another and bad translation of pneuma, 
generally rendered spirit. Only those who have followed in the 
footsteps of Jesus, sacrificing the human will and receiving the 
mind or spirit of God, can understand the import of these words of 
Jesus. To the natural man, an explanation of this text is impossible; 
but he who has the mind of Christ realizes that it is a comforter 
indeed. No matter how painful the crucifying of the flesh may be, 
we have learned to view it all from God's standpoint, and to esteem 
present afflictions as light, compared with the glory that shall be 
revealed in us. 

The mind of Christ, or the new spirit, leads us to search the 
Scriptures, God's storehouse of truth: Thus the spirit of truth works 
in us. It also acts upon us by helping our infirmities and enabling us 
to comprehend his Word, that we through patience and comfort of 
the Scriptures, might have hope while enduring present afflictions. 
(Rom. 8:26 and 15:4.) 

(2) "And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost [spirit] and began 
to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." 
Acts 2:6. In this case, not only were the disciples filled with the 
Spirit or mind of God, which was God working in them, but God, 
or the Spirit of God acted upon them, conferring special gifts, for a 
special purpose. It must seem absurd to every one to talk about a 
person being in several hundred persons, but many feel compelled 
to say so, because of their unscriptural theory. In thinking of it, 
every intelligent thinker has to think of the power or influence of 
God in those men, no matter how stoutly they say that it was a 
person who was diffused into a number of persons. 



(3) "But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart, to lie 
to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?" 
(Acts 5:3.) Satan had filled Ananias' heart with his spirit of 
covetousness. God had filled Peter with His spirit, and one of the 
gifts of God's spirit conferred upon Peter, was the gift of 
"discerning of spirits." (1 Cor. 12:10.) 

In verse 3, the lying is said to be unto the Holy Ghost (spirit or 
mind of God), and in vs. 4, it is said to be unto God. The idea is the 
same and defines the term Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit to be the mind 
of God, whether in the Father, or in his representatives and agents. 

(4) "Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed 
together, to tempt the Spirit of the Lord." (Acts 5:9.) As with 
Ananias, so with his wife, their lying was reckoned to be not to 
Peter and the church as men, but to God whose agent and 
representative through the Spirit, Peter was. 

(5) "But whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be 
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come." 
Matt. 12:32. Read context— Jesus had just exercised the power of 
God by casting out a devil. The Pharisees saw the miracle and 
could not deny it; but, to turn aside its force, they said that it was by 
the power of the devil that he had cast out the devil, and not by 
God's power. But in answer, Jesus claims that he cast out devils by 
the Spirit [influence or power] of God. (Vs. 28) Then he upbraids 
them for being so malicious —a generation of vipers, so set on the 
traditions of their church that their eyes were blinded against the 
simplest kind of reasoning. It was so plainly evident that the power 
which opposed and cast out evil must be good, that they were 
inexcusable in ascribing it to Satan. They might and would be 
freely forgiven for supposing him, as a man, an impostor, and hence 
blaspheming him; but they were wholly inexcusable for that gross 
prejudice which would ascribe such a good deed to the power of 
Satan. This, their sin, would not be among those forgiven. It must 
be punished; it will neither be forgiven in the present life, nor in the 
next-the Millennial Age; it indicates more than Adamic depravity, 
and must have stripes. (See "Food for Thinking Christians," page 
50-The Unpardonable Sin.) 

(6) "The Spirit said unto Philip, Go near and join thyself to this 
chariot." Acts 8:29. We fail to see in this anything demanding 
another God. We think that the influence or spirit of God could 
indicate this to Philip in a variety of ways. In what way he was 
influenced is not stated. It is immaterial to us. 

(7) "The Spirit said unto him, Behold, three men seek thee." Acts 
10:19. We would make the same criticism of this, as of the former 
objection. It is immaterial how the power or spirit of God addressed 
to Peter this information; possibly it came as an inspired thought 
into his mind-possibly guided by the men's voices and the three 
visions. 



(8) "The Holy Ghost said, separate me, Barnabas and Saul, for the 
work whereunto I have called them." Acts 13:2. We are not told in 
what manner the holy Spirit said or indicated the setting apart 
specially of these two. It is probable however, that they were 
"called," and "set apart" by the holy Spirit in much the same 
manner that all true ministers of God are now called and set apart. 
All fully consecrated-begotten- children of God are called to 
preach; each according to his ability. The Spirit says to us all, "Why 
stand ye idle... go, ye, also into the vineyard." But, where special 
ability to teach or expound God's Word is possessed by any of the 
company, that special ability is recognized as a special call to the 
more public work of the ministry— as a call of the holy Spirit. In 
relating his call to the ministry, (Gal. 1:1.) Paul mentions his 
authority as from the Father and Son, but ignores the holy Spirit 
entirely; which would be inexcusable if the holy Spirit were a 
person, and, in fact, THE person actually appointing him. But it is 
consistent enough, when we regard the holy Spirit as the holy 
influence from the Father or the Son, or both conjointly, as their 
will and purposes are one. Gal. 1:1, says: "Paul, an apostle, not of 
men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who 
raised him from the dead. " 

(9) "For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us," etc. Acts 
15:28. The decision reached in the matter under consideration, 
seemed to be the judgment of the church and in harmony with 
God's will and plan. 

James, the chief speaker at the counsel, gives the clue to how God's 
will or mind was ascertained then; and we find it the same method 
which we use to-day. He argues from Peter's statement of God's 
leadings in the matter of Cornelius; and from an unfulfilled 
prophecy which he quotes. The conclusion drawn from these, he 
and all the church accepted as the holy Spirit's teaching. (Read 
carefully vss. 13-18.) 

R373 : page 5 

(10) "And were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the Word 
in Asia." Acts 16:6. Like the others, this text in no way indicates 
that the holy Spirit is a person. As to how God's power or influence 
was exercised to direct their course away from Asia we know not, 
but possibly by unfavorable circumstances, or a vision. No matter 
how, the lesson is, that God was guiding the apostles. An 
illustration of one of the Spirit's ways of leading them, is given in 
the context, vs. 9. "A vision appeared to Paul in the night. There 
stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, "Come over 
into Macedonia, and help us"; and after he had seen the vision, 
immediately they endeavored to go into Macedonia assuredly 
gathering that the Lord had called them for to preach the gospel 
unto them. " All these various dealings teach us that the methods by 
which God taught and led in those days were not so different from 
those now in use, as some seem to think. 



(1 1) "Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city, saying, that 
bonds and afflictions abide me." Acts 20:23. Nothing here indicates 
personality. As an illustration of the agencies by which the holy 
power of God informed Paul, see Acts 21:4, 1 1, 14. 

(12) "The flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you 
overseers to feed the church of God." Acts 20:28. Paul, addressing 
the church, not the world, says, "The manifestation of the Spirit is 
given to every man [in Christ] to profit withal"- "GOD hath set 
some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly 
teachers," etc.-"and there are diversities of operations, but it is the 
same GOD which worketh all- in all." (1 Cor. 12:6,7,28.) This 
explains how God, through his holy Spirit sets apart men to various 
offices which he deems needful to the church. 

(13) "Thus saith the Holy Ghost," etc. Acts 21:11. See explanation 
number 1 1 . 

(14) "God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit 
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.". ..(15) "Which 
things also we speak not in the words which man's wisdom 
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth" 1 Cor. 2:10-13. 
(Read context) This we have already found to prove that the holy 
Spirit or mind of God in us as His children, enables us to 
comprehend his plans, etc., even the deep things of God, by coming 
into full harmony with him through his Word. We have also noticed 
the context vs. 12, where Paul, in explaining the subject, tries to 
make it plain by comparing "the SPIRIT, which is of [from] God," 
in us, with "the SPIRIT of the world," which influences "the natural 
man. " It is clear that the spirit of the world is not a person, but a 
worldly mind. The spirit or mind of God in his children, is no more 
a person than is the spirit of the world with which it is here 
contrasted. 

(16) "But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of 
God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, 
for they are spiritually discerned." Vs. 14. This is a forcible 
statement of what we have already seen in numbers 14 and 15, viz. 
A man who is filled with the worldly spirit is unprepared to see the 
"deep" and glorious things of God-the things which God hath 
prepared for them that love him. This is a close test if applied. Have 
you the Spirit of God? Have you been taught by it [through the 
Word] any "deep things" which the natural, worldly man cannot 
appreciate? 

Alas ! how often we have felt the force of this distinction between 
natural and spiritual as we have talked with some of the professed 
teachers of to-day, the great majority of whom are blind leaders of 
the blind, when they confessed and sometimes boasted of their 
ignorance of "the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him. " Thereby they proclaim that they have not the mind of 
God, do not know his plans, have not much of his Spirit. The test 
here given of our possession of the Spirit is our knowledge of his 



plans and deep things which are hidden from the worldly-"God 
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit. " 

INEXPRESSIBLE GROANINGS. 

(17) "The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings 
which cannot be uttered, and he that searcheth the hearts, knoweth 
what is the mind of the Spirit. Rom. 8:26,27. 

How much this expression of our Father's loving care has been 
misunderstood by his children! Who has not wondered that if the 
holy Spirit is a person— a part of the infinite God, and, as the 
catechism states it, equal in power— why, if all powerful, should it 
be impossible for the holy Spirit to utter groans? Many a Christian 
brother has endeavored to make up for this supposed weakness or 
inability of the holy Spirit to express itself, by redoubled groanings. 

But it would be equally strange if it be understood to mean that the 
holy Spirit, as the influence or power of the Almighty Jehovah, is 
unable to express itself. We know how, in past ages, this influence 
found abundant expression by words and deeds of prophets. We 
know how, in this age, the apostles all attest of its power over them. 
What can it mean, then- "The Spirit itself maketh intercession for 
us with groanings which cannot be uttered"? The mistake is, in 
supposing that it is God's Spirit which supplicates. It is the spirit of 
the saints which supplicates and often cannot express itself. 

R373 : page 6 

Let us look at this text with its connections, and this will be 
evident. Paul has just been speaking of sin and death-burdened 
humanity groaning in its fetters. He assures us that they shall be 
given liberty from this bondage when the church is selected from 
the world, and as sons of God manifested in power; the great 
deliverer whom Jehovah raises up to bless all the families of the 
earth. (Vss. 19-21.) He then passes from the groaning of the world 
to the present condition of the church, in which we groan: 
"Ourselves also, which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we 
groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption." (Vs. 23.) 

Our renewed, transformed mind or spirit, once worldly, is now 
spiritual and holy; but our bodies are still human, and have the 
Adamic imperfections. Hence, we, as new creatures, are burdened 
by the flesh, and groan for the deliverance into Christ's likeness. 
Paul explains how we may, by faith, reckon the earthly body dead, 
and think of ourselves as new creatures perfected, and thus realize 
ourselves saved now-"Saved by HOPE. (Vs. 24.) Then, having 
seen how we may view ourselves, he tells us how the matter is 
viewed from God's standpoint-God reckons us "new" and "holy"- 
"spiritual" beings-and he recognizes only those deeds of the flesh 
as ours, to which our minds consent. God knows when your holy 
spirit (new mind) is willing and your flesh weak. 



As the receiving of the new mind brought us into a new relationship 
to God, and into new hopes, so "likewise the spirit (our new holy 
mind) also helpeth [maketh up for] our [bodily] infirmities. For we 
know not [even] what we should pray for as we ought; [much less 
are we able to do] but the spirit itself [our holy mind] maketh 
intercession [for us-omit] with groanings which cannot be uttered. 
And he that searcheth the hearts [God], knoweth what is the mind 
[Gr. phronema -inclination] of the [our] spirit; because he [it] 
maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God. " It 
is God's will that the heart-desires of his children shall be accepted, 
both in prayer and service, and not the imperfections of their 
earthen vessels. 

O, how comforting is this thought! How often you have 
experienced it. You were perhaps overtaken in a fault, entrapped by 
the weakness of the human nature, or trouble, and almost 
disheartened, you went to your Father in prayer. You had no words 
for utterance, but you groaned in spirit to God- "being burdened." 
God heard you and blessed you, answering your unuttered prayer 
and giving strength. Paul's conclusion is ours; we have every cause 
for rejoicing. What shall we say then? "If God be for us, who can 
be against us?" (Vs. 31.) 

THE WITNESS OF THE SPIRIT. 

(18) "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are 
the children of God." Rom. 8:16. 

Nothing in this text teaches that the holy Spirit is a person, but the 
contrary; it indicates that as each man has a spirit or mind, so God 
has a spirit. Read this text in the light of 1 Cor. 2:1 1,12, thus 
comparing Scripture with Scripture, and it is easily seen that it does 
not teach a personal holy Spirit. But, though not pertinent to the 
subject, it may be of interest and profit, for us to see how the Spirit 
beareth witness with our spirits on this important subject of our 
being God's children. On few subjects have Christians in general, 
felt more disturbed. Thus, the Calvinist, repudiating the idea of 
positive knowledge of sonship, sings: 

"Tis a point I long to know, 
Oft it causes anxious thought: 
Do I love the Lord or no? 
Am I His, or am I not?" 

This comes from a misapprehension of the doctrine of Election. 
Other Christians, equally misunderstanding the Scriptures, lay hold 
of this text relative to the witness of the Spirit, and claim that when 
they feel good, they have the witness of sonship. Because the 
Scriptures say, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is 
stayed on thee," they judge of their sonship solely by their peace, 
and often by their prosperity. They lose sight of the words of Jesus- 
-"In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have 
peace. " 



R374 : page 6 

When things move smoothly they feel good, and consider this the 
witness of the Spirit. But when they look at the heathen and at the 
worldly, and see them have peace of mind too, their supposed 
witness proves insufficient. Then the dark hour comes-a 
Gethsemane— and they say, How easy a matter to be deceived, and 
sing- 
Where is the peace I once enjoyed, 
When first I found the Lord? 

They are in torment lest they have grieved the Spirit-for "fear hath 
torment. " This is all because of the unscriptural view taken of the 
Spirit and its dealings and witnessings. Let us take the Bible view 
of the witness of the Spirit (mind) of God, with our spirit (mind), 
and we can sing- 
How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in His excellent Word. 

As we would know of a man's mind or spirit, by his words and 
dealings, so we are to know of God's mind by his words and 
dealings. God's word is, that whosoever [consecrates] cometh unto 
God by Jesus is accepted. (Heb. 7:25.) Then, the first question to 
ask yourself is, Did I ever fully consecrate myself to God— my life, 
my time, talents, influence,— all? If you can candidly answer before 
God— Yes, I gave myself wholly to him; then I assure you on the 
authority, not of your feelings, but of God's Word, which, unlike 
your feelings, is unchangeable, that you then and there instantly 
became a child of God-a member, a branch of the true vine. (John 
15:1.) This is an evidence, or witness that you have joined the true 
church, which is Christ's body. 

Whether you are abiding in him now, depends on whether you have 
grown as a branch, and are bearing fruit: "Every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit, he taketh away, and every branch that beareth fruit 
he purgeth [pruneth] it, that it may bring forth more fruit. " Here is 
stated the rule in our Father's family-chastisements, pruning, 
taking away of dross, and a development of fruit-bearing qualities. 
If you lack these indications of parental care, and personal growth 
in grace, you lack one evidence that you are a child. "Whom the 
Lord loveth, he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he 
receiveth. If ye be without chastisement, then are ye bastards and 
not sons." (Heb. 12:8.) Afflictions and troubles come upon the 
world as well as upon the Lord's saints, but are not marks of 
sonship except to those who have fully consecrated to his service. 
Nor is the pruning and chastising in the Divine family always the 
same. As with earthly children, so with God's children; to some, a 
look of disapproval, to others a word of rebuke is an all-sufficient 
reproof. Others must be scourged repeatedly. An earthly parent 
rejoices most in the child so obedient and submissive that a look or 
word is sufficient to prune off evil; and so does our Father in 
heaven. Such are those who judge themselves, and therefore need 



less of the chastening of the Lord. (1 Cor. 1 1 :31.) To be of this 
class, requires a full consecration; and these are the overcomers 
deemed worthy of being joint heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, 
whose footsteps they thus follow. 

Here is one testimony of the Spirit then-that every true child or 
branch needs, and will have continual pruning. Are you being 
pruned? If so, that is an evidence of your being a branch; in this, the 
Spirit of truth bears witness with your spirit that you are a child. 

Again the Spirit witnesseth that "whosoever is born [begotten] of 
God sinneth not." (1 John 5:18.) Such may be overtaken in a fault, 
may err in judgment, be overpowered by the old nature not yet 
under control, but will never sin wilfully-will never willingly 
transgress God's will. Now can your mind answer that you delight 
to do God's will, and would not willingly violate or oppose it? If so, 
the witness of your spirit, or mind, agrees with the spirit of truth, 
indicating that you are a child of God. 

The witness of the Spirit is that the true branches of the vine, like 
the vine, Christ Jesus are not of the world- "If ye were of the world, 
the world would love his own, but because ye are not of the 
world... therefore the world hateth you." "Yea, and all that will live 
Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) Does 
your mind testify that it is so in your experience? If so, then the 
Spirit of God again witnesseth with yours, that you are a child. 
Remember that the world spoken of by Jesus, included all worldly- 
minded ones, all in whom the spirit of the world has a footing. In 
Jesus' day, this was true of the nominal Jewish Church. In fact nine- 
tenths of his persecution came from professors of religion. Marvel 
not if you should have a similar experience. It was the chief 
religionists of his day, that called Jesus Beelzebub— a prince of 
devils; and he tells us, "If they have called the master of the house 
Beelzebub how much more shall they call them of his household." 
(Matt. 10:25.) If Jesus had joined hands in their Pharisaism he 
would have had no "hate" nor "persecution." Even had he kept quiet 
and let their hypocrisies, shams, long prayers and false teachings 
alone, he would have been let alone and would not have suffered. 
So with us. 

The Spirit witnesses that whosoever is ashamed of Jesus and his 
words, of him shall he be ashamed. (Mark 8:38.) Does your spirit 
witness that you are one whom he will confess? If so, rejoice; you 
are a child and an heir. 

The Spirit witnesseth that "Whosoever is born [begotten] of God 
overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith." (1 John 5:4.) Is this your experience? To 
overcome indicates that you are not in harmony with the world, its 
spirit, and its methods. Have you this witness that you are 
overcoming the world? Wait a moment— you are not to overcome 
the world by flattery, nor by joining in its follies, nor are you to 
overcome the world by teaching a Sunday class, or joining a 



sectarian church— no; but by your faith. If an overcomer, you must 
walk by faith, not by sight. Looking not at the things that are seen- 
popularity, worldly show, numbers, denominational greatness, etc.; 
but looking at the things which are not seen-the crown, the throne, 
the church whose names are written in heaven— the eternal things. 
(2 Cor. 4:18.) 

Again, the Spirit witnesseth that if you are a child of God, you will 
not be ignorant of his Word, and will not only be in the light as to 
present truth, but should know something about "things to come." 
The maturing child will grow in grace, knowledge, and love, adding 
daily the graces of the Spirit- faith, virtue, knowledge, charity, etc. 
And "if these things be in you and abound, they make you that ye 
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. But he that lacketh these things is blind and cannot see 
afar off, etc... for if ye do these things ye shall never fall, for so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ." (2 Pet. 
1:5-11; compare John 1 6 : 1 2- 1 5 .) Ask yourself whether you have 
this witness of progress-growth, and this sort of fruit mentioned. 
Remember too, that you cannot grow in love faster than you grow 
in knowledge; and you cannot grow in favor, except by complying 
with God's instructions. This instruction, this knowledge, is found 
in his Word. Hence, "search the Scriptures," that you may be 
thoroughly furnished unto every good word and work. (2 Tim. 
3:17.) 

This is the witness of the Spirit by which we may know perfectly 
just how we stand. You may be a young sprout in the vine; then, of 
course, God does not expect much fruit instantly; but there should 
be the budding at once, and soon the fruits. And if you are a 
developed and advanced Christian, every testimony of the Spirit 
above cited should witness with your spirit- mind. If in any of these 
testimonies of the Spirit, you find yourself lacking, give diligence, 
give earnest heed, that you may possess every experience 
described. Then you will no longer sing- 

'"Tis a point I long to know," but will know, and be rooted and 
grounded, built up and established in truth and love. 

When darkness seems to vail His face, 
You'll rest in His unchanging grace; 
His oath, His covenant, and His blood, 
Supporting 'neath the whelming flood. " 

SANCTIFIED BY THE SPIRIT. 

"Ye are washed-sanctified— justified, in the name of our Lord 
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." 1 Cor. 6:1 1. 

Sanctification means a setting apart or separating. Those who are 
sanctified, or set apart to God— fully consecrated -must first be 
justified or cleansed from Adamic sin by accepting in faith the 
testimony of God, that "Christ died for our sins according to the 



Scriptures." Being then justified by faith, we have peace with God, 
and can then approach him and begin to do works acceptable to 
God by Jesus Christ. The evidence which we have of acceptance is 
the testimony of the spirit of truth in the Word, and the "seal" and 
"witness" in ourselves -our transformed mind. 

Sanctification is of two parts-first a consecration, and second the 
performance of that consecration in our daily life. The power which 
enables us to live up to our consecration vows is the Spirit or mind 
of our God 

R375 : page 7 

of which we receive— The Spirit of truth received by the study and 
obedience of our Father's words, gives needed strength for the 
overcoming of the human nature and the spirit of the world. 

To this agree other Scriptures. Paul prayed: "The very God of peace 
sanctify you wholly"; Peter says, Ye are "elect... through 
sanctification [setting apart] of the Spirit, unto obedience. " Again, 
that the sanctifying power, or spirit in us is the spirit of truth, is 
shown by Paul's statement, that Christ sanctifies and cleanses the 
church by the Word. Eph. 5:26. Jesus prayed: "Sanctify them 
through thy truth; thy Word is truth." (John 17:17.) 

All thus sanctified are reckoned new creatures in Christ, and are 
addressed as "them that are sanctified in Christ." (1 Cor. 1:2.) That 
it is by reason of our sanctification of spirit that we are one, is 
shown by the statement: "Both he that sanctifieth and they who are 
sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call 
them brethren." (Heb. 2:1 1.) Thus it is that we are "washed- 
sanctified— justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit 
of our God." 



THE SPIRIT WILL REPROVE THE WORLD. 

"When he ['the Spirit of truth'] is come he will reprove the world 
of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment." (John 16:8-11.) 

The spirit of God is not in the children of this world. Theirs is "the 
spirit of the world." The "spirit of the world," or "the carnal mind is 
enmity against God. " The Spirit or mind of God is in believers 
only. Hence wherever we find it, it is a seal, or mark of sonship. 
"By whom also ye were sealed after that ye had believed, the 
Gospel of your salvation." (Eph. 1:13.) "If any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his." The Spirit of God by means of 
its fruits, and its witness through the Word, is the evidence of our 
begetting to the family of God, it is "the spirit of adoption whereby 
we cry, Abba Father." (Rom. 8:15.) It must be evident to all then, 
that the Spirit in us, is not the spirit which is in the worldly. 

Then the question arises, in what sense does the Spirit of God-the 
Spirit of truth-the Spirit of Christ- in us reprove the world? We 
reply that being in us, it constitutes us (the true church) the light of 
the world. It is the light which shines from the true Christian, which 



reproves or condemns and opposes the darkness of this world. Jesus 
when anointed of the Spirit of God declared "I am the Light of the 
world. " And again, "As long as I am in the world, I am the light of 
the world." (John 8:12 and 9:5.) Addressing his church of this age, 
sanctified by the same holy Spirit, he says "Ye are the light of the 
world"-let your light shine before men. (Matt. 5:14-16.) Paul 
addressing the same body of Christ, says, Ye were once "darkness 
but now are ye light in the Lord; walk ye as children of light. " (Eph. 
5:8 and 1 Thes. 5:5.) "For God... [the spirit of God, the spirit of 
truth] hath shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of 
the glory of God." (2 Cor. 4:6.) 

Thus we see that it is the light of God's truth or mind shining in our 
hearts, which shines out upon the world- We are to "do all things 
without murmurings and disputings; that we may be blameless and 
harmless, the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked 
and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world; 
holding forth the word of life." (Phil. 2:15.) 

It is thus seen, that not directly but by a reflex light-through those 
who possess it, the spirit operates upon (but not in) the world: for 
the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God neither 
can he know them. (1 Cor. 2:14.) The Apostle thus explains the 
reproving of the world by the Spirit in the saints, saying, "Walk as 
children of light,... and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness but rather reprove them... All things that are reproved 
are made manifest [shown to be wrong] by the light." Eph. 5:8-13. 

The light which shines from a saint's sanctified life-sanctified 
through (not without) the truth, is the holy Spirit- the mind of 
Christ dwelling in you richly, and working out in harmony with, not 
in ignorance of, the plan of God. This light reproves the darkness of 
the world— convincing those who see it, as to what is sin, and 
showing what is righteousness, and they will reason of a coming 
judgment, when righteousness will receive some reward and sin 
some punishment. 

But "if the light that is in thee [become] darkness, how great is that 
darkness?" This is the condition of the nominal systems of 
"Babylon." Because they have taken the creeds and traditions of 
men, they have the "spirit of fear" and of "bondage." Because they 
have neglected the words of the Lord— the word of truth, they have 
lost the "spirit of truth" and received the "spirit of error." Because 
they have lost the spirit of truth, they have lost that sanctifying 
(separating) power, and have become imbued with the "spirit of the 
world" and the spirit of error; hence the light to reprove the world 
no longer shines out from them. As a natural result, the worldly feel 
themselves very slightly reproved by the nominal church and 
superior to a large majority of nominal Christians. Is it then any 
wonder that conversions have almost ceased? 

The true church always has been a light in the world; but as with its 
head, the light has shined in the darkness; and though the darkness 



recognizes the reproof of its presence, it comprehends it not. 
Therefore they have always persecuted the lightbringers, because 
they knew not our Father, nor our Lord, nor his body (John 16:3.) It 
has always been its mission to shine out truth and reprove evil. And 
its reproof has always been chiefly to nominal systems and 
professors. 

We believe that in most of these "bundles "-sects, (Matt. 13:30.) 
there are still some grains of wheat, some consecrated ones in 
whom the spirit of truth still has some residence. But such, should 
see that their influence for truth, and their light is hidden among the 
worldly mass. For such God is now raising up in every direction, a 
voice, saying, "Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) God's Spirit 
through His Word, has shown us as a people, that the reason this 
message is due now, and was not due before 1878, is, that we are 
now in the "HARVEST" which "is the end of the age:" and the time 
for executing the command— "Gather my saints together unto me, 
those that have made a covenant with me by (self) sacrifice —is now 
come. This has been clearly shown from the Prophecies to which 
we do well that we take heed as unto a light. These will be 
elaborated more fully in the forthcoming "Millennial Day Dawn. " 

A COMMON ERROR. 

A common error among God's children to-day, and one arising 
from an improper conception of the holy Spirit, is the supposed 
necessity for frequent baptisms of the Spirit. We are told, "Be ye 
filled with the Spirit": and we would urge the necessity of 
constantly receiving supplies of grace to help our infirmities. We 
need constantly to go to the fountain to replenish, because our 
"earthen vessels" are very defective, and the spirit of Christ easily 
slips out, being under constant pressure from the spirit of the world. 
But to be filled with the Spirit is something totally different from 
the Baptism of the Spirit. 

So far as we are informed, there have been but three baptisms of the 
Spirit in all: First, Jesus was so baptized; second, the disciples at 
Pentecost were similarly baptized; third, Cornelius and his family 
were so baptized. These three baptisms were in reality but one, as 
already shown from the Levitical type. The holy anointing oil was 
poured upon the head and ran down over the body. The same Spirit 
given to our Head —Jesus— descended on the church at Pentecost, 
and has since been running down over and anointing all that are his. 
In these three cases, it was an outward manifestation which 
witnessed specially that God recognized such as his. To convince 
the natural man, the reception was accompanied by various "gifts." 
(1 Cor. 14:22.) To them, these gifts were the evidences of the 
possession of the Spirit and acceptance with God. 

The Spirit, or mind, of God is now received without the gifts, and 
without outward manifestation. Those manifestations and gifts 
being now recorded in the Word of God, and not (or with few 



exceptions) in the persons and deeds of his children. Paul testified 
that he might have gifts, or be acted upon by the Spirit, and yet be 
almost destitute of the Spirit of love and sacrifice itself- and thus 
be but "a tinkling cymbal" (1 Cor. 13:1.) Thus we see that the gifts 
were not a mark of special favor toward those exercised by them. 
What we may have of the "witness" of the Spirit, is a far better 
criterion of our spiritual condition, than if possessed of the 
mountain-moving, tongue-speaking, and miracle-working power, 
without the internal witness of harmony with God's Word. 

Since Cornelius, there have been no such baptisms or OUTWARD 
MANIFESTATIONS of Gods favor; but instead, the inward 
unseen witness of the Spirit of truth with our spirit, that we are 
children and heirs. 

Nor should we wonder at this: the church was like two rooms, 
hitherto unopened— locked up. The one room represents the Jewish 
believers in Jesus; the other the Gentile believers. Both were to be 
henceforth thrown open and used. There must be an opening and 
demonstration, after which, the doors standing open, needed no 
further re-opening. Peter unlocked or opened both of these doors. 
At Pentecost he did the opening work to the Jews who had 
believed. (Acts 2:14-41.) And when about three and one-half 

R376 : page 7 

years after, it became God's due time to receive the Gentile 
believers into the same privileges of sonship, Peter was again used 
to open that door- being sent to Cornelius, the first Gentile convert. 
(Acts 10.) Thus he used the "keys of the kingdom of heaven" 
(church), and opened the way as Jesus had foretold. (Matt. 16:19.) 
Keys represent power and authority. He needed more than one, 
because hitherto Jew and Gentile were totally distinct, and the 
Gentiles were not fellow heirs, and of the same body. 

If this acceptance of Jewish born believers was indicated once for 
all at Pentecost, why should God repeat it to others now? If the 
acceptance of Gentile born believers was clearly shown in 
Cornelius' case, why should a repetition be asked? There is nothing 
in Scripture to indicate that such baptisms were ever repeated. 

Some now meet and agonize and pray for a Pentecostal baptism of 
the holy Spirit. They look back to that with special longings, 
thinking that it was something not now possessed by the saints, 
whereas the things not now possessed are merely the gifts of the 
Spirit. This is wrong-it is looking from the standpoint of the 
natural mind. It is looking at the things that are seen, and not at the 
things unseen and eternal for a basis of faith. They were just 
coming out of the fleshly into the spiritual dispensation, and must 
needs have something which the natural man might recognize, to 
mark the new era. We repeat, the GIFTS were in the church not to 
convince the saints of their acceptance with God, but to convince 
the natural man. (See 1 Cor. 14:22.) The WITNESS of the Spirit 
was for the saints. 



The church in general had the gifts, but they did not all receive 
those gifts at Pentecost, nor by a baptism of the Spirit. The eleven 
apostles, with Paul, the Lord's choice for the place of Judas, 
possessed the special power of communicating those gifts by laying 
on of hands (compare Acts 8:13,14,17-19); but those who received 
the gifts from their hands could not re-communicate it to others. 

But, while it is entirely out of harmony with God's Word to pray for 
another baptism of the holy Spirit, it is right to pray to be kept filled 
with the holy Spirit. The Father in heaven is more willing to give 
the Spirit to those that ask him, than earthly parents are to give 
good gifts to their children. (Luke 11:13.) When we ask for 
anything, it implies that we want it, and if wholly consecrated, we 
should want to receive the holy Spirit in the way God wishes to 
give it. We pray for daily food, and properly, but if we do nothing 
more than pray, God might let us starve. He puts within our reach 
the needful means of procuring the food, and we say the food 
comes from him from whom cometh every good gift. When we 
pray for the Spirit, and desire to "be filled with the Spirit," it is 
well. God has already provided all the means necessary to the 
fulfillment of our request. The "Spirit of truth" stands ready to give 
us the filling we desire, but we must partake of— eat— the feast, or 
we will not be filled. He who will not eat of a full table will be 
empty and starve, as truly as though there were no food. Neither 
will the asking of a blessing on food fill you; you must eat it. 

The Spirit of truth speaks to us (through the Word) and by 
obedience to those words, we shall be filled with the Spirit. It was 
Jesus himself who said "The words that I speak unto you, they are 
spirit and they are life." (John 6:63.) And of those who are filled 
with the Spirit it is true as spoken by the prophet, 

R376 : page 8 

"Thy words were found and I did eat them." (Jer. 15:16.) It is 
useless then, for us to pray, Lord, Lord, give us the Spirit, and 
neglect the Word of truth from whence that Spirit is to be supplied. 
It is for this reason that many who meet often and pray much for the 
holy Spirit, are "still but babes in Christ," and many seek the 
outward signs as proof of relationship, instead of the inward 
witness with the Word of truth. 

It is because, as we have just seen, we have something to do if we 
would be filled with the Spirit, as surely as we have something to 
do if we would have natural food, that the Apostle addresses us— 
"Be ye filled with the Spirit" (Eph 5:18.)-indicating that it rests 
ENTIRELY WITH US, since the doors were opened at Pentecost 
and at Cornelius' house. 

"He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. " Matt. 
3:10-12. These words were spoken to the Jews as a nation, and 
Jesus was the one who would do the baptizing. So many of that 
nation as received Jesus were baptized of the holy Spirit at 
Pentecost, and the remainder were baptized with fire -trouble. The 



time of trouble which finally, in A.D. 70, destroyed that nation, was 
the fiery baptism so oft foretold concerning them by the Prophets, 
and now repeated by John. The three verses here connected (10-12) 
refer to the same fire. The unfruitful tree cast into the fire, and the 
chaff burned, represent those of that nation who "knew not the time 
of their visitation. " 

ANOTHER FUTURE OUTPOURING. 

There is to be another future outpouring of God's Spirit, 
accompanied by remarkable and demonstrating gifts. But this will 
not be the same as the previous outpouring in all respects. The 
baptisms and gifts at the beginning of this age were indications that 
those who received them were sons of God on the spiritual plane- 
new creatures. The next outpouring will be a sign of relationship to 
God as human sons, not as "new" or spiritual ones. 

It has frequently been shown that God's design is, through Christ, in 
the coming age, to restore all of the human race who are willing, 
from the condition of human sinners, back to the condition of 
human sons-the position occupied by Adam before he sinned. 
(Luke 3:38.)-this is the great Restitution mentioned by Peter, Acts 
3:21. But we have seen that before thus restoring the human sons to 
their proper position and glory, as such on earth, God is now taking 
out a number of sons who change their nature, and in the 
resurrection will become perfect spiritual beings, no longer earthly. 
Since both of these families are sons, it is proper that God should 
indicate his recognition of them in some way. Hence he has already 
at the beginning of our age indicated our acceptance, and so, or 
similarly, he will indicate the acceptance of the fleshly sons when 
their age is opening— and it should be indicated soon, we think. 

The Prophet Joel mentions both of these outpourings of the Spirit 
and the gifts attendant. (Joel 2:28-32.) Peter recognized Pentecost 
as a fulfillment of this, and so it was. Most, and the chief part of the 
prophecy, was fulfilled there, but not all of it. There God poured 
out of his Spirit upon his servants and handmaidens; but did he pour 
it out upon all flesh? Certainly not; only on those who received 
Jesus and became sons of God by consecration. 

Yet, like other things of God's Word, it is so written that the full 
import remained covered-hidden- until due time. The hiding 
consists in stating the first fulfillment last, and the last first. And 
such is God's custom: He gave the natural seed of Abraham and its 
promises first, and the spiritual and chief seed last; yet in the full 
completion of his plan, the spiritual seed must be glorified before 
the natural can have its promises fulfilled. 

If we transpose the words of Joel we can see the two outpourings of 
gifts, etc., clearly-thus: "And also upon the servants and 
handmaids in those days will I pour out my Spirit. " [This was 
fulfilled in the Lord's servants at Pentecost.] "And it shall come to 
pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and 



your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, [declare] and your old 
men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions." In 
the receiving of these earthly sons, Israel will be the first-"To the 
Jew first, and also the Gentile. " And in harmony with this we read, 
that in that day-the day of the Lord-God will pour upon them the 
spirit of grace and supplication: and they shall look upon him 
whom they have pierced. (Zech 12:10.) 

It is eminently proper, that man should and must come again into 
harmony with the mind or Spirit of God. Man was created in the 
image [mental likeness] of God. Sin has marred it, until he is more 
the [mental] image of Satan. But in the incoming age, coming under 
the influence of truth and the rule of Christ, the hearts of stone shall 
become hearts of flesh [proper fleshly minds] (Ezek. 11:19.) and 
the likeness of Satan, will give place to the original likeness of God. 

Those who have the Spirit of God and its witness then, will neither 
be called to suffer nor to reign as we are, who are now called to the 
heavenly inheritance. 

The Spirit will witness to them that the "marriage of the Lamb is 
come" (accomplished)-that the "little flock" selected to the 
spiritual plane of being, is complete, and is the power, which with 
its head Jesus, is blessing them. As the Spirit now witnesses to the 
new creatures that they are to suffer while the wicked flourish; it 
will witness to those of the next age, that the body of Christ has 
filled up the measure of suffering. Instead of witnessing to them as 
to us, that houses and lands must be forsaken to gain a heavenly 
inheritance; it will witness to them, that he that serveth God shall be 
blessed, and build houses and inherit them, plant vineyards and eat 
the fruit of them, and long enjoy the work of their hands, (Isa. 
65:22) and that the righteous shall flourish and the wicked [wilful 
sinners] be cut off from life. 

This change in the order of things after the body of Christ has been 
selected, will be due to the fact, that then the Christ will have taken 
his great power, and the reign of the kingdom of God will have 
begun. This is forcibly shown in Malachi 3:14-18. "Now we call the 
proud, happy, etc. [This causes perplexity until the reason is seen- 
but when the Jewels have been selected-then there will be a 
change.] Then shall ye return [things shall be changed] and ye shall 
discern between the righteous and wicked, etc. " Then the whole 
order of things will be different; the proud will be debased, and the 
meek exalted; the wicked will be cut off from life, and in "His day 
the righteous shall flourish. " 



*It was not until the beginning of the fourth century that the 
Trinitarian views began to be elaborated and formulated into a 
doctrine and an endeavor made to reconcile it "with the belief of the 
church in one GOD." "Out of the attempt to solve this problem 
sprang the doctrine of the "Trinity. "...Trinity "is a very marked 
feature in Hindooism, and is discernible in Persian, Egyptian, 



Roman, Japanese, Indian and the most ancient Grecian 
Mythologies. "-Abbott & Conant's Religious Dictionary, page 944. 



R377 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Please permit me two questions —If the door to the High 
calling closed in 1881, how is it that conversions still take place? 
Again, the Sanctification movement among Methodists still 
progresses-is this not the same that we term the "High calling?" 

Ans. (No. 1.) We never claimed that conversions would cease with 
Oct. '81. On the contrary we have claimed that the conversion of the 
World in general, is a special work of the incoming Millennial age. 

What is conversion? It is a turning from one thing to another. To 
convert a good man would be to make him a bad man. To convert 
an unbelieving transgressor, is to make him a believing servant. Of 
the world in general it is true that they are the servants of sin, and to 
convert them is to make them servants of righteousness. It is in 
order that all men may be converted to God (become his servants) 
that Jesus died and that the glad tidings are to be testified to all men 
in due time. Therefore conversions do not belong to the Gospel age 
alone, nor can the door to conversion close before the end of the 
Millennial Age. The nominal church because lacking in truth and 
abundant in error is losing its power over the world, even to convert 
to morality. Almost all the recent additions to the nominal churches, 
are Sunday School children. 

Conversion, not only is not the door but it has nothing to do with 
our "High Calling" except that it is a necessary step which each 
sinner and unbeliever must take before he can enter the "strait gate" 
and "narrow way" to the great prize, offered during this Gospel age. 
Thus we read "Repent and be converted (turned) that your sins may 
be blotted out." (Acts 3:19.) After you are freed from your sins- 
"justified by faith" from all things, then you are on the sinless 
platform and so long as the narrow way and gate were open, you 
might enter and run for the prize to which it leads. That narrow gate 
might be entered (while open) by any one who having been made 
free from sin by faith in Jesus' ransom, would present himself "a 
living sacrifice" to God. 

The first to enter this gate and run the race was our Leader and 
Forerunner -Jesus. He needed not to wait for a ransom for his sins, 
being "Holy, harmless and separate from sinners"— "In him was no 
sin. " Jesus entered the gate to run for the same prize, when he 
consecrated himself a living sacrifice to God, at Baptism. That 
narrow way stood open ever since, till Oct. 1881, and every 
justified believer has had the invitation to come take up his cross 
and follow the Leader— share his sufferings and be made 
conformable unto his death. "Few there be that find it," because 



(through lack of study or faith in the Word) few appreciate the 
grand prize so highly, as to be willing to share the cross despising 
the shame and contempt of the World. 

Our understanding is, that all justified believers who had, prior to 
Oct. '81 consecrated their all, of mind and body to God, are on "the 
narrow way" and should continue to "so run (according to their 
covenant) as to obtain" the prize. It is for this perfecting of the 
members of the body now in the narrow way that we wait in our 
present humiliated condition, expecting that when the trial is 
finished, the Lord our head will glorify his BODY. To thus perfect 
us and ripen us rapidly, the light of truth [the harvest Sun] shines 
brighter than ever before. [See Jan. No., page 5.] 

Ans. (No. 2.) Sanctification means, set apart or separated. There are 
many and various ideas on the subject of sanctification. One trouble 
is that many are sanctified to error and almost destitute of truth. 
They are set apart to carry out some plan or scheme of their own, 
begotten through the traditions of men. 

The only sanctification recognized in Scripture as the good, 
acceptable and perfect will of God, is a Sanctification of the spirit 
(mind) through the belief of the truth. (2 Thes. 2:13.) That was 
Paul's inspired idea of sanctification. Jesus taught the same truth, 
praying: "Sanctify them through thy truth: thy Word is truth." (John 
17:17.) James taught the same. Jas. 1:18. 

We conclude then, that there is much spurious Sanctification. 
Some, we doubt not, are sanctified through less truth than we have 
received; but if children, it is only reasonable to suppose that the 
Father will provide such with the "meat in due season." One thing 
seems sure, that all consecrated ones who have any measure of the 
spirit of truth, will feel and manifest a desire for, rather than an 
opposition to, more advanced truths. 

To such as have been sanctified through a little truth and have truly 
given their minds and bodies to God's service, we, as his 
ambassadors urge, that they gird up the loins of their minds (Being 
girt about with truth,) and run with fresh vigor the race for the prize 
of our high calling-that they throw off all entanglements of earthly 
organizations, and run as Christ's free men. But while we still 
would urge justified believers (who have never yet consecrated) to 
now consecrate their time and powers to God's service, we cannot 
hold out as a hope, the heavenly prize. We point such to the same 
prize for which Abraham and all prior to Jesus ran, viz: future 
earthly blessings. 

Ques. Why do you say in February issue that the reformers were 
untitled men? History records that Martin Luther was a Doctor of 
Divinity before he became a leader in the Reformation. 

Ans. Yes, he was a D.D. before he reformed, but was called a 
Heretic after it. 



Ques. (No. 2.) You say that Luther's 27th Thesis showed that he did 
not believe in man's natural or inherent immortality. I have looked 
up the 27th Thesis of the Lutheran Church and find no such thing. 

Ans. The Lutheran Church has changed those Theses, and though 
they have a 27th, it is not Luther's 27th. They dropped his out, 
because it taught just as we said, that man by nature is not 
immortal. Immortality is promised only to overcomers. See 
"LUTHER'S WORKS," vol. 2, pp. 106 and 107.-His defense of his 
XXVII. Thesis. 

Ques. Jesus has not been called Immanuel (God with us) yet, has 
he? Does not this name apply to the complete Christ-head and 
body- when exalted and present with the world? 

Ans. We think that it is similar to the title— "The Everlasting 
Father. " As we have heretofore seen, "The God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten us," who constitute the members in 
particular of Christ's body (1 Pet. 1:3); consequently, we are 
members of the body of that "Everlasting Father" or life giver to the 
world. So also with the title Immanuel. Like these, is another title, 
"The Prince of Peace" -we are members in particular of the body 
of that Prince-joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord and Head, if 
so be that we suffer with him. 



R377 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1882. 

NO. 2. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R377 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

A prominent point of interest now engaging the minds of all, is the 
Egyptian War. War has commenced -Alexandria, the capital, is in 
ruins -the rebelling Pasha of Egypt is fortified at Cairo, and it is 
reported that a Mohammedan Messiah has arisen, and is marshaling 
numbers of Mohammedans, and marching to the defense of Cairo. 
It has but begun, and no one can tell where, or when it will end. 

"Second Advent" papers abound with exciting comments on this 
war, claiming that it is the battle or war "of the great day of God 
Almighty." (Rev. 16:14.) Many of our readers doubtless 
sympathize, to some extent, with this view. It is but natural that 
expectation should make haste to reach fulfillment; but we suggest 
to all-have patience, this is not the war of Rev. 16:14. It may, 
indeed, have some bearing on the future, not at present discernable; 
but it is not the war which closes the great day of God Almighty. 
That battle is the seventh plague, and is brought about as a result of 
the six plagues which precede it. 

In our next, we expect to show that the first six plagues will be 
upon the nominal church-Babylon-the results of which will be to 
"gather," or array the people and their rulers against each other, and 
that this general conflict between priest and people, rulers and 
ruled, capital and labor, is the "battle" or conflict represented by the 
seventh plague-the conflict of the great day of God Almighty, in 
which all oppression and bondage shall cease, by the overthrow of 
the great and mighty in church and state; (Rev. 19:18-21) a 
preparation for the true King of earth to exercise his authority. This 
will not be fully accomplished, as we read prophecy, until A.D. 
1914. 

But our part in the conflict of this "great day of God" has already 
commenced. We fight not with flesh and blood, but with gigantic 
systems of error, with spiritual wickedness in exalted positions, 
against falsities honored by time and wealth and earthly learning- 
against great Babylon, mother and daughters. Are we each fighting 
a good fight— are we overcoming and getting the victory 

R378 : page 1 

over the symbolic Beast and Image— or are we being overcome and 
kept in bondage by them? (Rev. 20:4.) 

To be an overcomer now, requires close application to the one thing 
in hand— the conflict. Hence, it is necessary that our time and 
attention be kept as much as possible free from the thronging cares 
of life, which, if permitted, would swallow us up. It is to this 
special time that Jesus directs our attention, saying: Take heed, lest 
your hearts be overcharged with the cares of this life. (Luke 21 :34.) 
To overcome, we need the armor which God has provided. We 
obtain it from the Word of God, and it requires time and care to fit 



it and learn to use it. We cannot, therefore, spare our valuable and 
needful time to attend to worldly things, plans, and speculations; 
but only the things needful. All else must be laid aside— every 
weight— while we take to ourselves the whole armor of God, that we 
may be able to withstand in the conflict of this evil day. (Eph. 
6:13.) 

During the warm weather some of the preaching brethren are 
finding open-air meetings very advantageous, and the minds and 
hearts of some are thus being reached. We commend the plan to all 
others. Get a shady lot, or park, or market place, as the Master did, 
and thus speak to the people. The common people now, as then, 
will hear gladly the "Glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all 
people. " Tell them why you thus come to them— to bring them joy 
and peace, through the knowledge of the real character and plan of 
God. Tell them why you are not and cannot belong to any of the 
sects or divisions, and can recognize only the ONE CHURCH of 
Christ. Point out how their teachings are confusion, Babel, 
contradiction. Show the contradictory teachings on "Election" and 
"Free Grace"; and show the proper position of both of these 
doctrines in the true plan of God from the Word. Show up the errors 
of the sects in all their naked deformity, by which they distort the 
truth of God, and turn it into a lie; but do it all in the spirit of love, 
showing that the systems, and not the true Christians bound by 
those systems, are denounced by the Word of God, and condemned 
to overthrow. (Rev. 18:2,3.) Show that the call of the Lord to all 
who are truly his is to come out of Babylon (Rev. 18:4) into joy, 
peace, and liberty in Christ. Let your speech at all times be 
seasoned with grace (favor), and as ye go, preach— the kingdom of 
God is at hand. 

A St. Louis brother writes that he purposes, while off on a vacation, 
to hold some public meetings, and read sundry WATCH TOWER 
articles. This is a good suggestion for many who have no practice in 
preparing sermons. The suggestion is offered, also, that at evening 
meetings, when twos and threes and dozens assemble, it would be 
far better to take up and discuss with the Scriptures bearing thereon, 
one and another of the articles in the TOWER. It would be vastly 
better to thus study God's Word, than to spend so much time, as 
some do, in vain repetitions and telling of "experiences." Try it, 
brethren and sisters; and let all take part in the search for truth, and 
seek diligently till you find it-clear, beautiful, and invigorating. 

Precious letters still come, showing that others of our Father's 
children are coming to rejoice in the light, and to be refreshed by 
the truth. God be praised: He is his own Interpreter, and he will 
make it plain to all who have an ear for the voice of the Lord, our 
Shepherd. We are glad to see how much some are trying to spread 
the glad tidings, and we are sure our Father is well pleased also. 
Freely we have received; freely let us give. We subjoin extracts 
from a few of the letters received. 

page 1 



OAKLAND, CAL., June 29, '82. DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

I would like to have those outline notes for six sermons, with the 
chart. I am doing what I can for the truth. One brother in my class 
has embraced the truth, and is rejoicing in it, and is hungering for 
more; others are inquiring the way. My heart burns within me as the 
Lord opens to me the Scriptures. I see new light and new beauty in 
his Word as never before. My wife has been reading the 
"Tabernacle," and rejoices with me in the truth. I want to instruct 
my children in the right ways of the Lord. Please send eight or ten 
more of the "Tabernacle," also ten "Food." I enclose $5 for Tract 
Society. 

Your brother in Christ, . 

R378 : page 1 

PHILADELPHIA, PA. DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I have some good news to convey to you. For years my dear 
husband has been so opposed to churches and ministers, that I have 
had to endure a great deal on account of them, and I knew the 
greater part he said was true, but I never said anything one way or 
the other; and for some years I have felt that the Saul's Armor of 
Creeds did not fit; the yoke chafed me very much. I never was that 
kind of a Christian that took in all I listened to without thinking for 
myself; and because of this, I have been considered peculiar; but 
thank God it is the peculiar people God is gathering to himself. I 
have been struggling to be free for some time, but yesterday I died 
the death, to Sectarianism. I sent in my resignation to both my 
Sunday class and church. I did not even ask for my certificate of 
membership. I counted the cost, and already it has been said I had 
accepted false doctrine. Bless God for such a doctrine! 

I told my husband this morning, and I said, "Now, I would like to 
have a Bible-class in my own home, something I have wanted so 
long. " I knew if God would use me in that way he could bring his 
mind into accord with it. He consented, though once he said I 
should never have a prayer meeting in his house. Where shall I 
begin to praise God for his goodness. Now, I intend to use all my 
efforts in the good work; pray that God will teach me how. 

Your sister in Christ, . 

page 1 



DANSVILLE, N.Y., July 11, 1882. DEAR BROTHER:- 

I returned home last week. While absent, I met with a few of the 
dear ones in their homes; and the result was renewed strength and 
more courage to "press toward the mark for the prize of the high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus." O, what a privilege to be permitted 
to have part in the great work just dawning upon us. 

Two sisters came in on Sunday, and we read the article on, "The 
Holy Spirit," in last ZION'S WATCH TOWER. I would like, if I 
could, to express the feast it was to us; we forgot all else for almost 
five hours. 

I was led to ask myself, Am I doing all I can? and the answer came, 
no. I resolved that a portion of every day should be devoted to a 
special effort in the Master's work, either by word, deed, or pen. 
There are some dear ones near me I shall visit this week. My time, 
talents, and all I have are Christ's, and he is mine. I desire, most of 
all things, to be in complete subjection to our Head. 

Your sister in Christ, . 



ST. LOUIS, July 4th, 1882. DEAR BROTHER:- 

I am doing all I can to spread the "glad tidings"; perhaps have been 
the means of doing some good by talking, and use of the little 
books. For some time I have been attending Bible reading of the 
Y.M.C.A. I am seeking an opportunity to speak at some of these 
meetings. Many of these young men think they are doing a great 
work for Jesus. They seem very sincere; they pray and strive for 
what they are taught to suppose is the Spirit of Jesus. Their chief 
exercise is to pray and give what they suppose is testimony for 
Jesus, apparently without any correct understanding of it. Their 
practice is to stop 

R378 : page 2 

persons on the street, and abruptly demand to know if they are 
Christians, or saved, as they call it. There is a wonderful power 
here, if it could be properly used. But patience! patience! it will 
come all right, just as soon as their eyes are opened. As soon as 
possible we will get a small society of the consecrated ones as a 
nucleus for extending the truth. In my own case, truth seems to 
develop wonderfully, and I have a strong desire to make it known. 
Yes, 

I love to tell the story, 
It did so much for me. " 

I expect to travel a couple of months, starting soon. If so, I will read 
in public some articles from the TOWER, in towns where I may 
stop a few days, and may do some good as the agent of our Father 
and our Lord Jesus. 

Your brother in the Anointed One. 



SULLIVAN COUNTY, MO., June 26, '82. BRO. RUSSELL:- 

Last Saturday I received a sample copy of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER— I don't know how you came to send it to me; I can 
hardly understand it, but in the supplement to it I see something 
grand. I am teachable, and if I get your meaning, that the restitution 
of all things means also the salvation of all men, I want to learn 
more about it. Send me the paper and other reading matter; I will 
carefully read them. I have been preaching twenty years, but I want 
to know all truth and God's plans, etc. 

Oh, how the church is wrapped in darkness ! For fifteen years I have 
been trying to get the light, and how little do I know yet. 

Yours, in search of truth. . 



[As you read more, you will understand better how we anticipate a 
salvation of all men from the Adamic death. When saved, they may 
live forever if they will; or die the second death for their own 
willful sin against knowledge and ability. -EDITOR.] 



CHANDLER, KANSAS. DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

We are here on the frontiers of Kansas. We have never regretted 
sending for the WATCH TOWER. It has brought light into our 
minds, and it has so perfectly explained some portions of the 
Scripture, that it seems as though the dark clouds are passing away, 
and the true light is shining upon us for the first time in our whole 
lives. We have been church members for forty years, but we have 
learned more from the WATCH TOWER than we ever learned 
from the pulpit. There are some here who are inquiring for the truth, 
and we think that if we had some pamphlets or papers to circulate 
through this country, it would be sowing the precious seed of God's 
truth. This is the time when the true followers of Christ should 
work, for it seems to me that the churches are all asleep. They are 
starved to death. Please send some of the "Food for Thinking 
Christians," and we will circulate them. 

AND WIFE. 



PHILADELPHIA, July 15, 1882. DEAR BRO.:- 

Enclosed please find a small sum ($5), for the purpose of spreading 
the "glad tidings" of salvation from death, for all of our race. The 
more I read of the plan of salvation the better I like it. I am but a 
babe yet, but I am learning. I am doing what I can with tongue, 
papers and books. Hoping many may be enabled to see the light, 
and that I may be the means of doing some good, I remain, 

Yours, &c, . 



R378 : page 2 

FAITH HEALING. 

Mr. Boardman, a minister of Philadelphia, records the following 
faith cure, as related to him by a Dr. R , of that city: 

"I do not like to speak of it to people generally, they are so 
unbelieving; but I can tell you. The children were jumping off from 
a bench, and my little son fell and broke both bones of his arm 
below the elbow. My brother, who is a professor of surgery in the 
College at Chicago, was here on a visit. I asked him to set and dress 
the arm. He did so; put it in splints, bandages, and in a sling. The 
child was very patient, and went about without a murmur all day. 
The next morning he came to me and said, 'Dear papa, please take 
off these things.' 'Oh, no, my son, you will have to wear these 
things five or six weeks, before it will be well.' 'Why, papa, it is 
well.' 'Oh, no, my dear child, that is impossible.' 'Why, papa, you 
believe in prayer, don't you?' 'You know I do, my son.' 'Well, last 
night when I went to bed it hurt me very bad, and I asked Jesus to 
make it well, and he did make it well, and it is well.' 

I did not like to say a word to chill his faith. A happy thought came; 
I said, 'My dear child, your uncle put the things on, and if they are 
taken off, he must do it.' Away he went to his uncle, who told him 
he would have to go as he was six or seven weeks, and must be 
very patient; and when the little fellow told him that Jesus had 
made him well, he said, 'Pooh! pooh! nonsense,' and sent him away. 
The next morning the poor boy came again to me, and plead with so 
much sincerity and confidence, that I more than half believed that 
he was really healed, and went to my brother and said, 'Had you not 
better undo his arm, and let him see for himself? then he will be 
satisfied. If you do not, I fear, though he is very obedient, he may 
be tempted to undo it himself, and then it may be worse for him.' 
My brother yielded, took off the bandages and splints, and 
exclaimed, 'It is well, absolutely well,' and hastened to the door for 
air to keep from fainting. 

He had been a real, simple-hearted Christian, but in his student days 
wandered away; but this brought him back to the Lord. Strange, if it 
had not. To all this I could say nothing, if I had been ever so much 
disposed, in the way of accounting for it, upon any other hypothesis 
than that of the little fellow himself, that Jesus had made him well. " 

This account seems to come in such a way as to be reliable. No 
Christian can doubt the ability of the Lord to heal at the present as 
well as in the past. The fact that such cases are more seldom than in 
the apostles' days is nothing, when we remember that the gifts of 
the spirit in the early days of the dispensation, were to convince, not 
saints, but unbelievers. (1 Cor. 14:22.) Now the world has many 
proofs of the truth of Christianity which then it did not have, and 
which made miracles and gifts necessary, as a proof that the 
teachings were of God. However, let no one confound the above or 



similar answers to prayer, with the "gifts" of the primitive church; 
they are not the same. Those who possessed the gift of healing, did 
not pray, but commanded the healing. 

The above is more like what James mentions (5:14,15.)-The prayer 
of faith. It has been the privilege of the church throughout the entire 
age— in sickness, as in every trouble, to— 

"Take it to the Lord in prayer." 

But which cases shall we take to the Lord— every case? It could do 
no harm to take the smallest scratch or pain or bruise to the Lord in 
prayer, yet, certainly we cannot understand James' teaching to apply 
to such trivial affairs, else the "elders of the church" would be kept 
busy with one or two large families. James' prescription, it seems to 
us, applies to a case where, what can be done, has been done, and 
the sufferer is at death's door. If it please our Lord to give so 
marked a healing as the one above recorded occasionally, we 
rejoice with those that rejoice. 

We expect that such manifestations of favor may become more 
frequent from this on; but we would call attention to the fact that 
those who have consecrated life, strength, mind, and all to God— a 
sacrifice which he has accepted— cannot, with propriety, ask to have 
back what they are sacrificing. 

R379 : page 2 

This thought is strengthened when we recall that neither Jesus nor 
the apostles were ever the subjects of miraculous healing. The 
power of Jesus was exercised in healing the people; but when he 
was weary, instead of seeking a supernatural supply of strength, "he 
sat on the well." (John 4:6.) When the multitude hungered, he fed 
them by supernatural power; but when he himself hungered, he 
would not command stones to become bread, to satisfy his hunger, 
but rather sent his disciples to a village to buy meat. (John 4:8.) 

Jesus, by asking, could have had more than twelve legions of angels 
to protect his life from death, but would not ask. (Matt. 26:53.) 
Because he had consecrated himself to death, he could not ask nor 
use supernatural means to retain his hold on life. To such an extent 
was this true, that even his enemies remarked it, saying of him 
when on the cross: "He saved others, himself he cannot save." No, 
we thank God that he did not save himself, else we should have had 
no Redeemer. And we pray that all those who have consecrated 
themselves to God— to be "conformed to his death" (Phil. 3:10.)— 
may be enabled, not only to not keep back any part of the price, but 
to see so clearly the dependence of glory with him, or the suffering 
with him, that they will not ask physical healing for themselves, 
however much they may ask it for the people. 

God's favor to us in Christ is not to be measured by our physical, 
earthly blessings, but by the spiritual favors which we receive from 
him. Thus it was when Paul asked at one time, the removal of a 
physical difficulty —"a thorn in the flesh"-God refused to remove 



it, but told him that his favor (grace) would more than compensate 
him- "My grace is sufficient for thee," is the language of the Lord 
to all who suffer with him that they may also be glorified together. 
(2 Cor. 12:9.) 



R379 : page 2 

THE Jewish relief committee of this country announces that it can 
render no more aid to the Jewish refugees from Russia— their funds 
are exhausted. Any steamship company hereafter bringing paupered 
cripples will be liable for their return according to Law. 

The poor creatures who arrive here are truly pitiable, and unable to 
make themselves understood, even to their Jewish friends. Sixty 
started back to Europe on July 22d. This is indeed "the time of 
Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. " 



R379 : page 2 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques.-I am told that it cannot be proved that the Hebrew name 
Jehovah, is the distinctive name for the Almighty Father; but that it 
is applied only to Christ. Can you give a satisfactory answer to this 
statement? 

Ans.-It is the opinion of some that the Hebrew word el applies to 
our Heavenly Father, while the name Jehovah applies to Christ. 
This is just the reverse of the truth, however. The Hebrew words el, 
and elohim, are general terms, meaning mighty ones. They are 
applied to Jehovah, to Jesus, to angels, and to men. (See April No.- 
"The Word of God. ") Not so with the word Jehovah, however. We 
cite a very few out of the many, to prove that this name belongs 
alone to the great first cause of all things: Isa. 42:8. "I am the Lord 
(Heb. Jehovah); that is MY name, and my glory will I not give to 
another." Exod. 15:3, "The Lord (Jehovah) is a man of war; the 
Lord (Jehovah) is his name." Exod. 6:3, "I appeared unto Abraham, 
unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God (el) Almighty 
(sheddai); but by my name JEHOVAH, was I not known to them." 
Psa. 83:18, "That men may know that thou, whose name alone is 
Jehovah, art the Most High over all the earth. " 

Jehovah is frequently represented as the Savior of mankind; that is, 
he was emphatically the Savior in that he provided a Redeemer in 
the person of Christ. Thus we read, Isa. 43:3, 11, "For I am the Lord 
(Jehovah) thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior.". .."I, even I, 
am the Lord (Jehovah), and beside me there is no Savior." Hos. 
13:4, "I am the Lord (Jehovah) thy God, from the land of Egypt, 
and thou shalt know no God but me, for there is no Savior beside 
me. " Jesus is also called our Savior, and properly so, in that he was 
the willing agent for the accomplishment of Jehovah's plans. 



We confidently assert that the name Jehovah is never applied in 
Scripture to any but the Father. It is for those who claim the reverse 
to give a text, and show its applicability to Jesus or any one else 
than the Father. Here is a way to prove the matter conclusively —the 
New Testament writers quote much from the Old Testament; do 
they ever quote a passage in which the word Jehovah occurs, and 
apply it to Jesus? We claim that they do not. On the contrary, we 
will give one out of many similar quotations, in which it is clearly 
applied, not to Jesus, but to the Father. Psa. 110:1. "The Lord 
(Jehovah) said unto my Lord (adon— master) sit thou," etc. Note 
carefully the application of this by Jesus (Luke 20:41-44), and by 
Peter. (Acts 2:34-36, and 33.) This one text is sufficient until 
answered. If any one can twist it, we have others ready. 

Ques. Please explain Rev. 20:8. Is it to be understood that Satan, at 
the close of the Millennial age, will deceive a multitude as the sand 
of the sea? 

Ans. It says he went out to deceive —to deceive all: all were a great 
multitude, as the sand of the sea. We are not informed what 
proportion of all he succeeded in deceiving. 



R379 : page 2 

AN edict signed by the czar and published in the official Gazette 
of St. Petersburg virtually bankrupts every wealthy Jew in Russia. It 
provisionally suspends all payment for contracts or debts due to 
Jews, prohibits them from settling outside towns and villages, and 
otherwise provides for their speedy extirpation throughout czardom. 



R379 : page 3 



LET US GO FORTH.--Heb. 13:13. 

HORATIUS BONAR. 

Silent, like men in solemn haste, 
Girded wayfarers of the waste, 
We pass out at the world's wide gate, 
Turning our back on all its state; 
We press along the narrow road 
That leads to life, to bliss, to God. 

We cannot, and we would not stay; 
We dread the snares that throng the way, 
We fling aside the weight and sin, 
Resolved the victory to win; 
We know the peril, but our eyes 
Rest on the splendor of the prize. 



No idling now, no wasteful sleep, 
From Christian toil our limbs to keep; 
No shrinking from the desperate fight, 
No thought of yielding or of flight; 
No love of present gain or ease; 
No seeking man or self to please. 

No sorrow for the loss of fame; 
No dread of scandal on our name; 
No terror for the world's sharp scorn; 
No wish that taunting to return; 
No hatred can our hatred move, 
And enmity but kindles love. 

No sigh for laughter left behind, 
Or pleasures scattered to the wind; 
No looking back on Sodom's plains; 
No listening still to Babel's strains; 
No tears for Egypt's song and smile; 
No thirsting for its flowing Nile; 

No vanity nor folly now; 
No fading garland round our brow; 
No moody musings in the grove; 
No pang of disappointed love; 
With the brave heart and steady eye, 
We onward march to victory. 

What, though with weariness oppressed- 
Tis but a little, and we rest. 
This throbbing heart and burning brain 
Will soon be calm and cool again. 
Night is far spent, and morn is near,- 
Morn of the cloudless and the clear. 

Tis but a little, and we come 
To our reward, our crown, our home; 
A little space— yet more or less, 
And we have crossed the wilderness, 
Finished the toil, the rest begun, 
The battle fought, the triumph won! 



R380 : page 3 

HUMAN TEACHERS UNNECESSARY (?) 

"You have an anointing from the Holy one; you all know it." 
(Rendering of Sinaitic and Vatican MSS.) "The anointing which 
you received from Him abides in you, and you have no need that 
any one should teach you, but the same anointing teaches you 
concerning all things and is true." (1 John 2:20,27. Diaglott.) 



Some have gathered from this, that among those who are fully 
consecrated to the Lord and have received the anointing (that is the 
mind, will or spirit of God-the same mind which was also in Christ 
Jesus our Lord) no teachers are to be recognized and that none are 
needed, as all shall be taught of God. To this we object, that God 
hath set in the Church apostles, teachers, &c, for the edifying of the 
body. We suggest that if the teachers be of divine appointment, 
those taught are divinely taught. See (Eph 4:11-16; 2 Tim. 4:2-5; 
John 13:20.) We believe that John does not contradict other 
Scriptures which show that God had appointed teachers in the 
church. We believe the proper understanding of his language may 
be found from its connections. 

John tells the church that there are some of the nominal church who 
have become Anti-christ-i.e., opposers of Christ. He urges them 
not to be in any way connected with such, nor led away by them. (1 
John 2:18,19.) He concludes his argument by assuring them that he 
has confidence in them, and that as they have the Spirit -mind of 
Christ, they will be competent to judge between these sophisms of 
men, and the truth. Having themselves the anointing, or mind of the 
Lord, they can easily discern a different spirit under whatever form 
or guise it may present itself, even without any special teacher to 
point out the doctrinal flaws of their arguments. He says: "I have 
written these things to you concerning those who (would) deceive 
you. But the anointing which you received from him, abides in you 
and you have no need that any one should teach you; but the same 
anointing teaches you concerning all things, and is true." (vss. 
26,27 Diaglott.) 

We have often remarked how some, almost intuitively, discern truth 
or error. It is because the Spirit of Christ (the spirit of truth) abides 
in them, that truth has an attracting, and error a repelling influence. 
We would not be understood as favoring a following of impressions 
and a neglect of the appointed means of instruction. No, but we 
believe that in addition to the Word and its God appointed 
expounders, it is essential that we have also the mind of Christ, the 
spirit of consecration and sacrifice, which is also the spirit of truth, 
else we might be deceived into a misconstruction of the plainest 
statements of God's word. But if we keep close to Jesus as his 
followers, drinking more into his spirit of sacrifice and love, and 
searching the Word to know the Father's will, then we may be proof 
against all the attacks of error. 

Note the principle in operation in the nominal churches. Having lost 
the spirit of sacrifice-the spirit of Christ, and having contracted a 
spirit of ease and pleasure loving-the spirit of the world, she soon 
convinced herself that the sufferings were past, and the reign of 
glory and conquest begun. Papacy thus developed, accordingly bent 
her energies to the obtaining of power and the persecuting of all 
opposers. The various Protestant sects sprung up with a measure of 
the spirit of self sacrifice and crucifixion- deadness to the world, 
but these soon began to covet a joint reign with the kingdoms of 



earth. They sought power, influence, and wealth. They too 
gradually received of the spirit of the world as they lost the Christ 
spirit of sacrifice. Thus losing the anointing, it is no wonder that as 
sects they drifted into error. As a consequence of having lost the 
spirit of truth, they find it easy to satisfy their minds relative to the 
Word of God, and laying it aside, they teach for doctrines, the 
traditions of men; claiming of course that it has Scriptural support. 

One of the natural results of such looking at spiritual things with the 
spirit of the world, is to get God's dealings and plans distorted and 
confused. So much is this the case, that intelligent people of the 
world see its weaknesses and cannot honestly support that which 
involves so many and glaring absurdities. Intelligent Christians can 
only accept of church theories and creeds, by shutting their eyes 
and ears and determining not to think on religious things. Thus the 
loss of the spirit of truth, caused the loss of the truth itself, and 
turning the truth of God into an apparent lie, it has become the chief 
cause of the wonderful growth of Infidelity both in and out of the 
church. 

Let us see to it that we receive the truth in the love of it-and drink 
into its spirit, as the sure preventive of all the assaults of error. 

N.B.-Read in connection with "Human Teachers Necessary," in 
June issue. 



R380 : page 3 

THE JEWS. 

[From the New York Herald.] 

LONDON, June 6, 1882. 

At a meeting of the Mansion House Committee for the Relief of the 
Russian Jews, it was stated that the amount of L. 82,45 8 had been 
collected, of which there remained L. 25 ,000. It was resolved to 
send commissioners to Hamburg to superintend the departure of the 
emigrants. 

THE REFUGEES IN TURKEY. 

Our Constantinople correspondent sends the following: -"Turkey 
is about to share with the United States the honor of providing an 
asylum for the Jewish fugitives from Russian and Romanian 
intolerance and persecution. Mr. Lawrence Oliphant and Mr. James 
Alexander-the Moses and the Aaron of the situation-are now here, 
and several hundred half-naked and starving men, women and 
children, forming the advance guard of the exodus, have already 
arrived in Constantinople. All the emigrants with whom I spoke 
expressed their joy at getting out of Russia, and declared that they 
had left behind them thousands of their co-religionists whose only 
immediate object in life was to get out of Russia, no matter how, 



even if they knew they must die of want in any other country. A 
general influx of Jewish refugees in Constantinople would involve 
the greater misery and suffering where there is already great 
privation and want among the poorer classes of the regular 
inhabitants. Such an influx is, however, deemed inevitable, and the 
only hope is, that the general stampede toward Constantinople can 
be retarded for a few months, when preparations of some kind can 
be made to lessen the suffering. In the meantime the Jews already 
arrived are provided with food by means of local subscriptions, and 
the Mansion House Committee has been applied to for funds. 
Besides an exodus from Russia, we are threatened with an exodus 
from Romania. 

MR. OLIPHANT'S MISSION. 

"Mr. Lawrence Oliphant, who recently arrived here from Jassy, 
states to me, that although no violent outbreak has yet occurred in 
Romania, nevertheless the entire Jewish population is in hourly 
dread lest the outrages which spread like a contagion from Balta to 
Bessarabia shall in turn extend to Romania, where, within the past 
few weeks, the Jews have been deprived of almost all their civil 
rights- where they cannot hold land, nor pursue their trades or 
ordinary occupations, nor even peddle their wares in the street, and 
where life has become intolerable. There are over two hundred and 
sixty- five thousand Jews in Romania, and Mr. Oliphant believes 
that over two hundred thousand of them will emigrate. Sentiment 
and reverence for the traditions of their race draw them to Palestine 
rather than toward America. Last week the Central Jewish 
Committee, which represents forty-nine local committees, met at 
Jassy, and 200,000f. were at once subscribed to start an exodus 
fund. The Romanian Jews added to the Russian Jews, will so 
augment the numbers coming to Turkey that all preparations for 
caring for them will probably prove inadequate; and Mr. Oliphant 
issued circulars from Jassy begging and imploring them to delay 
their departure for at least four months. The Sultan does not want to 
have another imperium in imperio in his dominions, and 
consequently will never consent to the formation of any 
autonomous colonization scheme in Palestine. He has, however, 
expressed his warmest sympathy with the oppressed Jews, and the 
Turkish authorities are instructed to issue Ottoman passports to all 
Russian and Romanian Jews who express a desire to settle 
anywhere in the Ottoman dominions, with the sole exception of 
Palestine. " 

CONSTANTINOPLE, June 7, 1882. 

A deputation representing over forty Russian and Romanian 
Jewish communities, waited on General Wallace, earnestly urging 
him to exert his good offices with the Sultan to enable them to 
colonize Syria in groups of 200 to 500 or 1,000. The Jewish 
refugees here are starving, and more are still coming. General 
Wallace has asked for instructions from Washington. 



R381 : page 3 



THE SECOND DEATH. 



If there is to be a second, it implies that there has been a first. Not 
only so, but the second must be like or similar to the first, or it 
would not be a second. Neither an apple nor a pear would be a 
second peach; so the second death, like the first, must be a cessation 
of life or being. The second death is spoken of with reference to 
humanity; and, since the first death- Adamic-passed upon all men, 
it follows as a matter of fact, that the first death must be abrogated 
or set aside in some manner, before the second death would be 
possible. 

Death is the wages of sin. The first— the wages of Adam's sin- 
passed upon all men. He, having forfeited his right to life, began to 
have the penalty executed on him- "Dying thou shalt die. " He 
could not, of course, give to his posterity that right to, and 
perfection of, life which he no longer possessed. Hence all partake 
of the depravity both mental and physical, and all partake of the 
penalty-Dying we die. In fact, we are born in a dying condition, or 
under the rule or dominion of death. This universal death, we call 
Adamic death, because our father Adam was the direct cause or 
source of it. 

Were it not that this Adamic death is to be destroyed by Christ, 
there never could be a second death. Life once forfeited, could not 
be forfeited a second time, unless it first be restored. This 
restoration to life is called a resurrection (Gr. anastasis- a setting 
up again-rebuilding- restoring.) Jesus obtained of Justice the right 
to restore mankind to life, by giving himself a ransom for them -a 
full satisfaction to the claims of justice. He bought us with his own 
precious blood. (1 Pet. 1:19; and 1 Cor. 6:20.) Hence it is that he 
can say, "O, death, I will be thy plagues; O, grave, I will be thy 
destruction. " (Hos. 13:14.) He presently, when united with his 
Bride, will begin the work of destroying death by raising all 
mankind out of it- "There shall be a resurrection both of the just 
and unjust." 

In the resurrected condition in the Millennial Age, each member of 
the human family will have an individual trial, testing his 
willingness to be obedient to the will of God. And the hope is, that 
the large majority will "choose life and live," being helped in their 
choice by the bitter experiences of the present Adamic death. 
Nevertheless, Scripture reveals the fact, that in that age some will 
sin against light, knowledge, and liberty, and die the second death- 
the wages of their own, and not of Adam's sin. 

The Lord shows the above differences between the first and second 
death, and the present and future age, in Jer. 31:29,30. "In those 



days they shall say no more, 'The fathers have eaten a sour grape, 
and the children's teeth are set on edge. 

R381 : page 4 

But every one shall die for his own iniquity: Every man that eateth 
the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge"-"The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die." (Ezek. 18:2,4.) This is a pointed Scripture; it 
shows that in the coming age the parents' sins will not be upon the 
children; consequently it describes a time when the first death has 
been abolished. But it tells of a second death too, for it informs us 
that then, after release from death once-then, the soul (person) that 
sinneth, it shall die. This could be no other than the second death. 

The first, or Adamic death is an extinction of being, but is called a 
sleep, because God had foreseen and forearranged that in due time 
all should be made alive, hence, while really dead, and returned to 
the dust from whence they came, yet not so in God's sight-they "all 
live unto him. " From the standpoint of his plan and power, they 
shall all awake again to life. They only sleep until the great 
Millennial day. But the "second death" is not a sleep, because there 
is no hope of a resurrection from it. Nowhere in Scripture is there 
any promise of release from it -"There is a sin unto death (a sin 
against light and opportunity). I do not say that ye shall pray for it." 
(1 John 5:16.) 

The first, or Adamic death, was accompanied by pain and distress 
in dying; but all pain and consciousness ceased when the death was 
complete. So with the second death, it doubtless will be 
accompanied by a certain amount of agony, but the agony will be at 
an end when the second death is accomplished. Because there will 
be no resurrection from it, because the second death will never be 
destroyed, therefore it is called ever-lasting punishment. The 
punishment or wages is death, and the second death is everlasting, 
because it will never be undone. 

Does some one say— death shall be destroyed— there shall be no 
more death? We ask which death will be destroyed?-is it not the 
first; the death that passed upon all for Adam's sin? Yes, and its 
destruction was often foretold, and the ransom to be given for the 
Adamic transgression was often typified in the sacrifices of the four 
thousand years previous to Jesus' sacrifice— the Lamb of God that 
taketh away the sin of the world. Having taken away their sin by 
paying their penalty for them, he obtained the right to take away 
that death which was on the whole world as the punishment of 
Adam's sin. But Scripture is silent regarding any ransom from the 
second death. On the contrary, it says of those who sin willfully 
against full light and truth, that "there remaineth no more a sacrifice 
for sins [We would no longer have any of the benefits arising from 
the sacrifice]. Henceforth such are exposed to the full penalty of 
their own sin-the second death. (Heb. 10:26,27.) 

But by taking a full Scriptural view of the subject, we may readily 
convince ourselves that the second death will never be destroyed. 



Call to mind the fact that a Savior from the Adamic sin and Adamic 
death was necessary, for "Without the shedding of blood there is no 
remission" of sins. (Heb. 9:22.) Call to mind also, the Scriptural 
teaching that every sinner requires a Savior, and you will see that if 
a thousand persons sinned thus individually, it would require the 
death of a thousand redeemers to set them free from the second 
death— one for each. This was God's reason for condemning the 
entire race in the person of one man, viz. -that they should require 
only one redeemer; and only one redeemer was provided. The race 
which was condemned to death because of one man's sin, could, 
with justice, be released from death through the one Redeemer. 
(Rom. 5:18,19.) Witness herein the economy which pervades all of 
the Divine plans. Truly he condemned all in one that he might have 
mercy upon all through another one. "Since through a man there is 
death, through a man (Jesus) also there is a resurrection of the 
dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) 

Some, overlooking the fact that God is just as well as loving, have 
arranged a theory for the ultimate eternal salvation of all men; and, 
anxious to hold their theory, they are in danger of neglecting the 
Scriptural doctrine of a second or everlasting death, for which there 
is no sacrifice and no promised redemption. These tell us that the 
"second death" is a symbol, and is used in speaking of symbols; 
hence, it cannot be understood as applying to mankind, but to 
systems. 

It is a matter of regret, that a desire to uphold a theory should lead 
any one to take this ground, for it is not true. Nowhere is second 
death applied to symbols or systems. We demand a Scripture for 
such an assertion. As a proof of its use relative to systems, we are 
referred to Rev. 20:14,15; and 21:8. We recognize the fact that this 
book is full of symbols and word-pictures, but its pictures are full 
of meaning; and it abounds also in literal statements. This is no 
excuse, however, for ignoring its teachings as meaningless. If 
systems are mentioned as dying a second death, it would prove that 
such systems had once existed, died, revived, and then died again. 
Many false systems now exist, which must die with this evil age. 
But will such evil systems come to life again, and flourish during 
the Millennial reign of Christ, and need at some future time to die a 
second death? Nay, verily. But all should notice that the expression 
"second death" or any equivalent expression is never used in the 
Bible with reference to systems. 

There is not the semblance of a system connected with the account 
of the second death in the above references. One reads: "And death 
and hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death, 
even the lake of fire. And if any was not found written in the book 
of life, he was cast into the lake of fire. " 

Here the words "lake of fire," are used symbolically, as elsewhere, 
to represent destruction; but no systems are mentioned as being 
destroyed here. The scene is laid in the Millennial Age, when, 
under the reign of Jesus and his Bride, Satan is bound, and the 



White Throne (reign of righteousness) is established in the earth. 
Then the dead, small and great, being brought forth from death and 
hades, are judged or tried by the opened books-the Scriptures. 
Then a record will be made of all worthy of ever-lasting life as 
God's human sons— called a book, or record of life, or of those 
worthy of life. 

[A book or record of life is made during this Gospel Age also-but a 
different one entirely. The one now being made is of those 
accounted worthy of the new nature— to be changed from human to 
divine beings. Hence we see that there are two books of life— one 
for the overcomers of this age— new divine creatures, and "another" 
book of life for those who are counted worthy in the next age.] 

As the work of raising mankind out of the Adamic death and the 
tomb progresses— they (death, and hades— the grave) are said to be 
destroyed or "plagued," or cast into a lake of fire— cast into 
destruction. 

R382 : page 4 

When the last one has been delivered from the power of Adamic 
death and the tomb, then the lake of fire [the judgment] will have 
destroyed death. But while the judgment of God (symbolized by 
fire) will thus destroy the Adamic death, it will also be the agency 
for destroying all men unworthy of life. And thus it is that it is to 
them the second death, as we read— This is the second death, even 
the lake of fire. And if any was not found written in the book of 
life, he was cast into the lake of fire." (Rev. 20:14,15. Rev. 
version.) 

In the succeeding chapter we have a pen-picture of the Millennial 
Age, in which the church and her Head- Jesus-are in glory, and 
the throne or kingdom of God is established among men. Through 
this glorified church, God dwells with men, and the Millennial Age 
of blessing progresses. During that age the former things (sorrow, 
pain, and death as results of Adamic sin) pass away, and death 
(Adamic) shall be no more. (Verse 4.) This is accomplished by him 
that sits in the throne-the Christ, head and body; hence it cannot in 
any sense belong to this age, when we pray, "Thy kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth. " It must belong to the coming age, when 
the words of the Master will be fulfilled: "Fear not, little flock, it is 
your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. " 

Speaking of those of that Millennial Age who overcome, or are 
found worthy of life, we read that they shall be God's sons-earthly 
sons, as Adam before he sinned was an earthly son. (Luke 3:38; and 
1 Cor. 15:47,48.) Then, speaking of the class found unworthy of 
life in the close of the Millennium, after having enjoyed all its 
privileges and favors, we read -"The fearful, unbelieving, 
abominable, murderers, fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, 
and all liars -their part shall be in the lake that burneth with fire 
and brimstone; which is the second death. " The judgments of God 
which shall devour these, are here, as elsewhere, represented by the 



two most destructive agencies known. (Fire is everywhere a figure 
of destruction, and burning brimstone is the most deadly agency 
known. It destroys every form of life.) This is the second death, 
because as we were just informed (verse 4) the general death— 
Adamic— was no more— it had been completely destroyed by taking 
out of it the entire race. 

Who can object to this decree of Justice, that all who will not come 
into harmony with the God of love and his loving plans when full 
knowledge and ability are possessed, should be cut off from life- 
die for their own sins-the second death. God will have a clean, 
sinless universe, all harmonious, all perfect; and to accomplish this 
he must either coerce men, or destroy those who would require 
coercion. He tells us that the latter is his plan, and it becomes us to 
assent to it. Does some one say that God's mercy endureth forever, 
and he will raise men from the second death, and give them further 
opportunity? We answer that if sin is willfully and persistently 
pursued regardless of knowledge, regardless of ability to do right, 
regardless of punishments, it would be useless to repeat the same 
operation. Besides this, we have shown that a ransom price and 
redeemer would be necessary for each sinner, and God reveals no 
such plan in his Word. Is it best to attempt to be wise above what is 
written? Does not every Scripture bearing on the subject teach that 
Christ and his Bride will reign a thousand years, and that in that 
thousand years all evil and every enemy of righteousness shall be 
destroyed -even death [Adamic] the great enemy? Then the entire 
earth and its nations— all whose names are in the second book of life 
(the others being destroyed by the second death) will be delivered 
up to God, even the Father. 1 Cor. 15:28; and Rev. 20:4. Though 
Lazarus and various others who were brought to life, died again, 
theirs was not a second death, because they were never fully 
brought from under the dominion of the first, or Adamic death. 
They were merely aroused for a time from the unconsciousness of 
death, to a small measure of life, soon to relapse again to sleep until 
the morning when Adamic death shall be swallowed up in victory. 



R382 : page 4 



THE SIN UNTO DEATH 
IN THE GOSPEL AGE. 



We have treated the subject of the second death above, from the 
standpoint of the next age entirely, applying it only to those who, 
during the next age, will first be actually set free from the dominion 
of the Adamic death, and then, by willful sin, bring death upon 
themselves-the second death. But it is used in Scripture with 
reference to this Gospel Age also. Now, those who have an ear to 
hear, and who believe God's Word, are informed of his purpose to 
bring all men to life again through the resurrection, and it is our 
privilege to anticipate that perfect, or restored and sinless condition 



of the next age now. By faith in God's Word and power, we reckon 
ourselves and are reckoned of God, as justified freely from all sin- 
no longer under the Adamic curse, but free from all the curse of 
Adam's sin, and from its penalty— death. By faith we see Jesus to be 
the full satisfaction of the claims of justice. Thus we reckon 
ourselves as alive from the dead. Death had passed upon all, and 
upon us among others; but now we know that we were bought with 
a price, and we think of ourselves as free from Adamic death— as 
human beings having perfect life again. 

But this is all an imputed or reckoned perfection-not actual. It is so 
reckoned by God and by ourselves, because of the efficacy of the 
ransom price. It is by faith only, that we realize it- we believe God 
that our life has been ransomed by him who gave himself a ransom 
for all. So far as sight goes, we have no evidence of a restored right 
to life. Aches and pains and death continue with us, as with others, 
but "we walk by faith, and not by sight. " Do you ask, what good the 
knowledge does us, since we experience no physical benefits more 
than the worldly? We reply, the knowledge of our redemption is 
valuable; it gives us hope and joy; it enables us to come to God as 
our reconciled parent-reconciled 1 800 years ago by the death of his 
son— reconciled while we were enemies and sinners. Thus it opens 
up communion and intercourse between us and our Heavenly 
Father. But more; when we come into communion with God, he 
tells us of his plans, and he 

R382 : page 5 

offers to make us co-workers with him if we prove ourselves 
worthy of so great a privilege. To prove ourselves worthy of being 
co-workers with him, we must consecrate ourselves to death, and 
follow the example of Jesus, presenting our bodies living sacrifices 
to God. 

We must become dead to the world and to all its earthly ambitions, 
honors, etc. If we do so, we thus consecrate ourselves to the second 
death. How? In this way: With all others, we were subject to and 
already under the dominion of the first or Adamic death. (Don't 
forget that all our steps since are steps of faith- walking by faith 
and not by sight. What we receive and do by faith, is counted as 
instead of the actual.) Thus we became free from Adamic sin and 
its penalty— death. Then, by faith, we gave our justified humanity a 
living sacrifice to God. When the sacrifice ends, we will be dead- 
"Be thou faithful unto death." When such justified and consecrated 
ones die, it is their second death. Now, hear Jesus' words: "Be thou 
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life... He that 
overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death. " 

Does not this teach us that some will, and some will not be hurt, by 
passing into the second death? The overcomers of this age will not 
be hurt by it. Nay, they will be benefited by it. Jesus, we are told, 
took our human nature in order to die for us, and when he laid it 
down in death —a sacrifice to God— the human nature was gone 



forever, but he was born from the dead, of the Spirit, and in his 
resurrection was perfected in the Divine nature and likeness. What 
the sacrifice of Jesus did for him (Phil. 2:8,9), our sacrifice is to do 
for us. Unless we lay down the human nature in complete sacrifice- 
- even unto death— we cannot become partakers or sharers of the 
Divine nature. 

Jesus did not die the second death, because he was not under the 
Adamic penalty. We were of the condemned race, and being 
justified by his ransom, we become sharers in HIS death, which 
was not the Adamic. Thus we shared by nature in the Adamic 
death, from which we flee, and rejoice to be delivered; but we seek 
and rejoice to be "dead with him" that we may also "live with him" 
on a higher than human plane of being. (Rom. 6:8; and 2 Pet. 1 :4; 
Phil. 3:10.) Thus we prefer to sacrifice our humanity because of our 
faith in God's promise of a higher nature, rather than to share with 
our human father, Adam, a restitution to the perfection of human 
nature. 

Ah, yes, we can thus see a force and depth in Jesus' words: "He that 
overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death. " But there are 
some who will be hurt-badly hurt by the second death-it will be to 
such, the end of all life and hope and being— everlasting death. We 
have seen the class who will thus die in the end of the Millennial 
Age— for their own sins; now, let us look at a class who, during this 
Gospel Age, die the second death, and will have no resurrection 
from it. This class is spoken of in 1 John 5:16. There are sins not 
unto death, and there is a sin unto death; I do not say that ye should 
pray for it. The Apostle is not referring to the Adamic sin and 
death, 

R383 : page 5 

for it passed on all. Consequently, he must have reference to an 
individual sin and its penalty-the second death. As he does not 
define what the sin is, we will seek further light on the subject. But 
here we remark that this sin could be committed in this age, only by 
one who had been justified by faith from the Adamic sin and death, 
for they could not die for their own sin until they had been 
reckoned free from the Adamic penalty. 

Paul gives us a description of the sin unto death, and shows us that 
none could commit it (now) but those who have been justified and 
consecrated themselves. The Apostles could commit it; we could 
commit it, or any one who has already enjoyed by faith, all the 
blessings due him as a member of the redeemed race. Paul says: 
(Heb. 10:26, Diaglott) "If WE should voluntarily sin AFTER 
having received the knowledge of the truth (a thorough 
understanding), there is no longer a sacrifice left for sins." [The 
share of such, in the sacrifice of Jesus, is exhausted— he died to 
redeem and liberate us from Adamic sin and its penalty, which 
came upon us without our will or choice: His sacrifice is abundant 
to cover every weakness and imperfection arising in any way from 



that source; but his ransom does not cover our willful or determined 
sin.] 

Voluntary sin does not mean the relapse for a time, through the 
weakness of our will power, into what we now see to be sinful; but, 
as explained by the context, it is an open apostasy -an ignoring of 
their share in the sacrifice. Verse 29 describes the willful sinner 
against light, as "having trampled on the Son of God, and esteemed 
as a common thing [lightly esteemed] the blood of the covenant by 
which he was sanctified, and insulted the spirit of favor. " 

As to what is meant here by trampling on the Son of God and 
esteeming his blood a common thing, we leave to the reader to 
decide for himself. The only way in which we can conceive of this 
being done, is a method now springing into popularity; namely, the 
disclaiming of the necessity of Jesus' death as our ransom price 
from the just penalty of sin— death. Sin is a reality, its penalty- 
death— is a reality, and a release from it is obtained only by the 
giving of an equivalent for us. This was done by him "who loved us 
and gave himself for us"— "For ye were redeemed not with 
corruptible things, such as silver and gold, but with the precious 
blood of Christ. " Those who realize themselves bought with this 
price, value the blood, or sacrificed life of Jesus as "precious"; 
while those who claim that we are not thus redeemed or purchased 
out of death, set aside the value of Jesus' death, and count it as the 
death of any one else-a "common" or ordinary thing, which paid 
no penalty for us. 

This view, that Adam's sin needed no atoning for, other than man 
can give, and hence that Jesus' death purchased no release, has long 
been held by Universalists, Unitarians, and others, but the force of 
the text quoted, is not applicable to those who never saw the value 
of Christ's ransom. It refers to a class who, having once seen its 
value, and been sanctified thereby, turn about and begin to 
underrate its value and esteem it a common thing. "My soul come 
not thou into their secret. " 

Here we see who can in this age sin (individually) the sin unto 
death —the second death. It is not the poor blasphemous wretch 
steeped in sin and death, who has never yet tasted that the Lord is 
gracious; nor the ignorant religious professor who loves and serves 
mammon, and knows God only enough to fear him; but it is the 
well enlightened, who were once partakers of the spirit of adoption- 
- the spirit of Christ-and who have been sanctified or consecrated. 
These only can now commit a sin unto death —it will be their 
second death, since by faith they had been justified and released 
from the condemnation of the first, the Adamic death. We expect 
no resurrection for these. The same Apostle, speaking of this class 
elsewhere, (Heb. 6:4-6) indicates that, having taken this step of 
willful sin, it is impossible to move them to repentance afterward. 
This class, like a similar class in the next age, will be badly hurt of 
the second death— They lose all. 



Peter says of such- "If, after they have escaped the pollutions of the 
world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ 
(their ransom), they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the 
latter end is worse with them than the beginning. It had been better 
for them not to have known the way of righteousness." (2 Pet. 2:20- 
22.) 



R383 : page 5 

LORD SHAFTESBURY ON THE RETURN 

OF THE JEWS FROM RUSSIA 

TO PALESTINE. 

The following is the greater portion of a speech by this venerable 
nobleman at the recent anniversary meeting of the Society for 
promoting Christianity among the Jews:- 

"You express your sympathy with the persecuted people of the 
Jews— persecuted under circumstances more atrocious, more vile, 
more greedy, more grasping, more covetous, more detestable in 
every sense of the word, than any other persecution that I have ever 
heard of in modern times. This persecution has been governed by 
greed from beginning to end, and it has exceeded in anarchy and 
spoliation and bloodshed, the records of almost all the persecutions 
that I have read of, even in Roman history. I cannot but believe that 
a very serious issue awaits the Russian empire. I remember my 
learned and valued friend, Dr. McCaul, once quoting to me a 
passage which I could not understand in the Book of Isaiah. 
Speaking of the Jews as a nation, the prophet uses the words, 
"terrible from their beginning hitherto. " I could not understand that 
passage, because the Jews have seldom gone beyond their boundary 
for the purpose of aggression; but the Doctor gave me the true 
interpretation-I have held it ever since, and I hope every one of 
you will hold it. "Aye," he said, "they are 'terrible from the 
beginning hitherto,' because no nation ever injured the Jews without 
smarting for it. " 

Now, there is a kindred feeling to that shown by Russia, though it is 
restrained in expression and in operation; there is a strong anti- 
Semitic feeling among the Germans, but it rests on totally different 
grounds. A vast number of the Germans are deeply hostile towards 
the Jews, and I heard the solution of that only a few months ago, 
having suspected it before. A friend of mine being in Berlin, got 
into conversation with a very great man there, a man who knew 
what he thought himself, and who also knew what others thought. 
My friend said to him, "What is the history of this strong anti- 
Jewish feeling which you have in Berlin and throughout Germany?" 
He replied, "Do you want to know?" "Yes." "Then," he said, "I will 
tell you. These Jews, if they go into commerce, become the first 
merchants; if they go into the banking line, they become the first 



bankers; if they go into law, they become the first lawyers; or if 
they go into literature, they beat us all. Whatever career they 
undertake, they drive out the Gentiles; and I tell you, sir, we won't 
stand it." There is, in fact, a great jealousy of that wonderful people 
who are now coming to the front. And what a sign of the times it is, 
that wherever the Jews are, they are either the most prominent 
people to be persecuted, or the most prominent people to take a lead 
in all the various professions ! 

WILL THEY RETURN TO PALESTINE? 

Now, the question arises, "Will the Jews return to their own land?" 
A great number of them are going to America; they will go 
anywhere if they can there find freedom from persecution, and ease 
to pursue their career. I do not think there is, so far as I can make 
out, any great desire among the Jews as a nation to return to their 
own land. And this I know from authority, that the wealthy Jews of 
England— I do not know whether this is the case with the wealthy 
Jews of other countries— are very adverse to it. I had it from an 
influential Jew's own lips, that the wealthy Jews of England do not 
wish that any Jew whatever should return to the land of his 
forefathers. But there are many ready to go, and it will depend upon 
the contributions made by faithful Christians whether they shall be 
enabled to go in greater or smaller numbers. 

WILL THIS PERSECUTION CEASE? 

Another question arises, "Will this persecution cease?" I do not 
believe it will. It may cease for an interval but it will recur in 
successive periods. And there is every reason why it should do so. 
The persecution of the Jews in Russia and Poland does not depend 
upon religion or nationality. These have nothing whatever to do 
with it. The Russians would persecute any people in the same 
position as the Jews. Bear this in mind, that the Jews hold in 
mortgage a very considerable part of the landed property of Russia; 
that they hold in their debt a very large proportion of the peasantry, 
and very many of the shopkeepers in different parts of the empire. 
Every single opportunity which now presents itself to the Russian 
people for plunder and spoliation of the Jews is almost sure to be 
seized. In the destruction of the Jews, and of their papers, Russians 
get rid of documents by which they are bound, and which might be 
brought as evidence against them; and so long as there is property 
to be laid hold of, so long will you find the Russian people rising 
against the Jews. 

RUSSIAN HATRED TO THE JEWS. 

The Russian people would not, perhaps, if left to themselves, be so 
greedy or so violent; they are encouraged by the officials of the 
Russian 

R384 : page 5 



empire, many of whom are indebted to Jews. This I had on official 
authority, that at the very last outbreak in Balta, while the Jews 
were being persecuted, the police stood by and would not allow the 
Jews to protect themselves, while they, at the same time, 
encouraged the peasantry to come in with their carts and wagons to 
carry away the plunder from the Jewish houses. It has been shown 
that the Government is paralyzed -that part of it, I mean, that 
wished well to the Jews. I believe the present Emperor to be a 
humane man; I believe him to be a just man; but, although he is a 
despot, he is as perfectly inefficient for the government of his 
empire as though he 

R384 : page 6 

were a baby two years old. He has no will of his own, and is 
surrounded by officials of an anti-Semitic character. The Russian 
empire is lost in profligacy and wickedness and every description of 
vice. Whatever else it may be, this persecution is a sign of the end— 
I should rather say, perhaps of the beginning of the end-of that 
great end which, God be praised, cannot be far off. " 



R384 : page 6 

REMARKS ON THE FOREGOING. 

Thus, we see the attention of the whole world is being drawn to 
the restitution of the Jews, now commencing. The attention of all 
thinking Christians is being drawn to it. The leading religious 
papers-such as the "Independent "-find the interest in the subject 
so great, that, though hitherto they have shown opposition to 
Millenarian views, yet now they are calling attention to this marked 
fulfillment of prophecy now in progress. Yet, though they see this, 
they fail entirely to grasp the import of it. Lord S., in closing his 
remarks, came much nearer the real import of the Jewish exodus 
than do most thinkers on the subject, when he said, "This 
persecution is a sign of the end -of the great end, which, God be 
praised, cannot be far off." Yes, it is a sign of the end-the end of 
this age, and the beginning of the age of restitution -the 
Millennium. It is a sign of the end of "the present evil world," or 
dispensation of evil. It is the precursor of the World to come-the 
dispensation of truth and righteousness, in which Jesus and his 
Bride- the spiritual seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:29.) -shall reign over, 
and bless all the families of the earth, through Israel, after the flesh, 
who must first be restored to influence, and power. 

Israel is the anti-typical "fig tree," cursed and blighted by the 
Master, because it bore only leaves; and it is Israel that he refers to 
again, saying, When ye see the fig tree putting forth leaves, then 
know that summer is nigh— then lift up your heads and rejoice, for 
your redemption draweth nigh. (Luke 21:28-31; Mark 11:13,14.) 
Note the wonderful adaptation of the fig tree as an illustration of 
Israel's returning favor. It puts forth its fruit before its leaves 



appear; and when the leaves appear, the fruit is ripe. It is a staple 
article of food, and also possesses medicinal qualities. So Israel 
begins to show marked signs of the approaching summer. And 
when the rich foliage of God's favor covers Israel, and is manifest 
to all, she will be ripe and ready for the work of blessing, feeding, 
and healing the nations according to God's plan. Jesus, seeing the 
leaves on the fig tree, had a right to expect ripe fruit, especially as 
the "time for (harvesting) figs was not yet" fully come. So with 
Israel, when cursed, they were full of leaves, or professions and 
appearance of faithfulness; but when searched in their harvest time, 
were found lacking fruit— and cursed for the age. 

Yes, Earth's winter time, with its cold, and blight, and storms, is 
nearly over; the gracious, and fruitful, and beautiful Summer is 
nigh. Spring has come; the fig tree is "putting forth"; yet we must 
look for more storms, more trouble, just as in nature, the Spring 
equinoxial storm is one of the most severe. Jacob (Israel after the 
flesh) is to be delivered during a great "time of trouble, such as 
never was since there was a nation." "It is even the time of Jacob's 
trouble, but he shall be saved out of it." (Jer. 30:7; Dan. 12:1.) 

It is very remarkable that Christian people cannot appreciate Paul's 
statement, that the fleshly house were cast off from God's favor 
during the time his favor has been manifest to the spiritual house. 
How strange that they cannot see from this return of favor to 
"Jacob," that the end of favor toward the spiritual house has come- 
that the end ("harvest") of the Gospel age is now upon us. 

Like some of old, the church today cannot "discern the signs of the 
times." (Matt. 16:3.) But it was then, as now, the nominal church 
which discerned not. Those truly taught of God are, to that extent, 
not in darkness." Ye, brethren, [brethren in Christ, holding 
communion with God, through his Word, which is able to make 
wise] are not in darkness." (1 Thes. 5:4.) 

The great mass of the Church see the signs now taking place, but 
are so blinded by their creeds and traditions, that they cannot 
"discern" or understand them. How clear to the unfettered and 
discerning mind are the words of Paul: "I would not, brethren, that 
ye should be ignorant of this mystery... that blindness in part is 
happened to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and 
so [then] all Israel shall be saved. " [No one can question that Paul 
refers to the blinding of fleshly Israel, and consequently to the 
saving, or bringing back to God's favor, of that people. But one of 
the most pointed things in this expression is, that this saving of 
fleshly Israel, will not be "until the fullness"— full number "of the 
Gentiles be come in." In other words, the restoration of the fleshly 
house to the earthly promises, cannot take place until the Gospel 
call to the heavenly promises has ended, by accomplishing the work 
of selecting a people for his name-the Bride of Christ.] Paul 
proceeds, and adds to the strength of his own statement of God's 
plan, by quoting from the prophets: "As it is written, there shall 
come out of Sion the Deliverer [the Christ, head and body 



complete— the Bridegroom and Bride made one— the great 
Deliverer, both of Israel and the world, who will set at liberty the 
captives of death], and shall [first] turn away ungodliness from 
Jacob; for this is my covenant with them, when I shall take away 
their sins." Rom. 11:25-33. Compare this with James' statement, 
Acts 15:14-18. After referring to the taking out of the Bride from 
the Gentiles— "a people for his name"- James quotes a prophecy, 
which will be due to be fulfilled after the Bride, for his name has 
been selected, saying: "After this, I will return [cause my favor to 
return to Israel], and will build again the tabernacle [house -nation] 
of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins 
thereof, and I will set it up [Note well why God will rebuild Israel], 
that the residue of men might seek after the Lord. " 

Truly, then, the re-gathering of Israel is a sign of the end of this age 
-a sign that we are living in the harvest time, for "the harvest is the 
end of the age." (Matt. 13:39.) 

Let those who deny the restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, take notice that the 
restoration of the Jew to the Canaan land of promise, is only a 
beginning of the work of restoring all nations and all things. "For 
the Lord will save the tents of Judah first." (Zech 12:7.) The 
restoration of the living is only a first part of restitution, for "all 
nations shall come and worship before thee. " This will include the 
dead- "There shall be a resurrection (anastasis— bringing up to 
perfection) of the dead, both of the just and the unjust. " (Acts 
24:15.) 

But as Israel was thirty-seven years in falling, viz., from A.D. 33, 
when Jesus gave them up and left desolate their house, to A.D. 70, 
when their national existence ended; so we expect that they will be 
thirty-seven years in rising, or from 1878 to 1914, the end of the 
times of the Gentiles. This time of their re-gathering and restitution 
to favor, will be a time of great trouble— it is even the time of 
Jacob's trouble, but he shall be delivered out of it. As when they 
came out of Egypt over three thousand years ago, it was in the 
midst of great trial and distress; so now their deliverance will be, 
not without its distress, as it is written— "According to the days of 
thy coming out of the land of Egypt will I show unto him 
marvelous things: the nations shall see and be confounded at all 
their might." (Micah 7:15.) 

But we are also told, that the exodus now from among all nations, 
will be so much more a marked manifestation of God's favor than 
that from Egypt, that the latter, which has heretofore been the great 
and marked feature of Israel's history, will sink into comparative 
insignificance, when compared with the coming deliverance from 
among the nations. Thus we read: "Behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, that it shall no more be said, the Lord liveth that brought up 
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but the Lord liveth 
that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north 
[Russia], and from all the lands whither he had driven them. And I 



will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers." 
Jer. 16:14,15. 



R385 : page 6 



TAUGHT OF GOD. 



Jesus said, "No man can come unto me except the Father draw 
him." (John 6:44.) And the Prophet Isaiah replies, "They shall be all 
taught of God." Yes, says Jesus, "And every man (so taught) 
cometh unto me." (John 6:45.) 

God, however, does not teach all in the same time, and way. For 
6,000 years he has been teaching the world the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin and its bitter results, permitting them to remain in ignorance 
of his love. By and by, he will teach them the blessedness of virtue 
and holiness, and reveal to them his loving character. When? we 
enquire; and Isaiah replies, When "the glory of the Lord (through 
the Christ-Rom. 16:27) shall be revealed... all flesh shall see it 
together." (Isa. 40:5.) Before the glory of the Lord can be revealed 
in the Christ, a special course of training is necessary to develop 
that body. It is to be composed of a little flock of human beings 
who sacrifice their humanity and are exalted to divinity. These, all 
of whom except the head, (Jesus) were found under the curse of a 
broken law, to be finally lifted to that amazing height, require a 
special course of training. 

The Scriptures tell us that the holy Spirit specially guides, instructs 
and comforts this special class in their narrow and difficult way. 

Since we are of those called to walk that pathway, it becomes a 
matter of intense interest to understand what is the holy Spirit, and 
what the object and manner of our training? The Scriptures reveal 
the holy Spirit as the influence or power of Jehovah. And, since the 
Christ also partakes of the Divine nature, it is called the Spirit of 
Christ. The holy Spirit of the Father will dwell richly in the Son and 
daughter-Jesus and his bride. Nor should we, as the prospective 
bride of Christ, fear to claim our title as the daughter of the King. 
(Psa. 45:13.) Is Jesus "the express image of the Father's person?" 
(Heb. 1:3.) -We shall be like unto his glorious body. But though 
we shall be thus highly exalted to the same nature, the superiority 
of relationship— the headship of Father over Son, and of the Son 
over his bride, will always exist. (1 Cor. 1 1:3.) 

A being may be controlled by the holy Spirit willingly or 
unwillingly, known or unknown to himself, yet not partake of the 
Divine life-not be begotten of the Divine spirit. All beings are so 
controlled; even Satan and his host, though unwillingly. Prophets 
and holy men of old were willing subjects who spoke as they were 
moved by the holy spirit. Angels are the willing subjects of the holy 
Spirit, yet unto which of the Angels said God at any time, "Thou art 
my son, this day have I begotten thee!" But "when he bringeth the 



first born (the Christ complete, head and body glorified into the 
world,) he saith, 'And let all the angels of God worship him.'" Why? 
Because he has become a partaker of the Divine nature. It is fitting 
that all other forms of life should worship Divinity. 

The holy Spirit is exercised in the creation of various orders of 
intelligent beings, each perfectly adapted to the end of its existence; 
but one small class only, the "little flock," will be given that form 
which will be "the brightness of (God's own) glory, and the express 
image of His (own) person," and "filled with all the fulness of 
God."(Heb. 1:3; Eph 3:19.) 

The Divine power or holy Spirit of God is not only exerted in 
creating, but also in upholding, directing and controlling all things 
which he has created, whether animate or inanimate. But the holy 
Spirit is exercised in a marked degree, in behalf of those now 
begotten, and finally to be born into the Father's express image. It 
directs the newly begotten creatures through the pathway of the 
suffering and death of their humanity, and upholds them by 
becoming their "comforter," by unfolding the exceeding great and 
precious promises of God's Word— "For whatsoever things were 
written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through 
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. " (Rom. 
15:4.) It shapes and controls all circumstances, so that they all work 
together for their good. 

Now with this idea of the holy Spirit-that it is not a separate person 
from God, but rather that it is the mind, influence, or power of 
Jehovah, let us notice its object, and means, of preparing those who 
shall be of the anointed body. In Eph. 4:12, we learn that the object 
is, the complete qualification of the saints-the body of the 
anointed-for the work of service. (Diaglott.) From other Scriptures 
we learn that this service is to consist in redeeming, restoring, 
ruling, and blessing all the families of the earth, during the 
incoming age of a thousand years. In what further developments of 
God's plans, they may be afterward engaged, we are not yet 
informed. But the Divine family will always be gloriously engaged 
in carrying out the will of its Head-Jehovah— our Father. 

R385 : page 7 

With such an object in view, what means are being employed for 
its accomplishment. We have seen that it is a little flock of human 
beings who are being chosen for the high office. Though not all, yet 
many of the human race were called, yet few of those called, will 
be chosen, because not obedient to the call. Are we of those called? 
Yes. Our calling was made manifest by the appearing of our Savior, 
Jesus Christ, who brought immortality to light through the Gospel. 
(2 Tim. 1:10.) And the holy Spirit was given as a guide and 
comforter of the heirs of immortality, ever since Jesus was 
glorified. (John 7:39.) 

Though the little flock is now human, when they become Divine, 
like God, they cannot longer retain their humanity, for God is not a 



combination of Divinity and humanity— different natures are 
necessarily separate and distinct. Human nature is all we have, and 
when we consecrate that to death nothing remains. But the instant 
we completely consecrate ourselves to death, we are begotten by 
the spirit of God to the new, divine nature. Since that time, old 
things (human hopes, ambitions, desires etc.) have passed away; 
behold all things are become new. We are now embryo "new 
creatures." 

This new nature, begun at the time of consecration, must 
continually develop until born into the perfection of the divine 
nature. As the new continues to develop, the human gradually dies, 
until the death of the one, and the perfection of the other is 
complete. As "new creatures," we have a measure of the life, spirit, 
mind of our Heavenly Father. This energizing spirit enables us to 
carry out that which we covenanted to do— viz. to make subject, 
and keep under, our mortal (human) body-crucifying its desires 
daily, so that its will shall not rule, and these bodies reckoned dead 
indeed unto their own desires, are made alive unto God— compelled 
to do the will of the "new creature. " Thus while the old mind is 
treated as if dead, the effect of the new mind is to quicken these 
mortal bodies, counted dead, making them the living active servants 
of the new mind. Thus, Paul explained that if Christ (the Christ 
spirit) be in you, the body is dead to sin, but the dead body is 
quickened into life (made active in the divine service) by his spirit 
which dwelleth in you. (See Rom. 8:10,1 1, Diaglott.) 

The results of this new sap (the new mind, the spirit, power, or will 
of God, dwelling within) introduced into the dead tree, is seen in 
the fruits. Now the fruits of the spirit are love, faith, diligence, 
patience, humility, etc. ; in short, Godliness (God- likeness) and "if 
these things be in you and abound, they make you that you shall 
neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the KNOWLEDGE of our Lord 
Jesus Christ." (2 Pet. 1:5-8.) Such a spirit we are told (John 16:13) 
will guide us into an understanding of all truth due. It will guide the 
body as a whole, into all truth. 

If we are thus led of the Spirit, we will take God's standpoint of 
view in every matter. Our love, will beget a desire to know that we 
may do his will; our diligence and patience, will leave no means 
unemployed to gain that knowledge; our faith in God, will lead us 
to place implicit confidence in his word regardless of all the 
traditions of men to the contrary; our meek humility, will cast out 
pride and love of self exaltation; enabling us to accept of truth 
through whatever channel it may flow. Such will cherish no 
preconceived ideas of their own, when found inharmonious with 
God's word though their names are connected with them. No, the 
Spirit of God in us enables us to take his standpoint and to desire 
TRUTH, for the upbuilding of the "new creature." 

This is the sole object of truth. It is not given merely to gratify 
curiosity, nor simply to reveal God's character, but by that 
revelation to transform us into his likeness. Therefore God has so 



carefully provided us with means for ascertaining truth when due, 
with such certainty that not the shadow of doubt may linger about 
it. He has given us the holy Spirit (spirit or mind of Christ) as our 
infallible guide, in the understanding of his written word. The 
measure of the Spirit first received, leads us into some knowledge 
of God, and that knowledge enables us to drink more and more into 
his Spirit. Thus we continue to grow in knowledge and favor with 
God. 

For all so led of the Spirit, God has expressed his truth, and only 
such will understand it. 

While the exceeding great and precious promises revealed by the 
Spirit inspire with joyful hope, we find it to be God's will, that for 
the present we must tread the thorny path of suffering, even unto 
death. But in this, the Spirit of God becomes our "comforter," not 
by removing our distresses and trials, but by unfolding the glory, 
honor and immortality promised in God's Word. Thus we are 
indeed comforted and enabled to esteem them light afflictions, not 
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us." 
(Rom. 8:18.) And again, who possessing the Christ spirit has not 
found wonderful comfort in the blessed rest from pride, envy, strife, 
and vain glory? While enabling us to take God's standpoint-with 
him viewing the necessity of present evil, and the all-sufficient 

R386 : page 7 

remedy to be developed and manifested in due time— we rejoice in 
hope of the glory of God. Truly we have "meat to eat that the world 
knows not of," and a peace and joy which the world cannot give nor 
take away. 

The indwelling of the Spirit of God then, we see to be the first, and 
all important agency, in acquainting the body of Christ with the 
revelation which God has given relative to his plans and purposes, 
and in building up the "new creature. " It is not God's plan however, 
to build each member up in the knowledge of the truth independent 
of every other member. No, each member of the body must perform 
its part toward the building up of the whole body; and no one 
member can say to any other member, I have no need of thee. Some 
members of the body may be able to do greater service than others, 
but the least is necessary. Paul tells us that God appointed some of 
the members as Apostles, (the specially sent founders of the faith,) 
and some Prophets, (Interpreters of his Word) and some 
Evangelists, (Proclaimers of the good news) and some Pastors and 
Teachers. (Feeders, care-takers, teachers of truths learned, to the 
sheep and lambs.) All these, he tells us, are chosen for the 
perfecting of the saints for the work of the ministry, (a ministry to 
the world, in the coming age) for the edifying (building up) of the 
body of Christ. 

How beautiful and how necessary is such an arrangement, that the 
whole body may be "knit together in love," and fellowship of spirit. 



Paul says we should all earnestly desire, or seek to cultivate, the 
best gifts of the Spirit. (1 Cor. 12:31.) But in vs. 29 he intimates 
that all may not obtain the same gifts- "Are all Apostles? Are all 
Prophets? Are all Teachers, etc.?" But though some of us may 
possess none of these gifts, yet as the Lord's sheep we may all be 
full of love ("charity") and love is the greatest gift of all. Without it 
the others prove worthless. Therefore let us follow after love; and 
desire (seek to cultivate) the other gifts that thereby we may render 
greater service. Even the different sheep promptly and lovingly 
obeying the voice of the great shepherd, now present, and feeding 
in the rich green pastures to which he has led them, by their 
example invite other sheep to do the same. 

But some inquire, How shall we know what is truth when different 
members differently interpret the Word? We answer that just here is 
where we must apply the test.- Which interpretation brings 
harmony —which confusion? If we have been careful students, 
walking in the shining pathway, we need not long hesitate in 
discerning truth. We should avoid following human teachers as 
leaders. Their teachings should be received only so far as they 
harmonize with the word of truth. Who can tell but that an able 
teacher might become puffed up with a fleshly mind, and thus 
losing the spirit of truth, soon get far out of harmony with the 
Word. 

The Spirit of God in us, will enable us to discover that such are 
permitting the old nature to come to life; and to such extent as that 
old nature triumphs, will the light of the new nature become 
darkness. If the old nature is not speedily subdued, more and more 
of error will come in, until the light that was in them becomes total 
darkness-and "How great is that darkness." No increase of light 
through such, should be expected, until the old nature has again 
been crucified. Nor will the indwelling Spirit of truth permit us to 
follow such, though they may have been right-hand members. We 
will not love a right hand more than the Head. Therefore we should 
always look to God as our Teacher while making use of all the 
helps and agencies through whom he is pleased to bless us. 

Thus the members of the "one body of Christ," all "taught of God," 
"called in the one hope of their calling," being "knit together in 
love" and "holding the Head" in supreme reverence, shall "all come 
in the ("full assurance" and) "unity of the faith" and of the 
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man (the Christ 
complete) unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. " 
Thus complete, they will be perfectly prepared "for the work of the 
ministry" -restoring, ruling, and blessing the world in the incoming 
age. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R386 : page 7 



THE Jewish exodus from Russia has assumed such large 
proportions as to furnish a no mean parallel to that famous ancient 
one of the same race from Egypt. The great body of them are poor, 
in fact are wholly destitute of means, but Providence seems to be 
with his chosen people now as of old, and through moving into 
activity the sympathies of the charitable, is furnishing the manna 
necessary for their subsistence. Baron Hirsh, the well known Jewish 
banker at Paris, has contributed 1,000,000 francs toward their 
support. -Pittsburgh Times. 



R386 : page 7 



A FEARFUL THING. 



"It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." Heb. 
10:31. 

Why should this be esteemed a fearful thing— surely "God is love"; 
and to fall into his hands must be to fall into loving hands? 

It is doubtless because of our present imperfect, dying condition, 
that we are seldom able to reason clearly on any subject, examining 
all sides of a question. This difficulty confronts us continually. One 
mind grasps only "election"; another sees only "free grace": One 
sees God, only as an austere tyrant, cold, pitiless, and just; another 
sees Him only as kind and loving, and too tender to be just. 

While our tendency to one-sidedness in such reasonings is more to 
be pitied than condemned, yet it becomes all who realize this 
weakness, to guard against it, and to lay aside all prejudice, and 
take into account every side of such subject, as presented in God's 
Word, that we may "see light in his light." 

Thus viewed, we find the doctrines of Election and Free Grace, 
both taught in Scripture, and as heretofore shown, beautifully 
harmonious. And thus we have found God perfect both in Justice 
and in Love. "The Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy"- "God 
is love." It is equally true that there is no unrighteousness with God- 
-"Justice is the habitation of his throne." He will not condemn the 
righteous; and he will by no means clear the guilty. Every deed 
must receive a just recompense of reward, whether it be good, or 
bad. As we continue this investigation, we shall find that this 
uncompromising, impartial justice of God, no less than his love, is 
the firm, strong foundation upon which our hopes of the future must 
build. 

Our conceptions of God, and of his dealings, are based largely upon 
our own methods. Because we imperfect beings exercise our pity 
and love often at the expense of justice, therefore we are apt to 
suppose that God's methods are the same. 

You frame a law for your children based on their supposed ability 
to obey. You may find that you have made an imperfect law— one 



too severe for the ability of your child; therefore, when your child 
violates it, your sense of justice, as well as of love, calls for a 
remission of part of the penalty. Or your law may be none too 
severe, and you may be so lacking in justice and proper 
government, that when the child disobeys, your mercy tramples 
upon your own law, and you fail to punish. But with God it is 
different. His mercy and love can never trample upon his justice. 
"True and righteous are thy ways, Lord God Almighty. Judgment 
(wisdom) and Justice are the habitation of thy throne." 

Forever firm Thy Justice stands, 

As mountains their foundations keep. " 

God deals only with perfect things. As God created man, he was 
good- "very good"-perfect. (Deut. 32:4.) God being perfect, could 
give only a perfect law for the government of his creatures. That 
perfect law, in brief, was obedience to his will. God made one 
penalty for violators of his just law: It was that such being should 
be deprived of existence- "Dying thou shalt die"- "dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return." (Gen. 2:17; and 3:19.) This penalty 
could not be remitted, because it was just, and to remit it would be 
for God to act unjustly. It was not too severe a penalty, for God 

R386 : page 8 

is too wise to err. We may see, as God does, that anything short of 
perfect obedience to his perfect will and law, would create trouble 
and general discord not only to the sinner, but to all associated with 
him; therefore, it is a merciful provision for the good of all God's 
creatures, that "the wages of sin is death." 

The same attribute of Justice which was a guarantee of his 
communion with his Maker, and which provided the bliss of 
Paradise to Adam while obedient, became the avenger of the 
broken law, inflicting the penalty by driving man out of the garden, 
and cutting off his communion and fellowship with God. We 
cannot doubt that Adam sought anxiously to have his sin of 
disobedience forgiven, and to be reinstated to a right to life in 
Paradise, and to favor and communion with God. But the law of 
God was inexorable. God could not excuse the sin, for he cannot 
look upon (the least) sin with any degree of allowance. (Hab. 1:13; 
Psa. 5:4,5.) He could not grant him a free pardon, for he was justly 
guilty, and he could "by no means clear the guilty." (Exod. 34:7.) 
The penalty (death) had to be inflicted, and it was. 

To have pardoned Adam, God would have made himself a liar, for 
he had said: "In the day that thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt 
die. " Had God broken his word and law in that instance, our 
confidence and trust might well be shaken in every subsequent 
promise of his Word. The absolute unchangeableness of 

R387 : page 8 

God is the firm foundation upon which all his loving promises rest. 
For the same reason, we know that God can never pardon sin. 



[Recall the distinction heretofore shown between pardon and 
forgiveness. The word pardon does not occur in the New 
Testament, and in the Old Testament it should be translated 
forgive.] God's verdict is that "the wages of sin is death," and since 
he is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever, therefore, death will 
always be the wages which his justice will inflict on sinners. If he 
changes not, he will never look upon sin with any degree of 
allowance, and there could be no stronger proof of a time coming 
when evil and evil-doers shall be no more. 

But does not this unswerving justice render God's Love and Mercy 
powerless— is not the sinner therefore, hopelessly lost in death, even 
beyond the reach of infinite love? No, God's wisdom and love have 
provided a way by which he can be just, and yet forgive and receive 
the sinner back into his favor. This is the glad tidings-that "God 
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing 
their trespasses unto them. " Then we see that while God could not 
pardon, or excuse sin, and could not remit its penalty 
unconditionally; yet, in some way, he was able to do it through 
Christ. How, through Christ? Could Jesus do what Jehovah could 
not-could he unconditionally remit our sins? No, but "he bore our 
sins in his own body on the tree" (1 Pet. 2:24)— that is, he bore the 
punishment of our sins there-death. The Father "laid upon him the 
iniquity of us all." (Isa. 53:6.) 

This was not unjust on God's part. There could be no injustice in 
laying our stripes upon Jesus, provided Jesus was willing to suffer- 
"the Just (one) for the unjust, that he might bring us to God." (1 Pet. 
3:18.) We are assured by any number of Scriptures, that Jesus did 
share in the Father's plan for our "ransom from the grave." (Hos. 
13:14.) One text will suffice for proof of this: "Consider him 
(Jesus) who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, 
despising the shame." The joy set before Jesus was, doubtless, the 
promise of his exaltation to a place of honor and power higher than 
he ever before enjoyed. (See Phil. 2:9-11.) 

Thus we see that the Justice of God did not render his love 
powerless, but each adds to the brilliancy of the other. "In this was 
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his 
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. " 
(1 John 4:9.) 

Now, what Jesus did for the race was to redeem, ransom, or 
purchase them. "Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things... but 
with the precious blood of Christ." (1 Pet. 1:18,19.) "Ye were 
bought with a price." (1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23; and 2 Pet. 2:1.) But we 
hear an objector- You are using the word bought in its ordinary 
sense— this is too much of "a commercial idea." We inquire, what 
other way could we use the word, without wresting the Scriptures? 
The word has only one signification. The Greek word from which 
bought is translated, is agorazo, and conveys the "commercial idea" 
in the fullest sense; it means to purchase in open market. It occurs 



twenty-one times in the four Gospels in connection with buying 
food, linen, fields, meat, etc. 

If the commercial idea is correct— if we were bought, something 
was given for us, and to some one. Paul says— "The man, Christ 
Jesus... gave himself a ransom (antilutron— an equivalent price) for 
all." (1 Tim. 2:6. See also Matt. 20:28; Mark 10:45.) In answer to 
the question, to whom he paid the price or gave himself, the 
Apostle tells us that "Christ.. .through the eternal Spirit, offered 
himself without spot, to God." (Heb. 9:14; and 7:27.) The sacrifice 
lasted for three-and-a-half years, ending at the cross; but it was 
presented before God on our behalf when Jesus ascended. The Holy 
Spirit, since Pentecost, has been a witness of our forgiveness for 
Christ's sake— on account of Christ's ransom. It is most abundant 
proof that Jesus' sacrifice was acceptable and well pleasing to God. 
Since then, remission of sins and resurrection from death are 
preached in his name. This was never preached before, because, 
until then, our ransom price had not been paid. (Luke 24:47; Acts 
5:31,32; and 13:38; and 3:26; Matt. 28:18,19.) Though some were 
permitted to commune with God before that, it was only after a 
sacrifice had been offered, typical of Jesus' better sacrifice. 

From what were we purchased, or redeemed— from eternal torment? 
No, let Scripture answer- "I will ransom them from the power of 
the grave; I will redeem them from death." Hos. 13:14. 

Justice held the race in the prison of death, and to purchase their 
release was the object of Jesus' death. We were in death because of 
sin, and he died for our sins, that by taking our place in death, we 
might go free. And now we wait, during this Gospel Age, until the 
Bride shall be selected, and expect that then all the prisoners in 
Adamic death will be set at liberty— restored to life. 

Then if Jesus is our Purchaser, all men belong to him and are under 
his control, subject to his authority. He may do what he pleases 
with the race; hence we read, "Ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." 
(1 Cor. 3:23.) If he is their purchaser and owner, he has a right to do 
for them what he pleases. His plan is briefly expressed by Paul: 
"Who will have all men to be saved (saved from Adamic death) and 
(then) to come unto the knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 2:4.) 

Thus we see why it is that "The Father judgeth no man, but hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son." (John 5:22.) It is because the 
Father has already judged all in Adam, and condemned all to death, 
and could not treat with sinners except through a Redeemer who 
became a mediator (go between.) 

The mediator is in full harmony with the Father's law, and designs 
bringing all mankind who will, to a knowledge of the truth, and to 
perfection of manhood. When this work is accomplished, he will 
cease to act as a "mediator," and the responsibility of the perfect 
restored man will be direct to God, the Father, as it is written: 
"Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the 
kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all 



rule, and all authority and power... and when all things shall be 
subdued unto him, then shall the Son also, himself be subject unto 
him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all." (1 
Cor. 15:24-28.) 

From this standpoint we can see how and why "it is a fearful thing 
to fall into the hands of the living God. " It is because, if in his 
hands, though loving, he is just, and cannot look upon sin with any 
degree of allowance. If in his hands we know that the slightest 
imperfection must condemn us to death, how graciously, then, has 
God provided a "cleft rock" for our shelter, a perfect covering for 
our nakedness, in the person of Jesus our Lord. 

When Adam sinned, and prayed that God would excuse his sin, and 
not inflict the death penalty, as no doubt he did, and when he found 
his entreaty vain, then he, and all his race, found that it was indeed 
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 

But Paul's language implies that some might again, a second time, 
fall into God's hands, and again find it a fearful experience. He has 
graciously placed us all in the hands of Christ, and has committed 
the judgment or trial of all to him, in order that whosoever will, 
may come to perfection again, and live forever in harmony with his 
law, which in their present fallen condition they could not keep. A 
way by which we could now fall into the hands of the living God, is 
by coming out from under the covering of our cleft rock, ignoring 
the ransom price, and "counting the blood of the covenant a 
common thing." Any who thus withdraw themselves, are exposed 
to a second condemnation to death, at the hands of God— the 
"second death," for which "there remaineth no more a sacrifice." 
Truly, then, for anyone not absolutely perfect, and able to keep 
God's law perfectly, this leaving of the covering of Christ's ransom 
is a fearful thing. " 

This is the evident teaching of this Scripture and its connections; 
but only those who have come to a knowledge and recognition of 
Jesus as Lord and Redeemer, who have accepted of justification 
through his ransom, and have thus come under him, into his hands 
and from under the curse of Adam's penalty, could again fall into 
the Father's hands, for all unjustified are yet in the Father's hands, 
and under his condemnation. Only those who are justified by faith 
have escaped the condemnation, consequently only these could be 
again condemned, or fall again into the hands of God. (Rom. 8:1.) 
Note the context: It teaches that the falling into the hands of God, is 
the second death. Verses 26-29 (Heb. 10) show the class to be the 
willful sinners, who sin against knowledge, do despite to God's 
favor, count the blood of Christ a common or ordinary thing, and 
fail longer to recognize it as their ransom or covering. Such take off 
the garment of Jesus' righteousness, and have only the filthy rags of 
their own righteousness in which to present themselves to God. The 
condition of such, is a fearful one. When Adam had sinned he made 
aprons of fig leaves, to cover himself, but God provided coats of the 
skins of animals. This was but a figure of the condemnation of the 



race and our need of a covering for sins. Our righteousness is like 
the fig leaf apron— flimsy, worthless, and unable to cover us. The 
skins provided by God, typify the robe of Christ's righteousness 
which God has provided. Giving the robe to Adam cost the life of 
the animal; so the robe of our justification, cost the life of Jesus. 
Our redemption was bought with a price, even the precious blood of 
Christ as a lamb slain. 

R388 : page 8 

Verses 28 and 29 contrast the penalty for forsaking the true 
mediator, with the typical penalty under the law for forsaking the 
typical mediator, Moses. "He that despised Moses' law, died 
without mercy:" ..."of how much sorer (worse) punishment... shall 
he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, 
and counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified, 
an unholy (common) thing"? The penalty under the type was 
DEATH, without mercy; but was only a cutting off of a life which 
at most could continue but a few years. It was only a hastening of a 
death penalty already impending, and from which penalty God has 
provided a redemption for every man. But they who knowingly 
despise the anti-typical Moses and the anti-typical sacrifices for 
sins, will have a much more severe penalty, in that they will suffer 
the second death, from which there is no redemption, no salvation, 
no resurrection, promised in God's Word. 

All who see the force of this Scripture will realize the necessity of 
keeping under the cover of the blood of sprinkling, our ransom 
price, our substitute, who gave himself a ransom for all— who is the 
propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins (the church's) and not for ours 
only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 

The Scripture everywhere keeps up the distinction between the 
church and the world, as in the foregoing text, and note the fact, 
that there will be two distinct presentations to the Father. First, the 
church, when perfected at the end of this Gospel Age, will be 
formally presented to God, as we read: "Unto him (Jesus) that is 
able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before 
the presence of His glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God 
(Jehovah) our Savior (through Christ) be glory and majesty and 
dominion and power," and "The trial of your faith (shall) be found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. 
(Jude 24,25; 1 Pet. 1:7.) Secondly, those of the world, who, after 
trial, during the Millennial Age, are found worthy of life, will then 
be presented to the Father. (1 Cor. 15:24.) 



R388 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1882. 

NO. 3. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars 
by mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money 
Order or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



page 1 

THOSE who remit and cannot send money, check, or money 
order, will please send one or two cent U.S. postage stamps. 



WE have some copies of the EM. DIAGLOTT on hand, 
damaged on inside of cover slightly; price to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER subscribers, $1.50, to others, $3.00. This is a valuable 
work for all Bible students. 



R388 : page 1 

The October number of ZION'S WATCH TOWER will 
partake of a missionary character. We will be sending out a very 
large issue to new readers— about two hundred thousand in all. If 
you desire you may share in the work of scattering the "good 
tidings of great joy," by sending copies of this missionary 
number to your Christian friends. Order as many as you can use 
judiciously, or send us their addresses and we will supply them. 



R388 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The battle between truth and error still rages fiercely. Time- 
honored errors are worshiped, and earnestly defended, while 
new unfoldings of truth, as well as the old foundation principles 
of true faith, are being attacked on every hand, not only by the 
enemies of God, but by those who verily think they are doing 
God service. Surely we are in the "evil day," of which we were 
forewarned that it would be very difficult to withstand the 
assaults of error. (Read Eph. 6:11-18.) This should forearm and 
prepare us. The prophet Malachi says (Mai. 3:2) of this "Day of 
the Lord" in which we are living- "But who may abide the day 
of his coming (presence, after arrival), and who shall stand when 
he appeareth (a presence made known, but not necessarily by 
natural sight. Thus, Jehovah appeared to Abram; i.e., made 
known his presence, the same Heb. word, raah, Gen. 17:1), for 
he is like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap. And he shall sit as 
a refiner and purifier of silver (symbol of truth -he shall purge 
out error from truth dross from silver) and he shall purify the 
sons of Levi" (typical of believers). 

Seeing from the TOWER how the enemy endeavors to lull some 
to sleep with ease, comfort, and prosperity, in the matters of this 
life; how he perplexes and overcharges others in this world's 
busy cares; and how he seeks to draw others from the truth by 
error, we lift up the voice and cry aloud to those who have an 
ear to hear, saying: "We ought to give the more earnest heed to 
the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let 



them slip." Let us renew our vigilance, lest even now, when the 
"goal" is almost won, we should be deceived and allured from 
our racecourse. Let us, dear brethren, lay aside every weight and 
hindrance of earthly kind, and run with patience for the heavenly 
prize-unseen but eternal. What manner of persons ought we to 
be who have so much light on God's Word and plan, and such 
grand anticipations for the future; how separate from the world 
and its aims and ambitions? 

To stand— to maintain our standing -to keep on the armor of 
God— we need to have much and close communion with God, 
not only in the way of talking to him (prayer), but also and 
especially by listening to what he says to us (through his Word). 

We would suggest the following plan to you all, viz: that during 
the next six weeks you take up the following important subjects, 
both for your private study and more public discussion at your 
meetings:— 

(1) Was a "sin offering" or sacrifice necessary to man's 
reconciliation to God? 

(2) Did Jesus the Lamb of God put away sin by the sacrifice of 
himself? 

(3) If a sacrifice was necessary and was given and accepted, are 
we pardoned or are we ransomed? 

(4) Justification-are we not justified, old creatures (human), 
before we become sanctified, new creatures (spiritual)? 

(5) "You know your calling; brethren" -"What is the hope of 
our calling"? 

(6) Who had this, our hope, before Pentecost? Who, walked this 
narrow way to life before Jesus our Leader and Forerunner? 

Our view of the Scripture teaching on the above subjects you 
will find in your back numbers of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 
"The Lord will bless each in proportion as he earnestly and 
candidly seeks to know what saith the Scriptures. "He that 
seeketh findeth. " 

Bro. Sunderlin, you will be glad to know, is gradually 
improving, though still quite weak and unable to write or 
preach. 

page 1 

We are obliged to omit samples of interesting letters this month 
for lack of room. 



R388 : page 1 



THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 



THYATIRA. Rev. 2:18-29. 

"And to the Messenger of the Congregation in Thyatira write. " 

It is claimed that the name Thyatira means "sweet savor of 
labor. " We think it applies to the first part of the period during 
which the church was said to be in the wilderness; the time also 
in which the papacy was in power. It would thus cover the 
period during which the true church, purified by persecution, 
relieved of its ordinary load of lazy dead-heads, and 
untrammeled by the class who always choose the popular side, 
was fully harnessed and faithfully laboring in the Lord's work. 
Many evidently had more zeal than knowledge, but they were 
faithful to the light they had. 

"These things sayeth the Son of God. " 

This is a more emphatic declaration of who the speaker is, than 
in any previous message. It was necessary. A usurper had arisen, 
who, as foretold by Daniel, had "a mouth speaking great things." 
Claiming to be the Vicar of Christ, he assumed to speak as the 
mouth-piece of God. 

Our Lord here announces himself as speaking through his 
written Word-his only authorized authority. This declaration 
would call to mind the words of Paul: "If any man preach any 
other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be 
accursed. " 

"Eyes as a flame of fire. " Expressive of their piercing 
brightness. Despised and persecuted for the truth, as the little 
faithful company were, by those who claimed to be the church 
of God, it was a cheering thought to know that their exalted head 
"seeth not as man seeth"; but "the Lord knoweth them that are 
his." 

"His feet are like to polished brass. " The description here is very 
like that of the spiritual being seen by Daniel [10:6]: "Eyes as 
lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in color to polished 
brass." This metal was perhaps the most useful and enduring 
known to the ancients. It seems as if he would say to them: Fear 
not in 

R389 : page 1 

all your terrible journey of 1260 years in the wilderness, lo! I am 
with you; we shall walk together; I will be your companion and 
guide. 

"I know thy works, and thy love and faith and service and 
patience, and thy last works are more than the first. " This is 
generous praise, and shows the Lord's appreciation of the 
faithful labors of the true church of this period. The language is 



quite similar to that used in addressing the first church, with the 
apparent recognition that works of Thyatira were even more 
abundant than those of Ephesus. 

"But I have against thee that thou sufferest the woman Jezebel, 
who calls herself a prophetess, and she teaches and seduces my 
servants to commit fornication, and to eat things offered to 
idols." 

The Bible is a wonderful book. We find in it a faithful record of 
human history, and many curious events, sometimes so strange 
as to be almost or quite disbelieved by the natural man. Various 
attempts have been made to prove the Bible unhistorical; that 
while it taught spiritual truths, it was not intended to teach 
history, science, etc., and was in those directions entirely 
unreliable. The light of modern research and criticism is fast 
scattering such infidelity, and proving, day by day, the antiquity 
and reliability of the Book of books. Not only is its historical 
and scientific truthfulness shining out clearly, but there also 
appears a strangely deeper vein of truth which seals its 
supernatural origin, by revealing the astonishing fact, that that 
history was a living, speaking, prophetic pantomime —a 
prophecy acted out in type by living characters. Even their faults 
and misdeeds faithfully noted (to the disgust of some over- 
particular people) being apparently necessary to fill up the anti- 
type. 

The history of Elijah, and his relations with Ahab and Jezebel, is 
one of these prophetic pictures, seen not in vision, but in real 
characters. As this type is familiar to many of our readers, and 
will be treated fully soon for the benefit of all, we only take 
space to note a few of the prophetic features. 

Jezebel, as the nourisher and protector of the prophets of Baal, is 
the type of the Papal Church, the mother of abominations. 1 
Kings 18:19; 2 Kings 9:22. Ahab, her husband, the king of 
Israel, represents the kings or kingdoms of Europe who 
committed spiritual fornication with the "mother church." 

The Elijah of Malachi 4, is evidently the Gospel church in its 
militant condition, and which must be fully come-filled up. 
Rom. 1 1 :25- before the trouble spoken of can fairly begin, 
seeing that they assist in pouring out the plagues. The three-and- 
a-half years of drouth and famine foretold by Elijah (during 
which he was miraculously fed) were typical of the three-and-a- 
half "times" or symbolic years of spiritual drouth and famine 
foretold by Amos (8:11), during the combined reign of the 
Babylonian Jezebel and her kingly paramours. 

R389 : page 2 

If we compare Dan. 7:25; 12:7, with Rev. 11:2,3,9,12, and 
12:6,14, we will find that they measure the same length of time. 
In symbolic language a "time" is composed of twelve months, of 



thirty years each (a day thus symbolizing a year). A symbolic 
year is 360 literal years, and 3-1/2 of these years, or 3-1/2 times 
360 is 1260. Also 42 months multiplied by 30 days to a month is 
1260 symbolic years. There is abundant proof that this is the 
way God intended us to calculate symbolic time. 

We thus see that the flight of the true children into the 
wilderness, from the face of the false church during 1260 years, 
while the harlot reigned a queen, and lived delicious ly with the 
kings of earth, was clearly foretold in Elijah's flight from the 
face of Jezebel, and the 3-1/2 years of famine. 1 Kings 19:3, also 
17:l-with Luke 4:25. 

The description of Jezebel in this message exactly fits the 
teaching of Rome. "To eat things offered to idols." How could 
the Pagan ideas taught by the Papacy, and clung to by 
Protestantism, be better described? The natural immortality of 
all men, as first taught by the most beastly of idolaters— the 
Egyptians-the eternity of sin; and, worst of all, the character of 
God so degraded that no heathen monstrosity ever invented by 
pagan priest-craft could compare with it. Instead of a loving 
Father, a vindictive Giant, kind indeed to his followers [are not 
the heathen so?], but infinitely cruel to, not his enemies alone, 
but also to those who, never having heard of him, could neither 
like nor dislike him. True, we were told that he-or rather his 
Son— was love personified; but this idea was so mixed up with 
the hideous doctrine of "eternal torment" that the result was 
Babylon [confusion]. 

"She teaches and seduces my servants to commit fornication." 

Churches are continually typified in the Scriptures by women, 
so the teaching alluded to is the following and union with some 
of the daughters of Babylon. So successful has been this 
seduction that Protestants generally would rather associate with 
an immoral member of an orthodox church, or a member of the 
body of anti-Christ, than a faithful and consistent Christian, who 
has thrown off the fetters of sectarianism. 

Rome has claimed to teach the doctrine of "one church"; but the 
direct result of her teaching has been the various creed-bound 
sects which still hold captive the spiritual Zion. 

"And I gave her TIME that she might repent; and she willeth not 
to repent of her fornication. Behold, I cast her into a bed, and 
those who commit adultery with her into great tribulation [see 
Rev. 2:21,22] if they repent not of HER works." [Sinaitic, 
Vatican, and Ephraim MSS., and other best authorities: "HER 
WORKS."] 

The time given for repentance must date, we think, from the 
dawn of the light of the Reformation. Strange to say, just about 
365 years have passed away since Luther began to preach 
against the errors of Rome. On the 3 1 st day of October, 1 5 1 7, he 



placed his ninety-five theses on the door of the church in 
Wittenberg. In a few weeks the theses were known throughout 
Christendom, having been translated into several languages. 
This is considered the beginning of the Reformation in 
Germany. Now, we see the force of the language of our Lord in 
this message. 

"I gave her [a] time that she might repent." A "time," 360 years 
from the first clear rays of light through Bro. Luther, brings us 
to the hour when our Lord said to the nominal Gospel Church- 
as shown by the parallels— "Your house is left unto you 
desolate. " If we read the signs of the times aright they have 
already entered the "affliction" promised. 

"And I will kill her children with death; and all the churches 
shall know that I am he who searcheth the reins and hearts; and I 
will give to you every one according to your works." 

Rome, in the days of Thyatira, endeavored to kill Thyatira's 
children with literal death; and the Lord cheers them by the 
assurance that the reverse would finally take place; and that 
while those who had imbibed that persecuting spirit of Jezebel 
would be stricken with spiritual death [the anti-type of the 450 
priests of Baal whom Jezebel fed, and whom Elijah destroyed], 
she (all having the spirit of Thyatira) would receive the glorious 
reward according to your works. This changed condition of 
things will also reveal to "all the churches" who it is that is 
doing the sifting work. 

"But to you I say: to the rest which are in Thyatira, as many as 
have not this teaching; who know not the deep things of Satan 
(as they say); I put upon you no other burden; but that which ye 
have, hold fast till I come. " 

It will be noticed that there is a peculiarity in the use of the 
expression "deep things." There are apparently certain ideas 
which "they" call deep things [of God] which our Lord calls by 
their proper name: "deep things of Satan." 

When we speak to a certain class about God's dealings with 
mankind, and of the justice [?] of consigning the ignorant to 
everlasting misery, as imputed to our heavenly Father, we are at 
once told that we cannot fathom God's purpose in allowing all 
this sin and misery; that he has not revealed his plans; that our 
reasonings are mere speculation, the whole matter belongs to the 
"deep things" of God, which he has not revealed. "Eye hath not 
seen, ear hath not heard," etc.; not knowing that Paul continues: 
"but God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit. " 

Although knowing that anti-Christ has loaded "Our Father's" 
name with odium, and his character with infamy, they still 
persist in asserting that it is not our business to attempt to clear 
him; he will do that himself on the day of judgment, when, 



according to their theology, it will be too late to do anybody any 
good. 

We, who see the plan of the ages, might be content to wait; but 
we have a right to expect that those who believe that the world is 
now on probation should do all in their power to place God's 
character and dealings in a proper light before the world. We 
would be ashamed to treat an earthly friend so, how much more 
the "friend above all others"? Thank God we have not learned 
this "voluntary humility." 

I love to tell the story, 
Because I know it's true. 

R390 : page 2 

To the faithful laborers in Thyatira he lays no other "burden. " 
He began his message by commending them for their "works" 
and "service." He ends by telling them to patiently carry this 
burden, holding fast what they have "till I come. " We think we 
know some still living who have the Thyatira spirit. 

"And he that overcomes, and he that keeps my works until the 
end, to him will I give authority over the nations; and he shall 
rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of a potter are they 
dashed to pieces, as I also have received of my Father." 

The promise to the overcomers of the Thyatira age is peculiarly 
appropriate. Rome, the false church, was at this time in the 
height of her glory, claiming to be the kingdom of God; that 
Christ's reign had begun- through his vice-gerent, the Pope. 
Claiming, of course, the promises given to those who reign with 
Christ, she did literally rule the nations with a rod of iron, 
dashing in pieces whom she would. 

The type (in a sense) of the iron rule and great power of the true 
kingdom was thus signified [made signs of— shown by signs- 
Rev. 1:1] before their eyes; making even their terrible 
persecution a reminder of the glory and power they were called 
to inherit. 

"And I will give him the morning star." 

These who would continue to "work" in harmony with God's 
plan (which they could only do by walking in the light of 
present truth), are promised not only increasing light, but 
advanced light— as if before it was due; also the first sure proof 
of "Day Dawn," and of the approach of the glorious Sun of 
Righteousness who shall rise-not to bring DARKNESS, (Is 
John 1:9 fulfilled?)-not to destroy, but with healing in his 
wings. "The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the 
nations." "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith 
unto the churches." 

W. I. MANN. 



R390 : page 2 



FAITH'S ALCHEMY. 



Some statements of the Bible seem as startling and impossible 
as the dream of the philosopher's stone. Surely, it is as easy to 
turn all things into gold as to verify the promise that "no good 
thing will God withhold from them that walk uprightly. " Where 
are the people who possess all good things? Not the adherents of 
any favored sect, for then all controversy would cease, and faith 
give place to sight. Shall we take refuge in the limitation of the 
promise to those who walk uprightly, and reply that until we 
find persons who never waver, stoop, or stumble, it cannot be 
said the promise has failed? But it is addressed to fallible 
mortals, and by the upright must be meant those who, in spite of 
failing, honestly and habitually try to be right with God. Do 
persons enjoy all things generally regarded as good? This is not 
the teaching of the Bible. It is unfair to interpret any book or 
document by the meaning we choose to place on some sentence 
opposed to the general tenor of it. The Bible in all its teachings 
and narratives shows that "many are the afflictions of the 
righteous." No one is invited to be a Christian by the bribe of 
receiving all the things the world accounts "good. " 

What then, is the meaning of the promise? That is good which is 
for our complete and lasting advantage. A bed in a garden may 
be cultivated, a wing of a house decorated, a member of the 
body cared for, so as to entail injury on the whole. It would not, 
therefore, be a good thing. A child may be gratified by a berry or 
a toy, which may prove a fatal injury. Bitter medicine, a painful 
operation, a difficult task, though regarded by the child as very 
evil, may be good things, no wise parent would withhold. As the 
physical nature is developed by exercise, and the mental by 
education, so the spiritual by the discipline of trial. If thus, we 
are trained to the conquest of self-will, to filial submission, and 
confidence toward God, it is a good thing of supreme value. 

The present life is the childhood, the training time of eternity. If, 
then, a transitory grief helps to fit us for everlasting bliss, it must 
be good, and not evil. But who can tell what is thus good? We 
feel present pain and pleasure, but cannot see their spiritual 
results. It is not necessary, it is not possible that we should. God 
does, and he has the power so to overrule all things as to secure 
the desired end. We do not argue the matter with unbelievers. 
They point to our poverty, sickness, disappointments, desires 
unsatisfied, prayers apparently refused; and in the faith God's 
Word warrants and his Spirit produces, we reply with Faber: 

Ills that God blesses are my good- 
All unblessed good is ill; 
And all is right that seems most wrong, 
If it be His dear will." 



This is the alchemy that turns sorrow into joy, sickness into 
health, death into life. It is illustrated in the history of God's 
children. We see it in the case of Joseph, Moses, David, and 
Asaph. (Psa. 73.) St. Paul learned to glory in the thorn in the 
flesh. 

Things are not what they seem. God alone perceives their true 
value and lasting results. He is infinitely wise, and cannot err; 
infinitely strong, and cannot fail; infinitely kind, and cannot 
neglect. He will keep back nothing that is good, nor give us 
what would injure. This is our culture time. 

That is best which promotes the fruitfulness in which God 
delights, and which will be our own true glory by his grace. 
Christians must not judge of things as men do whose 
possessions and hopes are limited by the present. We are 
pilgrims, and must estimate circumstances in view of their 
influence, not so much in making us comfortable on our way as 
in helping us home. Nobler aims involve severer toil; fiercer 
conflicts, costlier sacrifice. If we seek a nobler goal, let us not 
envy others their smoother path. If we would win a richer prize, 
we must fight a sterner battle. If we would attain a loftier height, 
we must clamber up sharper crags.— Newman Hall. 



R390 : page 2 

HE WAS A LIAR FROM THE BEGINNING. 

Many despotic and evil governments have tried to hold 
themselves in power by misrepresenting what would result from 
a change of government. Thus Satan- "the prince of this world"- 
-has deluded mankind in general, teaching that, though they 
indeed have a hard lot now, it would be a thousand-fold worse if 
Jesus were to come and establish his kingdom. Hence, not only 
the worldly fear the coming into power of earth's rightful Ruler, 
but many of God's children, too, fear, instead of love, that for 
which they pray- "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 
as in heaven. " 

Thus, in everything it has been the deceivers' policy to 
misrepresent our loving Father's works and plans. It is 
astonishing, too, how much more readily even Christians receive 
Satan's lie than God's truth. And God allows his character to be 
traduced- probably designing that when, in coming ages, "the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," then the 
magnitude of his love shall shine with increased splendor by 
contrast with Satan's slanders. 



R390 : page 3 



WAIT ON THE LORD. 

Wait, O thou weary one, a little longer, 
A few more years— it may be only days; 
Thy patient waiting makes thee all the stronger; 
Eternity will balance all delays. 

Wait, O thou suffering one, thy days of sorrow 
Bring to thy soul its richest gain. 
If thou a Christian art, a brighter morrow 
Will give thee ten- fold joy for all thy pain. 

Wait, O thou anxious one, the cloud that hovers 
In gathering gloom above thy aching head 
Is sent of God in mercy, and He covers 
Thee with His heavenly mantle overspread. 

Be patient and submissive; each disaster 
Will bring thee nearer to thy loving Lord. 
These trials make thee like thy blessed Master, 
Who knows them all, and will his grace afford. 

Be patient and submissive; strength is given 
For every step along the weary way, 
And for it all thou' It render praise in heaven, 
When dreary night gives place to perfect day. 

Yes, perfect day, the day of God, eternal, 
When not a shadow shall flit o'er the scene; 
In that fair land where all is bright and vernal, 
And we will be with Christ, and naught between. 

Wait, then, dear heart, control thy sad emotion, 
God will subdue each angry wind and wave, 
And when the voyage ends across life's ocean, 
Into the haven of sweet rest will save. 



-New York Observer. 



R391 : page 3 



LINE UPON LINE. 



"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ." (Rom. 5:1.) 

Though a familiar text, we would that its full import were 
grasped more clearly by all God's children. It would be a source 
of pleasure and continual rejoicing to them all. It would be a 
firm foundation upon which the other teachings of God's Word 
would rest immovable, secure —a foundation which could not be 
moved, and from which our faith-building could not be shaken 
by every wind of doctrine. 



What is a justified condition, but a condition of guiltlessness? 
The act of justifying is the clearing or purifying or cleansing 
from sin. Any one who is pure, clean, perfect, or righteous needs 
not a justifier, for such are just of themselves. 

There has been but one "Just One" among men-our Lord Jesus. 
All others were sinners by nature, having inherited 
condemnation through Adam. All were unjust. Being unjust, 
they were all under condemnation to death. Being unclean, all 
are cut off from fellowship and communion with the holy and 
righteous God. The whole world lieth in condemnation - 
condemned to death. (Rom. 5:16,18.) 

Christ died the just (one) for the unjust (many) that he might 
bring us to God. (1 Pet. 3:18.) He brings us into harmony and 
fellowship with God by restoring us to the just or sinless 
condition, which Adam, our representative, lost for himself and 
us. Thus, Jesus becomes our Justifier, and justifies us from all 
things. (Acts 13:39.) Thus "being made free from sin," we may 
have communion with God, and can do works acceptable to God 
through Jesus Christ. (1 Pet. 2:5.) 

But it is objected-the text says we are justified by FAITH, and 
it does not say that our justification from sin required anything 
but FAITH. The text says nothing about the Just One, Jesus, 
dying to justify the unjust many. 

We reply that if any single text contained all the truth, the 
balance of Scripture would be useless— that one text would 
contain all the value. No single text contains all the truth. It is 
one of the fruitful causes of grievous errors that the Bible is not 
read more as a connected whole. But you are mistaken, our text 
does teach the necessity of a Redeemer to justify the unjust. 
Read the last clause: "justified... through our Lord Jesus Christ." 
Yes, we were all sinners— we could not justify ourselves. We 
could only be justified by one who would pay our penalty for us; 
then we might go free. It was for this cause that Jesus died, "the 
just for the unjust. " 

Do you inquire then, What has faith to do with the justification? 
We reply: Faith is the acceptance or belief of something. To be a 
proper faith, the thing believed must have proper and substantial 
reasons as a ground or basis of faith. A sound basis of faith is 
the Word of God. In our text, faith is the handle by which we 
accept of justification. We know that we are justified— or cleared 
from all Adamic condemnation —and reckoned of God as 
perfect, because he says so. He says, "There is, therefore, now, 
no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus." There was, 
and still is, condemnation to death resting on all others. We 
escape the condemnation, by reason of Jesus having paid the 
penalty of sin; and his redemption becomes applicable to every 
man as he comes to a knowledge of it, and accepts of it. That is, 
as soon as we accept of Jesus' death as our ransom price, that 



soon we realize or believe ourselves "justified from all things"; 
that soon we may know ourselves as no longer condemned 
sinners and aliens from God, but as his children, freed from 
condemnation by the full and sufficient ransom. 

Would to God, dear ones, that you all could realize yet more 
fully this "no condemnation," full "justification," this 
unblamable condition in which we stand who believe that Christ 
"was delivered (to death) for our offences, and was raised again 
for our justification. " (Rom. 4:25.) 

The justified by faith are very few, because for various reasons 
few believe that they are justified. Some who believe in the 
reality of sin, that all are sinners, and that Christ died for our 
sins, and redeemed us from the condemned condition, cannot 
realize themselves as being now, on that account, free from sin 
having no condemnation, and as pure and spotless as the snow 
in God's estimation. The only thing these lack, and it is an 
important lack, without which they cannot have full peace with 
God, is faith to realize or accept of the righteousness of Christ as 
the covering of all sin. Let us remember that "without faith it is 
impossible to please God," (Heb. 11:6.) or to "have peace (rest) 
with God." (Rom 5:1.) 

Another class who are not treated of by our text, and who have 
no right to comfort from it, do not believe that the race is under 
condemnation, and regard sin as a myth. These cannot be 
justified, because they do not recognize themselves as unjust. 

Another class to whom this text does not apply, includes those 
who admit that man is a sinner and needs to be justified, but 
who claim that sinners are justified unconditionally by the 
Father. That is, that God concluded that he would revoke his 
original sentence of death, and by his mighty power turn all 
sinners into saints. But if this were God's plan there would have 
been no necessity for the death of our Lord Jesus-the Just for 
the unjust. That this is an unscriptural faith, is readily seen, 
when we find that nowhere does God say that he will 
unconditionally pardon sin. Those who hold this view have no 
need of the last clause of our text- Justified... THROUGH Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

Another class to whose theory this text would not fit, claim, that 
while all are sinners, and need to be justified or cleared from 
their sin; yet that this is effected not by unconditional pardon by 
Jehovah, nor by a ransom for sin, and the payment of sin's 
penalty by Jesus, but that each man in the act of dying, will pay 
his own penalty, and therefore be free from sin. They who hold 
this view have no right to use our text, for it speaks of 
justification (cleansing from sin) "through Jesus Christ"- 
something Jesus has done for us, and not something for us to do 
for ourselves, is the basis of the hope and peace of our text. 



Truly, it has been written that the wisdom of God is foolishness 
with men, and the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. 
(1 Cor. 2:14; and 3:19.) Thus it has ever been. Men have been 
searching for centuries to prove that man is susceptible of a 
moral training which would bring him into harmony with God; 
or that he could make satisfaction for his own sins by means of 
penance now, or by the act of dying, thus restoring himself to 
favor with his holy Maker who cannot look upon sin with any 
degree of allowance. Others rely on the love of God, vainly 
hoping that his infinite love will override his infinite justice, 
causing him to revoke his own original decree. 

All these, while they may lead astray good, candid minds, and, 
by their human sophistrising, may overthrow the faith of some 
in Jesus as the Redeemer, who "bought us with his own precious 
blood," they can never make void the testimony of God's Word, 
nor permanently lead astray those taught of God through his 
Word. These see in Jehovah a God infinite both in Justice and in 
Love— so just that he will "by no means clear (pardon) the 
guilty," (Exod. 34:7) yet so loving that he gave his only begotten 
son to die for our sins, and to redeem us from death, the sin 
penalty. 

Let us hold fast to the blessed Bible doctrine of Justification 
(freeing from condemnation) through our Lord Jesus Christ, 
accepting of it by faith. As it is written, so we believe that Jesus 
"put away sin by the sacrifice of himself"; and "without 
shedding of blood there is no remission (no "putting away," or 
"justifying"). (Heb. 9:22,26.) 

Thus upheld in our faith by Jehovah's Word, we will not be 
carried about by every wind of doctrine which Satan stirs in this 
"evil day" to lead us from our anchorage in Christ. Let us now 
look at the subject from another standpoint of view: 

DID CHRIST DIE IN VAIN? 

It is an indisputed fact that "the man, Christ Jesus," lived and 
died; but various are the views held as to why, and the value or 
utility of his life and death. 

Of so-called Christendom, probably one-half believe that Jesus 
was merely an imperfect (sinful) man like other men, except that 
he had more than ordinary ability— a man superior to his day-a 
man who, as a teacher of morals, properly ranked with 
Confucius, Socrates, and Plato, though, they think, less 
philosophical than the two last. His death they regard as 
remarkable for cruelty and injustice, but aside from the fact that 
he was a martyr to principles of truth, they recognize no merit in 
it. He died, say they, as any other man dies, and for the same 
reason. As a member of the same human family, he would have 
died as any other man sooner or later, anyhow. They say, the 
value of Jesus' life and death consists entirely in the moral 



teaching, influence, and example which it affords mankind, 
showing to all men that they should lead pure, moral lives, and 
rather sacrifice life than principle. Of this view are almost all 
connected with the "Universalist" and "Unitarian" 
denominations, as well as a large proportion in all other 
denominations, sometimes called "Liberal" and "Independent" 
Christians- "advanced thinkers," etc. 

These scout the idea that Christ died the just for the unjust; that 
"Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures"; that "with 
his stripes we are healed"; that "the Lord (Jehovah)... laid on him 
the iniquity of us all"; (Isa. 53:5,6.) that "he was delivered (to 
death) for our offences." They endeavor to explain away these 
and a hundred 

R392 : page 3 

other similar Scriptures. Failing in this, they give us plainly their 
idea; viz. : that such texts and such ideas of the object of Jesus' 
death, while good enough in past ages, will not stand the "light" 
and "thought" of this nineteenth century. 

With claims of superior wisdom and benevolence, they give us 
three advanced views on the subject. First, God is too 
benevolent, too loving, to require a penalty for sin of his poor 
weak creatures. [They overlook the fact that the God of love has 
permitted the evils and miseries of the last six thousand years to 
come upon the race, as part of the "wages of sin."] 

The second view is, that the act of dying and being entombed 
pays the sin penalty-that thus each pays for his own sin, and is 
then entitled to life, and needs no redeemer to die for his sins, or 
to ransom him from the power of the grave. (Hos. 13:14.) [An 
absolute proof of the falsity of this view is furnished in the case 
of Jairus' daughter (Matt. 9:18,23-25), the widow's son, and 
Lazarus (Luke 7:11-15; John 11:44), all of whom having died, 
and thereby, according to this theory, paid their own penalty, 
should be free from death after Jesus had restored life to them. 
But they all died again. This is proof that the death of the 
condemned does not make reconciliation for sin, nor entitle to a 
release from its penalty. The just must die for the unjust; the 
Lamb of God must take away the sin of the world ere they can 
have a right to everlasting life. 

The third view, though also incorrect, yet by far the most near to 
the Scriptural view, is, that the ills of the present life, coupled 
with a sufficiency of punishment in a future life, to be just and 
effective, and to reward each, will be the wages of sin. 

We wish every reader to note carefully that the "nineteenth 
century light," of which these so-called "advanced thinkers" 
boast, is an earthly light. It is such intellectual philosophy and 
science, falsely so called, against which we are warned. (1 Tim. 
6:20.) It not only ignores, but opposes the heavenly light-THE 



WORD OF GOD. Among the strong advocates of this view are 
Henry Ward Beecher and many of the great; and adherents with 
these 

R392 : page 4 

are the rich and the wise, according to this world; but they 
cannot boast the words of Jesus, or Paul, or James, or Peter, as 
proving or harmonizing with their "light." No; but they are the 
ones to whom we refer for our faith. Their united testimony is, 
that "There is none other name under heaven given among men 
whereby we must be saved" than the name of Jesus. (Acts 4:10- 
12.) How sad that some who once stood with us in full reliance 
on the ransom-the precious blood of Christ-as the basis of 
forgiveness of sins and future RESTITUTION from its penalty, 
have recently fallen into this grievous error. 

The argument of this large class of "advanced thinkers" is 
completely overthrown by the legitimate conclusions of their 
own arguments. Assuming that Jesus died, not to pay a penalty 
for us, they say he simply became our leader and example. They 
all claim that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and others, who 
lived and died before Jesus' day, are saved in the same sense, in 
the same way, and receive as great blessings and rewards as 
saints who live since Jesus set the example. Do they not thus 
believe? You answer, yes. Then we inquire, what advantage 
resulted from Jesus' example? If they of preceding ages got 
along just as well without it as we who have it, and if his death 
did not satisfy any penalty or legal claims of justice against us as 
sinners, we should be forced to the conclusion that Christ died in 
vain. If God had been as wise as these teachers, and had 
possessed some of the nineteenth century "light," the inference 
is that he would not have sent his only begotten Son to become a 
man, and to "taste death for every man. " 

The regular and attentive reader will notice that the foregoing is 
not our view of the teachings of Scripture. We believe that by 
the death of Christ the human nature of all before and since his 
day is justified to life; but that we living since his day, have the 
advantage, that by following his example in sacrificing the 
human nature, we may become partakers of a higher nature, viz. : 
a spiritual— even the divine nature. We merely used the 
argument of the opposition to overthrow their own theory. 

But while we oppose, and always expect to oppose, above every 
other and minor heresy, the views which, as above mentioned, 
deny that our Lord bought us with his own precious blood (1 
Cor. 6:20; 1 Pet. 1:19; 2 Pet. 2:1,2), and every other theory 
which ascribes salvation from death to any other name than 
Jesus, and by any other means than that "he died for our sins- 
the Just for the unjust; yet for very many who hold these views, 
we have much sympathy; in fact, we admire many of them. 
Controlled by benevolent reasoning powers, and confronted by 



the unreasonable and unscriptural doctrines of so-called 
orthodoxy, they could scarcely avoid an opposite extreme. It is 
the inclination of our present demoralized human nature to fly 
from one extreme to another. We only get the golden mean of 
truth when we let the human will and human wisdom cease, and 
accept God's word as its own interpreter. 

The views from which these generally fled, represent the faith of 
about the other half of Christendom, and are termed "Orthodox" 
views. The belief of this class, in a few words, is as follows: Sin 
is an awful reality, entailing upon all, through Adam, a penalty 
which must be paid, or not one of the race could ever be restored 
to life or communion with God. God, foreseeing that none of us 
could pay the price of our own or of each other's sins (because 
all were condemned), provided a ransom or substitute (Both 
words have the same meaning.) in the person of "the man, Christ 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all," and "redeemed us" by 
dying "for our sins"— "the Just for the unjust." 

To all this we agree; thus far we have Scripture; but we can go 
no further with "Orthodoxy," for when they come to explain the 
nature of the penalty which Jesus paid for us, they leave both 
divine and human wisdom. They claim, unscripturally, that the 
wages of sin is everlasting torture and misery; some believing 
that it will be mental torture, and others that it will be physical- 
that God, before he had created man, had, in some distant 
locality, fitted up a place where the sinner may be tortured 
throughout eternity in surging billows of fire and flame. 

Somewhat less awful is the view of Papacy— that purgatory is a 
place of dreadful torture, which will end when the culprit has 
had sufficient punishment. Papacy found it necessary to use 
strong and forcible arguments when she undertook to convert 
the whole world; and Protestantism sought to make the 
inducements of Christianity still more striking by preaching an 
endless torture. 

Any benevolent mind, unbiased by prejudice, even though 
unenlightened by revelation, must see that there is something 
wrong in this theory; and positive proof of its falsity is 
furnished, when the fruitless attempt is made to harmonize this 
endless torture theory of men, with the substitution or ransom 
teaching of Scripture. By holding and mixing this truth 
(substitution) with this error (eternal torment), the truth is made 
to appear untrue. Thus, if the wages due to sinners was eternal 
torture in hell, and if Jesus became the sinners' substitute or 
ransom-then what? Then Christ is in hell suffering that torture, 
and must forever thus suffer to all eternity. Then he is not in 
heaven, at the right hand of God. (Mark 16:19.) 

This conclusion is, of course, preposterous and unscriptural; 
every logical mind sees this, and to escape the dilemma, some 
claim that Jesus suffered more agony in the few hours of his 



crucifixion than all men (over a hundred and forty billions) 
would be capable of suffering unitedly throughout eternity. 
Others seeing that this is as absurd as the former view, discard 
both the eternal torment and the substitution or ransom, and 
become disbelievers in the Bible as God's revelation. 

Still others, to compromise with reason, discard substitution, but 
roll the human tradition of eternal torment and purgatory as a 
sweet morsel under their tongue, determined to hold it at all 
hazards. A few, of whom we thank our Father it is our privilege 
to be, let go of the human tradition of eternal torture, but hold 
fast to the Bible teaching of Substitution, viz.: That Jesus "gave 
himself a ransom (Greek-antilutron— an equivalent price. See 
also "Webster's Dictionary.") for all" mankind. (1 Tim. 2:6.) 

Now, briefly, let us see why Christ died. We see that others 
either make out that his death was in vain, or, by tacking on 
eternal torment as the penalty he paid for us, they make void the 
Word of God by their traditions. 

First, then, we accept of substitution in its fullest sense, and 
claim that when "Christ died for our sins"— "the Just for the 
unjust"-when "the chastisement of our peace was upon him"- 
when "he was wounded for our transgressions and bruised for 
our iniquities," he took the place of the sinner before God, and 
suffered exactly the penalty of our Adamic sin— exactly what 
otherwise the entire race must have suffered. But now comes the 
question, What are the wages of sin which he must meet for us, 
in order to be our ransom or substitute? The Scriptures reply, 
"The wages of sin is DEATH." (Rom. 6:23.) Not life in torment, 
but the extinction of life is death. 

To this conclusion all Scripture harmonizes, viz.: that his death 
was the ransom which justifies all mankind to life, and makes 
possible (in God's due time) the resurrection of all that are in 
their graves. (John 5:28.) It was not the sufferings of 
Gethsemane, nor the weariness of his three-and-a-half years' 
ministry that 

R393 : page 4 

redeemed us— it was his death. "The Son of man came to give 
his life a ransom for many." (Matt. 20:28.) 

The Just one might have suffered ten times as much as he did, 
yet had it not culminated in death, it all would not have 
redeemed the unjust. The wages of sin was not torture, but 
death; hence to be our substitute, he must die, thus paying 
exactly our penalty. For this cause Christ died, the just for the 
unjust. 

The death of Jesus might have been accomplished in a less 
painful way, and it would have been equally our ransom price; 
but it pleased the Father that he should be not only the 
Redeemer, but also the Restorer of men. Hence, he must have an 



experience in our sufferings, in order to be able to sympathize 
with us, "For it became him (Jehovah)... in bringing many sons 
unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation (Jesus) perfect 
(on the spiritual plane) through sufferings." (Heb. 2:10.) 

Beloved, let no one take from you, by any means, this 
fundamental teaching of Scripture, this basis of all our hopes, as 
well as the basis of the world's hope of restitution. If Jesus did 
not become our ransom— our substitute— if the sacrifice of his 
humanity was not the "equivalent price" necessary to recover 
Adam and all who lost life through him as their representative 
head, none need expect to go free from death: Then our hope of 
a resurrection of the dead is vain. If the penalty of our sins is 
eternal torment, then Jesus did not pay it, and we must each 
expect to suffer it. But if, as the Scriptures teach, though so few 
believe it, the wages of sin is death, then we know that Jesus did 
pay our penalty. He died, or was cut off from life, "not for 
himself, " but for us, to give his life a ransom for many. (See 
Dan. 9:26.) 

This is Paul's argument, and when he would mention the very 
fundamentals of Christian faith, he says: "I delivered unto you 
first of all... how that Christ died for our sins, according to the 
Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:3.) 

Referring to the preceding article, we would remark that no one 
can have a proper or full comprehension of Justification, unless 
he sees that as a race, we were in a condemned condition — 
condemned to death, not to torment; and now we are made 
happy by the Gospel (glad tidings) that Jesus was delivered (to 
death) for our offences, and was raised again for our 
justification." (Rom. 4:25.) We now know that since our penalty 
has been paid by our Redeemer, "God (the Father) is just to 
forgive us." He will not be unjust to withhold that right to life 
which has been purchased for us according to his own plan. 

Notice how firmly Paul stood on this doctrine of a full release or 
justification, and notice that he bases it, not on Jehovah's 
rescinding the penalty, but on the fact that Christ died. Paul's 
argument is that it is the same Jehovah who once condemned us, 
that now declares us freed from sin- justified— and he 
accomplished our justification by not sparing his own Son, but 
freely delivering him up for us all. He says "Who shall lay 
anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. 
[Consequently, if God justifies, no one has a right to condemn 
us.] Who is he that condemneth? [Tell such an one that] It is 
Christ that died. " Tell such that we are redeemed from death- 
the penalty of sin-because "Christ died for our sins." (Read 
Rom. 8:32-34,1.) 



R393 : page 4 



AN ASYLUM FOR THE EXILES. 

[From the N.Y. Herald] 

Our Constantinople correspondent sends the following: -Since 
the days when Sultan Bajazet offered an asylum to the Spanish 
Jews flying from the stakes and scaffolds of Ferdinand H, there 
never has been promise of such a wholesale migration into the 
Ottoman dominions as there is at present. Already upward of a 
thousand Russian Jewish refugees are wandering homeless in 
the streets of Constantinople, and this, in spite of all efforts to 
stem, or rather to delay, the stampede until proper arrangements 
can be made to receive them. The two pilot fish of the exodus- 
Mr. Lawrence Oliphant and Mr. James Alexander-have made 
Constantinople their headquarters. As to the sincerity, and as to 
the disinterestedness, both pecuniary and personal, of these two 
gentlemen in their efforts to repatriate the Jews, there is not the 
slightest doubt. But as to the method of realizing the 
philanthropic object that both have at heart, Mr. Oliphant, and 
Mr. Alexander hold somewhat different views. It will be 
remembered that two years ago Mr. Oliphant in his work, "The 
Land of Gilead, " advocated a beginning of the repatriation of the 
Jews by a settlement, under the auspices of a sort of joint-stock 
company, of a number of Jews from Eastern Europe and Asia in 
an agricultural colony situated in the territory which formerly 
belonged to the tribes of Reuben and Gad-a district comprising 
about a million and a half acres of rich alluvial soil, and 
bounded on the west by the Jordan and the Dead Sea. This most 
favored portion of Palestine is scarcely inhabited. It was once a 
portion of the great Hittite Empire of Western Asia, whose very 
existence had already been forgotten as far back as the days of 
classical antiquity, and whose greatness is only now just 
beginning to be revealed by modern research. Comparatively 
recent relics may also be found in the isolated eminences of this 
region, which contain reservoirs and cisterns constructed in 
Scriptural times, and which have fallen but slightly out of repair. 

ISLAM'S OPPORTUNITY. 

Mr. Oliphant's scheme warmly commended itself to the Sultan 
as an opportunity for proving that Islam could be more tolerant 
to a persecuted race, and hence more compatible with modern 
civilization, than some of the foremost nations of Christendom; 
and also as a means of obtaining a well secured and increasing 
revenue from 

R393 : page 5 

a province that from time beyond memory had yielded nothing 
to the imperial exchequer. Mr. Oliphant was even feted at Yildiz 
Kiosque, and the signature of the Sultan to the firman 
repatriating the Jews was hourly expected. At this promising 
stage of the negotiation Mr. Oliphant's work, "The Land of 



Gilead," unfortunately appeared. The Sultan at once thought that 
he saw the germs of Jewish autonomy, backed by England and 
France, springing up in his already dwindling dominions. 
Naturally suspicious, and prone to see a "nigger on every fence, " 
Abdul Hamid remembered that Mr. Oliphant was an 
Englishman, strongly backed by the late Lord Beaconsfield, by 
the Marquis of Salisbury, and by M. Waddington. Moreover, 
one of the numerous orthodox Moslem habitues of Yildiz 
Kiosque, singularly enough, translated to the Sultan various 
stirring passages from George Eliot's "Daniel Deronda," where 
the hopes and possibilities of a great Hebrew kingdom are so 
vividly portrayed. The wily sheik could have hit upon no better 
device to arouse the suspicions of the mystic, visionary mind of 
his imperial master. There was no longer any question at Yildiz 
of the repatriation of the Jews in Palestine; and Mr. Oliphant 
was henceforth regarded as a wolf in sheep's clothing, whose 
real mission was to insert an additional wedge in the already 
strained fabric of Ottoman autonomy. Three weeks ago Mr. 
Oliphant again appeared upon the scene. English influence being 
at the lowest known ebb at Constantinople, he is now urging the 
United States Minister-who is at present a persona gratissima at 
Yildiz Kiosque— to advocate the colonization scheme to 
Palestine; whither the Jews, for sentimental reasons, much 
prefer to go, and whither they can be transported at much 
cheaper rates than to America. 

MR. ALEXANDER'S VIEWS. 

The modus operandi of Mr. Alexander is somewhat different. 
Mr. Alexander-himself an Israelite-represents Mr. Cazelet and 
other well known Jewish capitalists in England, Germany, and 
France, who believe that all purely humanitarian efforts must 
fail unless established upon a sound commercial basis. Mr. 
Alexander demands of the Sultan a concession, allowing him to 
construct a railway, tramways, and ordinary roads within the 
vilayets of Aleppo, Tripoli, and Damascus. The length of the 
railway from the ancient port of Tripoli to Damascus would be 
about two hundred miles; and it is proposed to obtain a grant of 
the uncultivated land along the entire length of the line for a 
distance extending two miles on each side of it, whenever such 
land belongs to the government. The whole of the profits 
accruing from the proposed railways are to go to the 
government. The opening up of such a route would speedily 
develop the wonderful resources of the country. The estimated 
cost of the line is about $50,000 per mile; $10,000,000 for the 
whole distance. For the construction of the railway, and the 
occupation of the conceded territory, which would amount to 
eight hundred square miles, employment and a resting place 
would be found for a large number of Jewish refugees. Should 
the government refuse to grant land in the above named vilayets, 
then the promoters of this scheme would take any other 



concession of land suitable for colonization purposes. M. 
Alexander and his backers are practical business men, and they 
are fully aware that any wholesale migration of Jews into Asia 

R394 : page 5 

Minor or Syria would involve the greatest misery and privation, 
unless immediate employment be provided for them beforehand. 
M. Alexander and his agents have lists containing several 
thousand names of Russian Jewish artisans and mechanics who 
desire to emigrate to Turkey. The moment that the concession is 
granted these men and their families will be transported by 
special steamers to Syria, and upon their arrival will at once 
receive their wages. The Grand Vizier sent a few days ago a 
most favorable report upon M. Alexander's scheme to the 
Sultan, and last Sunday the Minister of Foreign Affairs received 
the delegates of the Jewish artisans and mechanics of Odessa, 
and assured them that a peaceful home denied them in Russia 
would be accorded to them in Turkey. 

AN OFFER OF REFUGE. 

The following is the translation of the letter of instructions 
written by the Porte to the Turkish Consuls:— "In all cases when 
Russian Jews express a desire to establish themselves in Turkey, 
the following conditions, which the Ottoman government 
imposes upon this immigration, shall be made known to them:— 
1. The immigrants must be established in separate groups, and 
they are at liberty to settle anywhere in the Ottoman dominions 
with the exception of Palestine. 2. Without any exception or 
reserve whatever, they shall be subject to the laws of Turkey, 
and shall become Ottoman subjects." It should be remembered 
that the legal status of the Jews in Turkey is exactly the same as 
that of all other Ottoman subjects, whether Moslem or Christian. 
They have their own hakam bachi, or chief rabbi, who is the 
head of their nation in the whole Empire, and its official 
representative at the Porte. The hakam bachi enjoys the same 
rank and privileges as the Greek and Armenian patriarchs. It is a 
curious fact, that whenever the Jews have been oppressed in 
Turkey, the oppression has come, not from the Moslems, but 
from Christians; and then not from rivalry in commerce, but 
from fanaticism. Jews cannot remain in Greece on account of 
bad treatment; and thus far the Turkish government has proved 
itself to be the only Oriental government capable of maintaining 
order between the Christians and the Jews. During Easter week 
at Jerusalem, the Turkish authorities are obliged every year to 
send two regiments of infantry to prevent the Catholics and the 
Greeks from tormenting and killing the Jews, and in all Turkish 
towns the Jews are specially placed under the protection of 
municipal councils. In Constantinople it is by no means rare to 
find Jews intrusted with high official functions, and many of 
them form part of the Sultan's Privy Council; and of all other 



subjects of the Porte, the Jews have always been the most 
peaceful and easily governed. 



R394 : page 5 

THE DRIFT. 

[From "The Christian" London.] 

THE JEWS IN RUSSIA. -The vast populations here now, for 
the most part, have but one word on their lips, and that word is- 
Palestine. Newspapers and pamphlets are issued daily, not only 
in pure Hebrew, but also in the Jewish dialect, so everyone may 
be able to get information on this all-absorbing topic. Books are 
offered for sale to learn the Arabic language; Hebrew maps of 
Palestine are hung up in shops, and Jews study them with great 
avidity. I have visited Russia on several previous occasions, but 
never have I witnessed before such a yearning for the land of 
their forefathers. 

My friend, Dr. Benzion, agent of the British Society for the 
Jews, who is esteemed and beloved by many out of the 70,000 
Jews that know him in this town, is rendering me invaluable 
assistance in my work. We have Jews with us from morning till 
evening; some come for the Gospel, others for information 
about Palestine, willing to place themselves under our 
leadership. 

With reference to the persecution my brethren have suffered, it 
is difficult for human pen to describe the awful things that have 
taken place. I visited Balta, accompanied by my friend, Mr. 
Benzion; we were most cordially received by the leading Jews 
of the town. The Rabbi and principal members of the 
community called upon us, and gave us the names of the persons 
who have suffered so dreadfully. It was the hand of Providence 
alone that saved the Jews in that town from utter destruction. In 
their deeds of darkness, the persecutors spared neither age nor 
sex, and to give instances of the foul wrongs committed would 
only be revolting to humanity. I trust the authorities will bring 
the perpetrators of these crimes to condign punishment. 

A. STERNBERG. 

Hotel du Nord, Odessa, Russia, June 5 . 

A private letter from one who has recently visited the persecuted 
Jews in Russia, whose numbers are counted there by millions, 
tells not only of their suffering, but of their deep desire to return 
to the land given to Abraham and his seed forever, and from 
which they have been long strangers because of their sins. We 
would fain hope that these sorrows are part of the plan of their 
tender, faithful God, of "alluring them into the wilderness and 



speaking to their hearts." (Hos. 2:14.) Truly, the ways of our 
God are past finding out. 

OBSTACLE IN THE WAY OF THEIR GOING TO 
PALESTINE.-A letter in the Times of May 31, by Mr. 
Lawrence Oliphant, on the emigration of Russian Jews, is of 
much interest at the present critical juncture in the history of the 
"nation scattered and peeled." Writing from Constantinople, 
after having visited Gallicia and Romania, he testifies to the 
strong and prevalent desire cherished by the mass of Russian 
Jews in favor of "wholesale emigration to Palestine." This desire 
is not confined to the poor, but is equally shared by the wealthy 
Hebrews, some of whom are prepared to subscribe largely 
towards the expense of transfer to the land of ancient promise. 

An unexpected obstacle, however, has arisen, which, for the 
present, is likely to paralyze the national movement toward 
Palestine. Russian Jewish refugees are permitted to enter the 
Ottoman Empire only on condition that they will become 
Turkish subjects, and that they will not settle in that "province to 
which they are most strongly attached by religious association. " 
Mr. Oliphant, after deploring this restriction, thus concludes his 
letter:- 

Meanwhile, whether owing to unfounded suspicions, or to some 
still more occult reasons, the fact remains that no Jew is allowed 
by the Turkish Government to enter Palestine from Russia. In 
what manner the British nation can come to the relief of at least 
a million of people prepared for an exodus, but who are 
trembling in panic-stricken suspense till the way is opened for 
its accomplishment, it is for them to consider. 

EMIGRATION TO SYRIA.-The terrible outrages upon the 
Jews in Russia have led to the formation of a Society for their 
relief, specially for the purpose of assisting them to North Syria. 
Of this Society the Earl of Shaftsbury is President, and the 
Viscountess Strangford, Lady President. 

Mrs. Finn, widow of H. B. M., Consul at Jerusalem, said in a 
recent address: "Now, what is to be done for this persecuted 
people? We know that the Mansion House Fund was established 
for their immediate relief, and to send to America, but families 
are returning because they are obliged to eat forbidden food; and 
they say, we would rather die of persecution in Russia than 
disobey God's laws. Now, we have opened a fund with the 
purpose of sending them to Syria. The Sultan will not allow 
them to go to Palestine, by which he means Jerusalem and a 
little of the adjacent countries, so we may still send them to 
Syria and fields further abroad. But we want the money to buy 
this land. The other day I was offered L.500 to buy land, and 
L.200 extra to build houses on it; but we want (and can we not 
have?) at once L. 10,000 for this purpose. The Christians of 
England have only contributed one-ninth of the Mansion House 



Fund; is that what is expected of us? I entreat you all, the 
Christian women of England especially, to give something, be it 
ever so small. " 



R394 : page 5 



THE WORLD IN ARMS. 



The aspect of the world at large is as portentous of destructive 
wars today as at any period of its history. 

England, resting securely in her island home, a republic in fact, 
a monarchy in form, and an empire in the vast extent of her 
possessions, is rocking with internal agitation. Ireland is almost 
a unit in determined aim and desperate plans to disfranchise the 
owners of her soil, and to free herself from British rule. Distress, 
terror, and pauperism mark her whole population, and 
assassinations, the most atrocious, are the exhibition of her 
weakness and her hate. The "no rent" cry is to some extent 
echoed through England, and communism is ripe through all the 
British realms. 

France is constantly changing her cabinets, and her Republican 
Government is hated by rival claimants to the crown, of 
Napoleon, of Orleans, 

R395 : page 5 

or of the Bourbon. Communism, crushed out a few years since 
in seas of blood, is lifting again its defiant head, while the 
national revenge is nursed against Germany, and the 
determination fostered, to wipe out the disgrace of Sedan, and 
recover Alsace and Lorraine. At the same time, her designs on 
Tunis, and her precarious hold on Algiers, awaken the 
suspicions of Italy and Turkey, and cause divisions amongst her 
people. 

Germany, under the rule of Bismarck, the man of "Iron and 
Blood," is restive. His tendency to absolute government, his 
disregard of the political and civil rights of the people, his far- 
reached policy, and almost satanic WILL, make him hated and 
feared by his countrymen, and to a great extent by the 
surrounding nations. Old Kaiser William is in his eighty-fourth 
year. His throne, in the nature of things, must soon become 
vacant. It is doubtful 

R395 : page 6 

whether either in Germany or in England, another monarch will 
occupy the throne. Republicanism, if not communism, abide 
their time in both countries, to assert their rights and show their 
power. 



Russia is a dark waste where terror reigns. The crushed worms 
turn on the iron-heeled oppressors, and plot in secret and stab in 
darkness, and drive the tyrant and his minions into their guarded 
palaces, haunted by horrors. 

Italy has a dread skeleton in the midst of her capital. The Pope is 
a continual menace to her stability as a nation, and the security 
of her government. At any hour papal fanaticism may burst forth 
like a cyclone and spread desolation through all his domain. The 
votaries of the Pope, in almost all Catholic countries, are ready 
at the call of the "Holy Father" to rush to his rescue— or, in other 
words, drive out the Italian king and government, and place the 
Pope on the throne of his predecessors. 

In the meantime, Egypt, the most ancient of kingdoms, and, as 
predicted of her when at the height of her power, "the meanest 
of nations" starts to the forefront and arrests the attention of the 
world. The Khedive, a foreign prince, under the nominal 
sovereignty of the Sultan of Constantinople, trembles on his 
throne, and "bows to the will of the nation. " That will is the 
exaltation of Arabi Bey, his enemy, to the control of all the 
citadels and forces of Egypt. "Egypt for the Egyptians," is the 
war cry of the natives, and for once in thousands of years the 
foreigner is flying from the Egyptian. 

England and France have sent their war ships to the mouth of 
the Nile. But menace has had no effect on the leaders of the 
Egyptian army. Torpedoes have been laid along the channel of 
the harbor of Alexandria, and resistance to all foreign 
intervention has been fiercely avowed. 

But while England and France have undertaken to settle the 
affairs of Egypt, the Sultan of Turkey has been playing a double 
game. He has given public assurances to the Khedive of support, 
while he has secretly encouraged the insurgents. And then 
Russia, Germany, Austria, and Italy, claim to have a voice and a 
part in the settlement of Egyptian affairs as a European 
question— indeed a world-wide one. 

What the outcome of all this will be, no human foresight can 
determine. But a half million of soldiers, armed with breech- 
loading rifles, in each of the countries named— all ready for 
action— the rulers of those countries anxious to divert the 
discontented peoples by forcing wars— the mutual jealousies of 
these rival powers, and the difficulties of adjusting the "Eastern 
Question," now centered in the Egyptian crisis-all are 
portentous. The world is in arms. A crisis is impending. Lord, 
haste the day when he whose right to reign shall come, and 
peace and joy and righteousness shall clothe the earth in beauty. - 
-Christian Repository. 



R395 : page 6 



"Let us remember that all our safety depends upon our 
cleaving, with full purpose of heart, to the slightest 
manifestation of Christ's wishes. Thus the many voices there are 
in the world will not move us from our steadfastness, nor will 
the unstable sea of deceitful, carnal interest be permitted to 
overwhelm our bark, nor hide from our eyes the light of 
heaven. " 



R395 : page 6 

THE SEVEN LAST PLAGUES. 

"And I saw another sign in heaven, great and wonderful, seven 
angels having the seven last plagues; [last] because by them the 
wrath of God was to be completed." Rev. 15:1. DIAGLOTT. 

Among the pictures of this wonderful book of symbols, this 
one of the pouring out of the "seven vials of wrath" stands out in 
marked prominence. As its name indicates, it is understood to be 
the closing act in the drama of this age. An important difference 
exists between our view and that of many others, however, in 
that they suppose the end of the age to be accompanied by the 
destruction of the people, and of the earth itself; while we 
understand that it is the ending of the present reign of evil, and a 
necessary preparation of mankind for the reign of righteousness. 
The connections in which we find the vials mentioned in the 
record, are in harmony with our views, and contradictory to 
theirs: it is followed by the symbolic pictures of the new age — 
new Heaven and Earth, binding of Satan, and reign of Christ. 

The great source of error in understanding these, as all of 
Revelation's symbols, is a too literal interpretation. It is read as 
though it were a statement of facts, instead of a statement of 
symbols. Before proceeding to the account of the plagues, the 
inspired penman records another symbol-the "sea of glass." 
This indicates that it stands related to the plagues, hence we will 
consider it first. From all the connections, we understand that it 
immediately precedes the plagues. 

"And I saw as it were a glassy sea, mingled with fire, and the 
conquerors of the Beast, and of his Image, and the number of his 
name, standing on the glassy sea, having harps of God. " 

Who these are, is shown by what they overcome— viz., the Beast, 
Image, and Number. Here we see the importance of an 
understanding of the symbols of chapter thirteen; for unless we 
understood what those symbols meant, we could not understand 
who is overcoming their influence. In this way God has made 
his Word self-interpreting. The understanding of one part or 
symbol is the key to an understanding of another. In harmony, 
then, with Rev. 13, we understand the overcomers here referred 
to, to be those Christians who are free from Papacy-the Beast- 



and from organized sectarian Protestantism —the Image— and 
from all who bear the characteristics of the number -that is, 
free, to the extent that these have not the slightest influence over 
our actions, professions, or thoughts —free indeed. 

This serves, too, to show about when the plagues are due, and 
when this sea of glass condition may be reached; for, if, as 
seems clear, the Image was formed by the organization of the 
"Evangelical Alliance," in 1846, then it is equally clear, that the 
overcomers of the "Image" could not occupy this position of 
favor and exaltation prior to that date. This furnishes a general 
reason for believing that the plagues must commence this side of 
the date mentioned, since it is during the pouring out of the 
plagues that the overcomers occupy this "sea of glass" 
condition. 

Having, then, ascertained who these overcomers are, and about 
when they thus stand, we pass on to consider the sea of glass 
mingled with fire, on which they stand. Sea, as heretofore 
explained, we understand to symbolize the masses of the people, 
and fire to symbolize judgments, or trouble. We therefore 
interpret this to mean -the people in trouble, under the 
judgments of God. Above the troubled people are the 
overcomers —calm, serene, untroubled. Their position shows 
that their standing is by faith. (Matt. 14:29.) To the eye of faith 
all is transparent. 

These overcomers sing a song. A song is a beautiful and 
harmonious expression. It is the song of Moses and the Lamb. 
That is, the song or preaching of these overcomers is in perfect 
accord with the Law and the Gospel. It is the same which Jesus 
(the "Lamb") taught, and which Moses taught in the Law and 
types. Not only does the description of the overcomers indicate 
that they are but a little fragment of the nominal church, but the 
words of this song teach us the same— that the class who 
proclaim these things are few. The words of the song are given, 
or the leading points of the preaching which will be done by the 
overcomers— "saying, Great and wonderful are thy works, O 
Lord God, the omnipotent. " 

Alas ! how few are sufficiently acquainted with God's plans to 
recognize the fact that they are great and wonderful. Very few 
can sing this first note of the song, and fewer yet can sing it to 
its close. The second note is, "Righteous and true are thy ways, 
O King of the nations." [Diaglott.] Look at this; we can sing of 
the righteousness and justice of God's dealing with the nations, 
since we have come to see how he has permitted evil and death 
to come upon all, as a lesson to teach us to appreciate life and 
righteousness. We can see righteousness, justice, mercy, and 
love in God's dealings, since we see in his Word that there is to 
be "a restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. " (Acts 
3:21.) Who, but those who see the restitution to be accomplished 



in the next age, could sing this part of the song? Not one; 
Christendom in general fears to think of God's justice in dealing 
with the nations in general, the great majority of whom have 
gone down into death without any knowledge of the only name 
whereby we must be saved. The righteousness, and justice, and 
love of God's dealing, can only be seen by looking at the work 
of the next, as well as at that of present and past ages. Yes 
indeed, we rejoice to proclaim to all who have an "ear to hear"— 
Just and true are Jehovah's ways in ruling the nations. 

The next note is in perfect harmony with the last- "Who shall 
not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name? Since thou alone art 
bountiful. " Our great Creator's every dealing is an act of favor- 
even the evil which man was permitted to bring upon himself is 
to be overruled for good; and we ask ourselves the question, 
Who shall not fear and glorify God when, in the coming age, his 
wonderful goodness is manifested, and when the knowledge of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth. We would be inclined to 
believe that every one should praise his love everlastingly, were 
it not that Scripture clearly discloses a second death, which tells 
of some who will be accounted worthy of it. 

"For all the nations shall come and worship in thy presence, 
because thy righteous acts are manifested. " This is the last note 
of the song, and is full of force and meaning. How few are 
proclaiming, either publicly or privately, this part of the song. 
Some believe that many of the nations now dead are in a place 
of mental or physical torture, there to remain to all eternity. 
Others claim that they are dead, and will never again have life; 
others that those who are dead, will be raised from death to pass 
a mock trial, and be destroyed. But how few can sing this song 
of restitution, declaring that all nations shall yet come from 
death, and shall worship their Lord and Redeemer, when 
brought to a knowledge of the truth. (1 Tim. 2:4.) Even Sodom, 
a nation long since destroyed, shall come and worship. (Ezek. 
16:48-63.) 

Another symbol is the "harp of God. " The song is sung in tune 
and harmony with the harps. The harp of God we believe to be 
the Bible, its many strings or chords are the Law, the Prophets, 
the Psalms, the Gospels, and Revelation. Many Christians have 
the "harp," but few have it so strung and tuned that they can 
bring forth harmony enough to accompany the song of Moses 
and the Lamb. The overcomers have the harp well in hand-in 
fact, without it and the inspiration of its music, they never could 
have been overcomers. They have them tuned, too. How forcible 
this picture! Truly, it would have been incomplete without the 
harp of God. 

Another thought is suggested— the overcomers not only have the 
harp, and know how to sing this song of restitution, but they do 
sing it. There are some of God's children who have their harp 
considerably in tune, and who know the song, but who do not 



proclaim the glad tidings of coming restitution; they fear to face 
the opposition which this course would bring-the unpopularity 
which would attach to anything outside the religious rut of so 
called orthodoxy. These are not among the overcomers; they 
have not yet got a victory over the influence of the Beast and 
Image; they are yet in some bondage. All of the overcomers sing 
the song. Each of us should inquire of our own hearts whether 
we are tuning our harps and singing this song-Now is the time. 

Many of the Lord's dear children in mystic Babylon's captivity, 
have sat down beside her rivers so defiled by the mire of 
worldliness, and wept when they remembered God's favor to 
Zion in times past. They laid aside the harps of God, hanging 
them on the willows that weep over the grave of truth in 
Babylon. They that carried them away captive (the Babylon 
system) require of them a song and mirth, saying, "Sing us one 
of the songs of Zion." Yes, Babylon would like to see Zion's 
captives happy beside her muddy streams; and in the midst of 
her worldliness, would like to hear an occasional song of Zion, 
that she might boast of the Lord's favor. But "how shall the 
captive daughters of Zion sing the Lord's song in a strange 
land?" (Psa. 137:1-6.) To all such we cry: Take down your harps 
from the willows; flee out of Babylon into full liberty of thought 
and expression; tune your harps and sing the song of Moses and 
the Lamb. Sing of God's mighty love and the "restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets." 

The next thing shown to John is the coming of the seven 
messengers out of the temple to pour out the plagues. Since it is 
the saints who are "to execute the judgments written," (Psa. 
149:9), we interpret this "seven angels" to mean the saints. The 
living saints being the representatives or active agents of the 
entire anointed company— as "the 

R395 : page 7 

feet of Him. " It is the feet, or last part, who sing the restitution 
song of Moses and the Lamb, upon the glassy sea mingled with 
fire. How beautiful are the feet of Him that bringeth good 
tidings, that publisheth peace, that saith unto Zion, Thy God 
reigneth. (Isa. 52:7.) These same feet, as representatives on earth 
of the entire body, are to pour out the seven vials, or be 
associated more or less directly with the judgments coming. 
These are clothed with white linen; these have kept their 
wedding garments; they are robed in the righteousness of Christ- 
-"justified by his blood." They are the servants of God; the 
girdle representing a servant, and the gold of it representing 
divinity. They, as the servants of God, have a divine service to 
accomplish. 

When they had all gone forth from the temple it was filled with 
smoke, so that none could enter it. The temple symbolizes the 



church. The coming of the messengers out of the temple, 
symbolizes the coming of the overcomers out of the nominal 
church. When all such have come out, the temple (church) will 
be so full of smoke, (confusion) that no man would care to go 
into it. The messengers are now nearly all out, and already the 
smoke, or confusion, in the church, is considerable. Few care to 
enter even now, and recent reports of various sects show that the 
increase has been very slight for the past year. When we 
remember that the large proportion of new members received is 
from the Sunday School, we can realize how, even now, very 
few men (persons of mature thought) enter the nominal temple. 
The nominal church will be in this confusion until the seven 
plagues are poured out; during that time the Babylon, or 
confusion element, will be destroyed, and the cleansed temple of 
truth be again opened to receive justified believers— then as heirs 
of the earthly promises. 

[TO BE CONTINUED IN NOVEMBER NUMBER.] 
R396 : page 7 

THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 

An article recently published in a contemporary magazine, is 
sent us by a reader of the TOWER for an answer and criticism. 
The article in question claims to find a great deal of 
"Dispensational difference" between the expressions "kingdom 
of heaven" and "kingdom of God. " 

The writer endeavors, but signally fails, to prove that "kingdom 
of God" means a kingdom in men's hearts, and that the 
"kingdom of heaven" means the Millennial kingdom. While a 
great mistake made by Christians in general, undoubtedly is to 
ignore "dispensational statements" of truth, yet we believe it to 
be equally erroneous to go to an opposite extreme, and make 
differences where none really exist. It is difficult to estimate 
which of these extremes are the most injurious to truth. To 
sustain this theory, the writer is led to claim that Matthew's is 
"the Jew gospel," while the others, especially John's, are "the 
Christian's gospel." 

What absurdity-were not those writers-Matthew, Mark, Luke, 
and John— merely historians? Do they not witness merely, or 
record the things which Jesus said and did? How, then, could 
one write a Jewish, and another a Christian gospel? The usual 
view is that each of these evangelists wrote independently of the 
others, except John, whose gospel is supposed to have been 
written partly to supply points remembered by him, which had 
been omitted by the other writers. Each writer evidently has 
used some license in the use of words, hence no two give their 
accounts in exactly the same words. 



In the matter in question, Matthew uses the terms, "kingdom of 
heaven" and "kingdom of God" interchangeably, while the other 
writers use only the one, the last term. The word heavens 
signifies high, hence the kingdom of heaven is the high 
kingdom- higher than earthly dominions, and of course that is 
the "kingdom of God." We give more space to the consideration 
of this subject than we really think it worthy of, because quite a 
good many called "Brethren" hold tenaciously to it, and because 
we would like to prove to all that a theory based on a twist or 
turn of a word, and not on a general principle of Bible teaching, 
is unworthy of our consideration. 

That the two expressions are used interchangeably, will be seen 
by examining the following Scriptures: 

In Luke 19:11,12; and 21:31. The kingdom of God is mentioned 
in such an unequivocal manner, that none can doubt that the 
Millennial Reign is referred to. This of itself would destroy the 
theory quoted; but we will give some unquestionable proof that 
the expressions are interchangeable ones. In the following 
Scriptures, Matthew uses the words "kingdom of heaven," while 
other evangelists use "kingdom of God." 

Matt. 4:17: "Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." Mark 1:14,15 reads, "Jesus came 
into Galilee preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and 
saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at 
hand." 

R397 : page 7 

Matt. 13:11: "It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom of heaven. " 

Mark 4:11: "Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the 
kingdom of God. " 

Matt. 19:23. "A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. " In verse 24, we have proof that Matthew uses the 
expressions interchangeably, for he there says "kingdom of 
God." The same language is quoted in both cases, kingdom of 
God, in Mark 10:24,25, and Luke 18:24 and 25. 

Matt. 19:14: "Suffer.. .for of such is the kingdom of heaven." 
Mark 10:14, and Luke 18:16, read "kingdom of God." 

Matt. 13:31: "The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of 
mustard seed." Mark 4:30,31: "Whereunto shall we liken the 
kingdom of God... it is like a grain of mustard seed." Luke 13:18: 
"Unto what is the kingdom of God like?... It is like a grain of 
mustard seed. " 

We shall offer no further evidence, though more could be 
presented; we believe the above sufficient to convince any 
unprejudiced mind, and it is useless to write for others. 



The theory which the foregoing view is required to support may 
be shown: How else, they inquire, can the church now be the 
kingdom of God in its present time of suffering; and be the 
kingdom in a still different sense during the Millennial reign, 
unless the present condition be called the kingdom of God, and 
the future the kingdom of heaven? We answer, no such 
distinction is needed. The church is the kingdom now, only in 
the prospective sense that a babe is a man. The kingdom is now 
ours by faith, in the same way that we have every other heavenly 
blessing. When we are exalted and glorified with our Head and 
Bridegroom, Jesus— that will be our exaltation, or the kingdom 
of God, the heavenly kingdom, "set up." (Dan. 2:44.) 

But they question— How is it that Luke says of the kingdom of 
God, it shall be within you, and cometh not with observation? 
We reply, you misread Luke 17:20. It speaks not of a kingdom 
present within those "Scribes and Pharisees -hypocrites," but of 
the manner in which the kingdom would come-It "cometh not 
with observation, neither shall ye say, lo, here! nor lo, there!" 
for it will be among men-a present, but invisible, power or 
government. 

In due time it will bring mankind into harmony with itself. Then 
the kingdom of God will be "among men"; then men will be 
visible representatives of the invisible or spiritual kingdom. To 
this agree the words of John 3:3,5, and 1 Cor. 15:50. Thus 
considered, the record is harmonious, without straining out a 
gnat and swallowing a camel, as our brother whom we criticize 
has done. 



R397 : page 7 

THE BODY, THE BRIDE OF CHRIST. 

We are always sorry to differ with those we love; yet, when 
necessary for the truth's sake, we must do it in the spirit of 
meekness— the spirit of love-the spirit of Christ. We believe that 
it is our Lord's wish that we "contend earnestly for the faith once 
delivered to the saints"; therefore we "have not shunned to 
declare unto you all the counsel of God. " We find that among 
the Apostles there were differences. (Acts 15; Gal. 2:11; 1 Tim. 
1:19-20; 2 Tim. 2:16-18.) Hence, we need not be surprised if 
such should be the case in this day. But should the faithful 
servant ignore doctrinal differences to maintain peace? Did Paul 
do so? No; as faithful servants, we should contend earnestly, at 
the same time striving to maintain unity of spirit in the bonds of 
peace, yet never sacrificing truth for either unity or peace, else 
we should not be able to grow in grace and knowledge— up to a 
stature of perfection in Christ. 



In its last two issues, Zion's Day Star presents, as new light, the 
idea that the body of Christ-the church -is different from the 
Bride of Christ -the church. They claim that the "body" means 
those who overcome the world following the example of Jesus, 
their Head (which we always held); but deny that the bride is the 
same class of overcomers. They claim that the body, with the 
head, constitute the Bridegroom, who, in due time, will be 
united to the Bride; and they claim that the Bride company, 
through weakness of the flesh, are not overcomers of the world, 
but are overcome by the world [the class whom both they and 
we have always heretofore recognized as the servant company 
of Rev. 7:9-17]. 

The question arises, is this true— have we heretofore labored 
under a misapprehension? We are not to conclude that because it 
is different from what we had thought, therefore it is erroneous; 
neither are we to conclude that because it is new, therefore it is 
new light. It might be new error. It might be darkness. Neither 
should we judge of its truth or falsity by the measure of our love 
for those who advocate or oppose the view. This is a lesson 
which all need to learn: that while human teachers are necessary, 
and should be esteemed very highly for their work's sake (1 
Thes. 5:13), yet they are to be respected and heeded only so far 
as they can show us a thus saith the Lord, for their teachings. Let 
us, then, inquire of the Lord what is truth on this subject, and 
receive his reply from his Word. 

When Jesus would teach the nature of the kingdom of God, he 
gives a number of parables or illustrations:— The kingdom of 
heaven is likened unto a merchantman seeking pearls; it is like 
to a man seeking a treasure in a field; it is like a young 
nobleman going into a far country to receive a kingdom; it is 
like to a grain of mustard seed; it is like to leaven hid in meal, 
etc., etc. Shall we conclude that each of these pen-pictures 
represents a different kingdom? If so, how many kingdoms of 
heaven there are, and how different from each other! But no; we 
all recognize the fact that these are different views of the same 
kingdom; that different illustrations are given to show more 
clearly different features of that one kingdom. 

Again, in Rev. 20 and 21 we have seven different pen-pictures 
of the operation and results of the kingdom established-(l) 
Satan bound for a thousand years (vss. 1-3); (2) Earthly thrones 
cast down, and the Overcomers reign with Christ a thousand 
years (vs. 4); (3) The holy and blessed of the first resurrection 
live and reign a thousand years with Christ (vss. 6-10); (4) The 
great white throne-Heaven and Earth flee-The dead judged 
from open books (vss. 11-15); (5) New Heaven and Earth-Holy 
City-its blessings to mankind (chap. 21:1-8); (6) The Bride, the 
Holy City— the kingdom of God come to earth (vss. 10-27); (7) 
The water of life flows freely— the world's troubles healed-the 
curse destroyed (chap. 22:1-3). 



Should we conclude that these are seven different kingdoms in 
operation, or, that they picture seven different thousand years? 
No; these views present to us from various standpoints the work 
of the one kingdom during the one thousand years. The saints 
live and reign at the same time that Satan is bound; and the 
dead, small and great, are brought to a full trial before the great 
white throne of justice during the same time, etc. 

When we read the many different titles of Jesus-the Prophet, 
Priest, King, the Son of God, Son of man, Man of sorrows, the 
Lamb of God, etc., should we conclude that these titles belong 
to different beings? Or, do they not belong to the same, and do 
they not all represent, from different standpoints the "Son of 
God"? 

So, if we look at the various names given by inspiration to the 
church of Christ, we find them many; we find, too, that each of 
these illustrative names serves to show some feature of our 
work, or of our relationship to Jesus better than any other title. 

The church is a company of soldiers fighting a good fight- 
overcoming the world under the leadership of the "Captain of 
our salvation." It is also a "royal priesthood"; each overcomer is 
a priest, and all regard Jesus as the High or Chief Priest of our 
profession. This shows the life of sacrifice. Another illustration 
is that of pupils or disciples learning and copying from their 
Master's example and precept, for "He hath left us an example 
that we should follow in his steps." (1 Pet. 2:21.) 

Another illustration of the church's position and relationship to 
Jesus, is furnished in the figure— the body of Christ. This 
illustration does not show the sacrifice, as does the priest 
illustration; it does not show the battle with the world, as does 
the soldier illustration; it does not show the following of Christ 
as our pattern and example; but it does show a feature which 
does not appear in any 

R397 : page 8 

of the other illustrations, viz.: the very intimate and close 
relationship which exists between Jesus and his church, and 
among all the members of the church. As every member of the 
human body moves under the control of the head, so every 
member of Christ is controlled by the will or spirit of our Lord, 
the Head of the church. As every pain or suffering of each 
member of the human body is known and shared by each other 
member, and especially by the head, so each member of the 
body of Christ is in sympathy with the other, and the Head, 
Jesus— "knows our every weakness." 

Our head is quickly touched with a feeling of our infirmities, 
and applies the relief, using one or another member of the body 
to bind up and comfort and bear the burdens of the injured 
member. 



R398 : page 8 

But, while this last is one of the most beautiful of the many 
illustrations of our relationship to Jesus, still each of the others 
are necessary. 

The temple is another figure and name given to the church. 1 
Cor. 3:16.) At one time each Christian is compared to a temple, 
in which God, by his spirit, dwells; and again, each Christian is 
compared to a living stone in the one great temple which God is 
building during this age, and from which his blessing is to flow 
to the world during the next age. This last figure shows the 
growth of the church as the other figures do not show it. Neither 
the soldier figure, nor the priest figure, nor the disciple figure, 
nor the body figure, none of these show the growth of the church 
as a whole; but the temple figure does show it. We, as living 
stones, are cut, polished, and builded, and so through this age, 
the temple "groweth," until Jesus, the top-stone, shall crown it. 
Then it will be perfect and ready for its great Millennial work. 

How necessary, then, are all these figures. Consider, for a 
moment, that if any figure were omitted, much would be lost. If 
we had only the figure of "the body," how would additions be 
shown? Suppose a body which received additional members- 
one joint, one toe, one finger, one eye, one ear, one member, at a 
time, it would be an absurd figure, and would not illustrate the 
addition of members to the church, as the temple figure does, 
though it (the body figure) well illustrates the oneness and 
perfection of the entire living church at any stage of its 
existence. It shows the possibility of the perfect thing growing 
or maturing in perfection. Thus, we are perfect in Christ from 
the very first, yet we are to grow in grace, etc. "Let as many as 
are perfect be thus minded." (Phil. 3:15.) 

And now we come to another figure of the church, viz. : that of 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife. This is the figure which our brethren 
think should be regarded as representing a different company- 
not the overcomers -not the body of Christ. Their argument is, 
If we are the body of Christ, we cannot be the Bride, because, 
say they, the body of Christ is to be married to the Bride of 
Christ. 

At first sight there is a plausibility here, but let us remember that 
each of these figures stands separate and alone, and the moment 
we begin to blend any two of them we get confusion. Now, let 
us see; suppose we were to say, We are to be members of the 
body of Christ, hence when we read of Jesus as the Captain, we 
should conclude that we are not the soldiers fighting the good 
fight, for we are members of the Captain's body. Or, when we 
read of Jesus as the Master, who set his disciples an example to 
follow in his footsteps, should we conclude that we are not 
disciples or followers, because we are of his body; and say we 
could not walk in his footsteps because we are members of his 



feet, making the footprints, and therefore could not follow them? 
Or, should we say that we are not members of the holy temple, 
because we are members of his body, and reason that a body 
could live in a temple, but could not be a temple? This would be 
as wise as to say that we could not be represented by the bride 
figure, because we are represented in the body figure. Who 
would disclaim being of the "royal priesthood" because another 
figure shows that we are members of the body? (1 Pet. 2:9.) 

Thus we see that if we try to blend these figures, we get 
confusion. Yet, who will claim that each of these figures 
represent different classes? No one; they each represent some 
special feature of our relationship. 

We next pass on, to notice that there is a relationship between 
Jesus and his church better illustrated by the Bride and 
Bridegroom figure, than by any other. Jesus went away, saying, 
"I go to prepare a place (home) for you, and I will come again 
and receive you unto myself. " How beautifully this is illustrated 
by the earthly marriage relationship. The time for marriage is 
not yet; the intended husband goes to a far country, promising to 
return and claim his faithful betrothed, and cause her to share his 
wealth, his name, his honor, etc., and to make her joint-heir to 
all his inheritance. 

The one condition on which all is promised is love and 
faithfulness— a love which overcomes the painfulness of lonely 
waiting, and surmounts the difficulties of the way, ever praying 
"Come, Lord (husband) Jesus, come quickly." 

What other illustration would so clearly and faithfully represent 
the relationship between the church and her Lord during the 
time of his absence? The body figure fails entirely to represent 
this. Suppose a head cut off and separated far from a body, yet 
both alive and longing for union. It would be an absurdity. But 
when we take the figure of the church, so repeatedly presented a 
virgin (pure woman), espoused to Christ, we can see how the 
absent Bridegroom and the waiting Bride look forward to the 
time of their union. The loving devotion of each is beautifully 
pictured here. And, as a true bridegroom desires for his bride, 
one whose love could overcome the obstacles in the way, so 
Jesus will claim for his bride only such as overcome the world, 
the flesh, and the devil, which together conspire to allure her 
from her absent Lord. The inspiration of the promise -"Faithful 
is he that calleth you who also will do it"— will keep his faithful 
Bride "unspotted from the world. " 

Note how plainly the Scriptures teach that Jesus, personally, is 
the Bridegroom, and not Jesus and the overcomers. John speaks 
of Jesus personally as the bridegroom. (John 3:29.) Jesus also 
speaks of himself individually as the Bridegroom (Matt. 9:15; 
Mark 2:19; Luke 5:34.) In Matt. 25:1,5,6,10, the Bridegroom is 
four times mentioned, and who will say that any of them could 



be applied to other than the individual Bridegroom, Jesus? No 
virgin went forth in any sense to meet a multitudinous 
bridegroom. The midnight cry was not, Behold, a multitudinous 
bridegroom cometh, nor did a multitudinous bridegroom in any 
sense tarry. 

The glory, the honor, the power, all came directly to the man, 
and the woman obtains joint-heirship by marriage (covenant 
union with him). So Jesus was the heir of all things (Heb. 1:2) 
and we inherited none of them, until called by the Father, we 
become his betrothed, and now we are heirs unitedly with him, 
for "He (the Father) that spared not his own Son, but delivered 
him up for us all, how shall he not with him, also freely give us 
all things?" Therefore, by union or marriage with him who is the 
heir, "all things are yours." 

To this view all the Old Testament types harmonize: Man was 
formed first, then woman was developed, and became his 
companion and joint-heir to the dominion of earth. So Jesus was 
first perfected, and since then the church is being prepared as a 
bride for her husband, and hopes to enter the joys of her Lord 
(husband). Adam's sleep and the rending of his side did not 
directly produce Eve, but merely the rib from which Eve was 
formed by God's power. So Jesus' death did not produce the 
church directly, but it produced a justified humanity (a rib), 
which, by God's power, is transformed into the glorious divine 
likeness of the second Adam, and she henceforth becomes his 
bride and help-meet. 

It will not do, to say that Adam was the type of the body 
(church), as well as of Jesus, for Paul tells us that he was a type 
of Jesus personally. He says, "The first man was of the earth 
earthy, the second man was the Lord from heaven. " That Paul 
meant Jesus who had already been perfected on the plane of 
glory, is evident from his subsequent remark— "As we have born 
the image of the earthy, (Adam) we shall also bear the image of 
the heavenly," (Jesus, the anti-type). As Adam alone represented 
our Lord and Adam and his wife were unitedly called Adam, 
(Gen. 5:2,) so Jesus alone was the Christ, (anointed) yet when 
we as his wife are united to him, the one name stands for the 
united ONE-The Christ of God. 

Look too, at the striking type of Isaac and Rebecca. Abraham 
the type of Jehovah, sends his servant a type of the Spirit, to take 
a bride for Isaac, who typified Jesus, the Son and heir. Isaac was 
the rightful heir of Abraham without any bride, but when she 
was united to him she became a joint-heir. So Jesus was first and 
individually appointed "heir of all things" by Jehovah (Heb. 
1:2); and since then we are invited to be heirs of God, also joint 
or united heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

When we read- "We brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
promise, " we must remember how we became as Isaac. Not that 



we were created heirs and joint-heirs, but that we become such 
by reason of our espousal (covenant— marriage) with Jesus. 
Rebecca was an heir of Abraham and joint-heir with Isaac while 
journeying to his home, and yet it was by hope and faith, and 
depended on her completing the journey; so we are now heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Jesus by hope, by faith; but our full 
realization of it depends on our following on in the narrow way. 
We are "heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord 
(husband) if so be that we suffer with him," etc. Rom 8:17. 

Again, if the Bridegroom class, according to the Day Star, was 
not yet complete, how could Paul, in his day, addressing the 
church, say, "I have espoused you to one husband that I may 
present you as a chaste virgin to Christ"? Since every type of the 
Bridegroom and Bride shows that the Bridegroom was 
completed or perfected before the Bride was even called to 
union and joint-heirship, this is out of harmony with the view 
presented by our brethren. But it is entirely harmonious with the 
view we have all heretofore held, for Jesus was perfected in 
glory before the Spirit at Pentecost began to call the chaste 
virgin to be the "Bride, the Lamb's Wife. " 

No one can gainsay the fact that Jesus and Paul and Peter all 
recognized the calling of the Bride of Christ as in progress 
during the past eighteen 

R399 : page 8 

hundred years, and this of itself should be proof that the 
Bridegroom was Jesus, who alone was perfected on the spiritual 
plane, before the call of the church to be his bride. 

Paul's use of the two figures is clearly shown in Eph. 5. Here he 
does not blend, but links these illustrations -the body and bride, 
and shows them to refer to the same class. He is here addressing 
"the saints which were at Ephesus, and the FAITHFUL 
(overcoming ones) in Christ Jesus." (Chap. 1:1.) In chap. 1:23, 
he likens the church to the human body, of which Jesus is the 
Head; and in chap. 5:22-33, speaking to the same persons, he 
likens the church to husband and wife, exhorting husbands to 
love their wives, and wives to reverence their husbands, and 
thus exemplify the beautiful relationship between Jesus and his 
church. Verse 28 compares the wife to the body, saying, "So 
ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that 
loveth his wife loveth himself; for no man ever yet hateth his 
own flesh, but nourisheth it and cherisheth it, even as the Lord 
the church. " "For we (the same company-the church -the 
prospective bride) are members of his body, of his flesh, and of 
his bones." "For this cause (thus representing the heavenly 
union) shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall be 
joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh (one body). 
This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the 
church. " Could words express more plainly that the figures body 



and bride are used interchangeably, referring to the same class- 
the overcomers? 

When it is claimed that the title bride belongs to the class who 
are overcome by the world, and who do not keep their garments, 
etc., we object; we call attention to the fact that the Bride of 
Christ is everywhere spoken of as a "chaste virgin," and never as 
impure or in unholy alliance with the world (a harlot). But it is 
claimed that she comes out of Babylon! True, and who that is 
out and free did not come out of the Babylon or confusion? All, 
just as in the type all of typical Israel went into captivity, into 
literal Babylon, so here. It is well to read carefully the text, 
Come out of her (Babylon), my people, that ye be NOT 
PARTAKERS of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. 
(Rev. 18:4.) This shows that the class who are called out and 
obey are not partakers of Babylon's sins, but overcomers. 

In conclusion, since the Apostles urged the church as soldiers, as 
a priesthood, as disciples or imitators, as the body members, as 
living stones of the temple, and as "a chaste virgin, espoused to 
one husband-Christ,* we believe that all of these expressions 
were but variations of the same call, and to the same class, 
because during this Gospel Age there has been but one-the high 
calling; and all are "called in ONE HOPE of your calling. " 
Hence these distinctive titles refer, not to different classes, but to 
the same. 



*1 Tim. 6:12; Heb. 3:1; 1 Pet. 2:9,21; Eph 4:15,16; 1 Pet. 2:5; 
2 Cor. 11:2. 



R399 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 
PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER, 1882. 

NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars 
by mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money 
Order or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be sixty-five cents a year. Please send us no foreign money 
or postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R399 : page 1 

SUNDAY SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENTS. 

Inasmuch as this number of ZION'S WATCH TOWER will go 
to each of the ninety thousand Sunday School Superintendents 
of all denominations in the United States, it is proper for us to 
introduce our paper to them specially. 

The special mission of ZION'S WATCH TOWER is to clearly 
and forcibly elucidate and present truth on all religious topics, 
without fear or favor of any except our heavenly Master. It is 
strictly unsectarian and follows no formulated creed. Its method- 
-comparing Scripture with Scripture, we believe to be the 
correct one for the elucidation of truth. Thus getting God's own 
explanation of His will and plan, we realize that 

God is his own interpreter, 
And He will make it plain. 

While desirous of the esteem and fellowship of every child of 
God and loath to offend any, we yet stand ready to offend all, if 
a clear and forcible presentation of any Scriptural teaching shall 
have that effect. We discuss all Bible doctrines, not shunning the 
most abstruse-an uncommon thing among Christian journals. 
This feature makes our paper valuable to Sunday School 
Superintendents and Bible teachers, and advanced Bible 
scholars, in this day when infidelity is challenging nearly every 
doctrine held by the churches. Surely there never was a time 
when an open and fearless examination of every point of 
doctrine was so much more needed than practiced. An 
intelligent understanding of Scripture was never more necessary 
than now. 

We desire to assist in this great work, and with others to raise up 
the standard of truth against error in every form. We make no 
claim to defend every theory and creed of Christendom-this 
would be impossible, since many of them contradict each other— 
but we endeavor to draw direct from Scripture its uncolored and 
unbiased teaching on all questions. Believing that the true basis 
of Christian Union is a correct understanding of God's Word, 
rather than an ignoring of differences, we seek for this. 

This sample copy is sent you in order that if desired, it may be 
one of your assistants in seeking for Scriptural truths. We will 
send it on trial. 

THREE MONTHS FREE. 

to all Sunday School Superintendents, teachers and Bible 
scholars. We therefore invite you to send in your names at once. 



R399 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The fulfillment of Scripture prophecies as marked by the 
beginning of the return of Israel to Palestine, continues 
increasingly to have the attention of thinking Christians. 

The following is extracted from a letter in an English paper by 
Mr. Charles Reade, the well-known novelist, whose remarkable 
conversion occurred last year. 

THE PROPHETIC ASPECT OF 
THE JEWISH PERSECUTION. 

"The Jewish nation, though under a cloud, will eventually 
resume their ancient territory, which is so evidently kept waiting 
for them. The prophecies are clear as day on two points: That 
the Jews are to repossess Palestine, and indeed, to rule from 
Lebanon to Euphrates; and that this event is to be the first of a 
great series of changes leading to a vast improvement in the 
condition of poor suffering mankind and of creation in general. 
Now, we have here in prospect a glorious event as sure as the 
sun will rise to-morrow. The only difference is that the sun will 
rise at a certain hour, and the Jews will occupy Syria and resume 
their national glory at an uncertain day. No doubt it is the foible 
of mankind to assume that an uncertain date must be a distant 
one. But that is unreasonable. Surely it is the duty of wise and 
sober men to watch precursory signs and lend their humble 
cooperation, should so great a privilege be accorded to us. 

"This sudden persecution of the Jews in the very nation where 
they are most numerous —may it not be a precursory sign, and a 
reminder from Providence that their abiding city is not in 
European Tartary? I almost think some such reminder was 
needed; for when I was a boy, the pious Jews still longed for the 
Holy Land. They prayed, like Daniel, with their windows open 
toward Jerusalem. 

Yet now that the broken and impoverished Saracen would cede 
them territory at one-tenth of its agricultural and commercial 
value, a cold indifference seems to have come over them. I often 
wonder at this change of sentiment about so great a matter, and 
in so short a period, comparatively speaking, and puzzle myself, 
as to the reason. 

Two solutions occur to me. 1. Dispersed in various nations, 
whose average inhabitants are inferior in intelligence and 
forethought to themselves, they thrive as individual aliens more 
than they may think so great a multitude of Jews could thrive in 
a land of their own, where blockheads would be scarce. 2. They 
have for centuries contracted their abilities to a limited number 
of peaceful arts and trades; they may distrust their power to 
diversify their abilities, and be suddenly a complete nation, with 



soldiers, sailors, merchants, husbandmen, as well as financiers 
and artists. 

But it is now proved that sojourning among inferior nations has 
more drawbacks than living at home. True, the Russian yokel 
has for years been selling to the Jews his summer labor in 
winter, and at a heavy discount; but the improvident Russians 
have turned like wild beasts upon them, and outwitted lawfully, 
have massacred them contrary to law. Palestine can be colonized 
effectually from Russia alone, where there are three millions of 
Jews trembling for life and property; and the rest would follow. 
As to the second objection, history is a looking-glass at our 
backs. Whatever Jews have done Jews may do. They are a 
people 

R400 : page 1 

of genius; and genius is not confined by nature, but by will, by 
habit or by accident. What have these people tried and failed in? 
Warriors, writers, builders, merchants, lawgivers, husbandmen; 
and supreme in all! In this history repeats itself. 

"They shall be great in the arts of peace and war, and their 
enemies melt away before them like snow off a dyke. Should 
they seem to require help from any other nation at starting, 
blessed will be the nation that proffers it; and the nation that 
persecutes them will be made an example of in some way or 
other. Therefore, if by any chance this recent outrage should 
decide the Jewish leaders to colonize Palestine from Russia, let 
us freely offer ships, seamen, money —whatever we are asked 
for. It will be a better national investment than Egyptian, 
Brazilian or Peruvian bonds." 

Thus we see that from every quarter thoughtful minds are 
beginning to note the evidences of another great dispensational 
change. It is to be a gradual change from the Gospel Age into 
the Millennial Age. The former closes with a night, the latter 
commences as a dawning day. It is the day foretold by prophets 
when the earth and groaning creation shall be blessed and 
liberated from the effects of sin-blight, and death. It is the day in 
which "the Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his 
wings"— when the great physician shall heal and revive sin-bitten 
humanity. In him shall all the families of the earth be blessed. 

A thousand years, Earth's coming glory, 
'Tis the glad time so long foretold; 
'Tis the glad day of promise given, 
Prophets foresaw in times of old. " 

The Gospel Age ends, not because it has failed, but because it 
has accomplished its object. It's object was to call out, select and 
perfect a small fragment of Earth's people-a "little flock" of 
overcomers of the world, accounted worthy to be exalted to a 
spiritual plane of existence and to share as the Bride of the 



Lamb of God, in his glorious work of blessing mankind in 
general during the incoming age. 

Fleshly Israel was cast off from all special favor of God when 
this age began, and Paul assures us that when the work of 
selecting the spiritual church is complete, God's favor will again 
cover them as a people. (See Rom. 11:25-32.) The fact that 
favor is now beginning to come to them, is therefore an 
incidental proof of our position-that we are in the lapping time 
of the two ages. 

Encouraging reports of the progress of truth come to us from 
every quarter. Infidels and backsliders, and wholly consecrated 
saints are studying the Bible more than ever before, to see if 
these things in which we rejoice are the teachings of the Word 
of God, and are coming to say of the beauty and grandeur of 
God's plan and word, as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon — 
The half had not been told me. No, dear friends, we do not 
pretend to have told you half of the goodness and love and 
power of our infinite Father, the God of all grace. We merely try 
to point you to the Word as the inexhaustible fountain of truth 
and knowledge, that together we might be able to some extent, 
to comprehend with all saints, the love of God which passeth 
knowledge. The more of our Father's character we see, the more 
we feel like exclaiming with Paul, "O, the depth of the riches 
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. " 

And the more we come to appreciate God, and His Word and 
plan, the more our hearts burn with a desire to make it known to 
all men; especially to those dear children of our Father, who are 
yet as we ourselves once were, blinded by ignorance of the true 
teachings of His Word, and dwarfed and fettered by the 
traditions of men, the creeds and theories of the sects. Praise 
God that the light is shining more and more, and others as well 
as we are being blessed by it. 

As we each come to see the truth, if it has its legitimate and 
intended effect upon our hearts and lives, it will be our delight to 
use all possible effort in making known the glad tidings to 
others: Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh 
shall find giving meat in due season to the household. (Matt. 
24:45,46.) We should be specially interested in making it known 
to every consecrated child of God, many of whom are almost 
starved. You may have for the asking abundance of reading 
matter for free distribution. 

A very large edition of this issue has been sent out in hope of 
awakening thinking Christians from the lethargy and worldliness 
which has so largely overspread Christendom. The topics 
presented will be new to many of them, and we trust that all 
thoroughly consecrated readers will test it, and decide on its 
truthfulness, not by their prejudices, not by any sectarian creed, 
but by the Word of God, the only proper and infallible test; 



remembering, that the cause of divisions or sects is, that each 
party defends its creed, instead of laying aside tradition or 
accepting the harmonious testimony of Scripture. 

We subjoin a few of the many letters constantly coming to hand, 
that you may know of the deep interest being felt among 
thinking Christians. 



NOTTINGHAM, ENGLAND. 

MY DEAR SIR-Permit me, though a stranger, to assure you 
that I can never feel sufficiently thankful that out of the 
thousands of copies of your book, "Food for Thinking 
Christians," distributed in this town, a copy fell into my hands; 
apparently it was the merest accident; but really I regard it as a 
direct providence. It has thrown light upon subjects which have 
perplexed me for years, and has made me feel more than ever 
what a glorious book the Bible is, how worthy of our 
profoundest study. At the same time, I came from the study of 
your book with the conviction that a very large proportion of the 
theology of our churches and schools is the merest scraps of 
human notions, and that our huge systems of theology, upon the 
study of which some of us have spent so many laborious years- 
only to be the worse confused and perplexed-are infinitely more 
the work of mistaken men, than the inspiration of the allwise 
God. 

However I may differ from the book in a few minor details, I 
found the main argument to be resistless, commending itself to 
both my head and my heart. Again let me thank you on my own 
behalf for the good I have received. 

I find at the close of it you make an offer to send copies to any 
who have reason to believe they can make a good use of them. 
In my church and congregation there is a number of intelligent 
persons who are interested in the second coming, and who 
would be only too glad to read your book. I could distribute 
seventy copies with advantage. You say, "Ask and ye shall 
receive." I have faith in your generosity. Believe me to remain 

Yours most faithfully, 

page 1 

LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY. 

GENTLEMEN-Having read with the most profound interest 
your publication entitled, "Food for Thinking Christians," and 
being fairly dazzled by the wonderful light it reveals on the great 
subject, I find myself thirsting for more knowledge from this 
seemingly inspired pen. 

Therefore in accordance with the invitation extended by you on 
the cover of this little work I ask that you send me a few copies 
of "The Tabernacle and its Teachings." 



With reference to the first-named book, permit me to say that I 
have never yet read or heard anything equal to that little volume 
in its influence upon my heart and life; and, to my mind, it 
answers most grandly and conclusively the great question, "Is 
life worth living?" Such views as it sets forth are bound to find 
response in the minds and hearts of all unbiased thinking 
Christians, for they bear the stamp of something greater than 
mere human conception. I only wish we could hear it from the 
pulpits; but I think this must shortly follow. It is good seed, and 
in its "due time" will come forth. 

Believe me, I am 

Very truly yours, 

page 2 

MIXER VILL, INDIANA. 

"ZION'S WATCH TOWER"-My dear good friends:-Your 
kind favor, "Food for Thinking Christians," reached me in due 
time. To say that it is an exceeding welcome gift but feebly 
expresses my appreciation and gratitude. I have learned what I 
never knew before, and it has brought to me such a flood of light 
that I am amazed at the grandeur of the scheme and plan of 
redemption. To allow the phrase, I have literally devoured it, 
and my soul is ravished with the indescribable excellency and 
magnitude of God's plan of salvation. Oh, how dull and blunted 
does now appear the common method of Christian instruction. 
Who can read these things and longer doubt and waver about the 
truth, beauty and inspiration of the Bible, or the manner in 
which its glorious truths should be inculcated and demonstrated. 
I trust and believe that the great Author of the Word will prosper 
and bless you abundantly. Whatever else you have of like nature 
for grateful hearts I trust you will favor your present 
correspondent with. 

Yours truly, 



AUSTINTOWN, O. 

DEAR BRO.-The publication entitled "Food for Thinking 
Christians," was duly received a few weeks ago, and I have 
carefully distributed the greater portion of them among such as 
would appreciate such teachings; and they all speak volumes of 
praise. It is indeed food for Christians-rich food. Would to God 
we could only have the whole world read and fully understand. 
May God bless the work, and may the blessed seed sown sink 
deep in each and every heart, and bear much fruit to the honor 
and glory of God. 

Yours, etc. 



R400 : page 2 



MT. CARMEL, INDIANA. 

MY DEAR BROTHER-I have long felt a desire for some 
communication in reference to those blessed matters that make 
us one in our Supreme Head. I have been made better 
acquainted with the way of life recently. The new food has 
revived my slumbering spirit and given me a keener desire for a 
knowledge of the Word of God, and better understanding of his 
ways and dealings. I have been so absorbed with these delightful 
matters that the things of this present life sink into comparative 
insignificance. I can now comprehend the Apostle's 
exclamation, "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his righteous acts and 
his ways past tracing out." How privileged and responsible are 
those who are made watchmen upon the towers of Zion, to give 
warning, guidance and instruction to those who are seeking and 
willing to accept truth at all hazards; pointing out to us the 
dangerous reefs and rocks, and the hidden shoals and sandbars. 

O that all would search for and receive present truth, with all its 
joyful satisfaction and the comforting assurances and 
instructions constantly afforded-the near or full completion of 
the Body of Christ to spread universally the "good tidings of 
great joy;" the presence of the glorious Head of the Church, the 
grand parousia, the returning. Blessed thought, can anything be 
more exhilarating than these and other kindred blessed 
assurances, and the ineffable glory of the whole church which is 
to follow. Haste, haste, thou blessed time of glory, when the 
anointed one shall reign and all powers but his shall end.... 

Truly your brother in the Lord. 
R400 : page 2 

GOD'S "LITTLE WHILE." 

Because of the shortness of human life, we act quickly 
ourselves and expect others to act so, and we can scarcely avoid 
carrying the same thought with us when we go to the 
investigation of God's Word. 

We read- "Yet a little while, and He that shall come, will come." 
Heb. 10:37, We think, as we look back at the eighteen centuries 
which have elapsed since our Lord's first advent, that it is not a 
"little while." No, to us it is a long while. Our ideas of long and 
short periods are drawn from our experience. When you were a 
child you thought as a child; you impatiently looked at an hour 
as a long time, and a year seemed an age if it intervened 
between you and some coveted object or enjoyment. Since you 
have grown to manhood or womanhood years are short; how 
quickly they fly. Your plans and arrangements reach out and 
embrace numbers of them. 



We see then that a long time and a "little while" are 
accommodative terms, to be understood in harmony with the 
standpoint of the one using them. When Paul used these words 
he was God's mouthpiece, therefore the word is God's-and it is 
from His standpoint, in whose sight "a thousand years are but as 
yesterday," and "as a watch in the night." If we remember that 
He is from everlasting to everlasting, we can readily see, that 
eighteen hundred years are but "a little while" to Him. In His 
sight it is only "a little while" since He created Adam. Let us not 
be so impatient; there is plenty of time in eternity. 

If we can get this standpoint of time- God's standpoint-it will 
assist us to see how "the Lord is not slack concerning His 
promises. " When God promised Eve that her seed should bruise 
the serpent's head, she doubtless supposed that God's promise 
had failed when one of her sons was slain and the other had 
become a branded murderer; and when Seth was born, as his 
name indicates, she thought him the promised seed. She came to 
death, and yet saw not God's promise fulfilled. Ages rolled on, 
generations came and went, Moses and Israel read the promise, 
but saw no fulfillment. Had it failed? No, four thousand years 
after Jesus appeared on earth; suffered, died, arose, ascended. 
Was the promise fulfilled? No, only in part. Satan's head (vital 
part) is not yet crushed; he rears it higher than ever; his control 
is greater perhaps than ever before. Does God's promise mean 
less than it says? No, give Him more time; it is only "a little 
while" since he promised, and "in due time" it will all be 
fulfilled. Because He saw that we would wonder whether He is 
"slack concerning His promises;" and because Jesus counts us 
His friends ("I have called you friends; for all things that I have 
heard of my Father I have made known unto you." Jno. 15:15), 
therefore He kindly gives us through Paul, a clue as to how and 
when this promise will be fulfilled. Rom. 16:20, reads: "The 
God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly." 

This is the same promise made to Eve, and though Jesus had 
died, Paul well knew that Satan was not yet bruised. 

But God has not forgotten his promise; He will perform, but 
when? "Shortly." Ah, God's "little while" again. But why say 
under your feet? What had the Christians at Rome to do with 
bruising Satan? Had God's Word not said the seed should do it? 
And was not Christ this seed? Yes, Jesus is the head over this 
seed, but we are members of the body under this head, as we 
read: "The God of our Lord Jesus Christ.. .gave Him to be the 
head over all things to the Church, which is His body. " Eph. 
1:17-22. He is the head.. .that in all things He might have the 
pre-eminence. Col. 1:18. 

Satan was permitted to bruise Jesus, the head. "He was bruised 
for our iniquity. " He was made perfect through suffering, and 
we, the members of the body, must suffer with Him if we would 
be made perfect. We must "fill up the measure of the afflictions 



of Christ. " The head suffered most, but we must be sharers of 
the suffering, if we would be glorified together. 

Therefore, "count it all joy," and "think it not strange concerning 
the fiery trial which is to try you as though some strange thing 
happened unto you: But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of 
Christ's sufferings; that when ("a little while," "shortly") His 
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad, also, with exceeding 
joy." 1 Pet. 4:12,13. Yes, we shall share in the "glory that shall 
follow," and part of that glory shall be to crush the serpent. Now 
he bruises our heel. (Ours are not vital wounds, they will all 
heal.) We shall crush his head (a vital part, indicating the utter 
extinction of evil— when death shall be destroyed, and "him that 
hath the power of death, that is the devil. ") As this has required 
time for its accomplishment, so have almost all the promises of 
God. Take 

THE PROMISE TO ABRAHAM. 

God had promised and sworn to Abraham that his seed should 
be as the sand of the sea -innumerable-and Abraham believed 
it; but as years rolled on he and Sarah thought it a long time. 
They were getting old, and yet had no child. Finally, they 
concluded to help God to fulfill his promise. How many 
Christians want to FORCE a construction on prophecy, in order 
to help God out of a supposed dilemma, and help him to fulfill 
his word. Let us rather wait on the Lord. 

God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain. " 

Yes, they would help God to keep his word, and as Sarah was 
too old, her maid must bear the promised seed. This was a 
human way to fulfill, but God waited fifteen years until they 
were both old, so that both Abraham and Sarah laughed when 
they were told that they should yet have a son Isaac. "After I am 
waxed old shall I have pleasure my lord, being old also?" But 
the answer was: "Is anything too hard for the Lord? At the time 
APPOINTED... Sarah shall have a son." 

O, that we could learn that- 

"It may not be my time, 
It may not be thy time, 
And yet in His own time, 
The Lord will perform. 

Ages have rolled around, yet the seed of Abraham, although a 
nation and partially possessing Canaan for a time, have never 
yet had those promises to Abraham FULFILLED. 

"I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed 
after thee. " "And I will give unto thee and to thy seed after thee, 
the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for 
an everlasting possession. " 



But Paul shows us that there was a deeper meaning than the 
surface promise couched in the utterances of God to the seed of 
Abraham. Not only the fleshly children, but the children of faith 
have a share. 

"Now, to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He 
saith not, And to seeds as of many; but as of one, 'And to thy 
seed'-which is Christ.". ..And if ye be Christ's (if you have been 
"baptised into Christ, put on Christ," become "members of His 
body," if ye be the antitypical bride of the Lamb"), then (and 
only then, no other way), are ye Abraham's SEED and HEIRS; 
according to promise." Gal. 3:14 and 29. Jesus individually is 
the heir of all, and we by nature have no claims of heirship, but 
by our union (marriage) with Him we become heirs-joint-heirs 
(united) with Jesus Christ our Lord or husband. 

Here again we realize that God's "little while" is to man a great 
while; but surely and steadily the members of the body of Christ 
are being developed, and in due time they will be united to their 
Head, and with Him glorified-constituting in the complete 
sense "the seed"--and then, never fully until then, can it be true 
of Abraham and his seed: -"In thee shall all nations be blessed." 
(Gal. 3:8.) Then "A king shall reign in righteousness and princes 
shall rule in judgment and under that righteous reign and rule 
"all the families of the earth shall be blessed," for then "the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. " But there, are 

PROMISES TO THE NATURAL SEED, 

as well as to the spiritual. They never have and do not now 
possess Canaan as an "everlasting possession." The prophets tell 
us that "the Lord shall yet choose Jerusalem." Zech. 1:17. "I will 
dwell in the midst of Jerusalem;" it "shall be called a city of 
truth." "The streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls 
playing. " "If it be marvelous in the eyes of the remnant of this 
people in these days, should it also be marvelous in mine eyes, 
saith the Lord of hosts?" Zech. 8:3-6. "In that time.. ..I shall 
bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem. " "Then shall 
Jerusalem be holy. " Joel 3:1-17. 

James shows that these promises lacked fulfillment. Acts 15:16. 
After showing the object of the Gospel age to be the taking out 
of the Gentiles, a people for His name-the Bride— His body, the 
seed, after recounting this, James says: "To this agree the words 
of the prophets [or this is in harmony with prophecy."] "As it is 
written, 'After this' [after the seed is taken from among the 
Gentiles] 'I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of 
David which is fallen down, and I will build again the ruins 
thereof.'" Yes, God has good things in reserve for his ancient 
people, and as Paul says, though they were "blinded" and "cut 
off" from the first position of heirs of those promises, yet, "God 
hath not cast away His people whom He foreknew. " "For I 
would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, 



lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in 
part is happened to Israel. " How long, Paul? "Until the fullness 
of the Gentiles be come in." [That is, until the entire Church, 
which James says God is taking out of the Gentiles, have all 
been taken out and gathered into full sonship, as the seed of 
promise.] And if they are blinded only until that time, it is 
evident that at that time the blindness will be removed. But Paul 
continues, "and so all Israel shall be saved," [not saved eternally 
as individuals, but saved— rescued nationally —brought back to 
power and grandeur.] But Paul goes to the prophets as his 
authority. "As it is written, there shall come out of Zion the 
Deliverer [the seed, the Christ, head and body], and shall turn 
away ungodliness from Jacob [fleshly Israel] for this is my 
covenant unto them. " Paul then gives us his reasons for speaking 
so confidently, "For the gifts and calling of God are without 
repentance. " God's giving us the high calling, and the promises 
on the higher plane, does not interfere with or hinder His 
keeping His promise to the fleshly seed, but all the more 
guarantees it. 

Then he explains how it is that we, who were once Gentiles, had 
God's mercy and truth revealed to us, when and because natural 
Israel was blinded; so we obtained mercy through their unbelief; 
so these have not believed that through your mercy they also 
may obtain mercy. Through whose mercy? Yours, the Church's, 
when the Church is all taken out and glorified, she is with 
Christ, her head, her husband, to mercifully and justly rule the 
world; then Israel shall obtain your mercy. Rom. 11:2-25. 

O, that we could realize that every promise of God is sure, in 
His own due time; it would give us childlike trust and 
confidence for everything; and not to accept them as all sure is 
to make God a liar. 

Paul, as he looked forward and realized how in due time every 
jot and tittle should be fulfilled, and saw the greatness and 
majesty of God's plan, breaks forth in ecstasy and exclaims, "O, 
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of 
God!" "Who hath known the mind of the Lord?" [Who knew 
that God's plan was so comprehensive and full?] And our hearts 
can say, Amen. 

God knows the end from the beginning, and looking at the great 
clock of the ages, declares to us that the things we so much 
desire shall be "shortly," "yet a little while," and the glory, 
power and blessing of the promised Seed will be revealed to all. 
Let us look at things from his standpoint, and so 

Let the little while between 
In its golden light be seen. 



R402 : page 2 



KNOWLEDGE IS LIBERTY. 

When Luther discovered how fully Papacy filled the picture 
given by Paul in 2 Thes. 2:3-8, and the symbols of Rev. 17, he 
felt justified by that knowledge in publicly denouncing that 
system. The knowledge gave him the liberty to thunder the truth 
of God with all its power against the Vatican. God gave the 
liberty by giving the knowledge, and Luther would have been 
unworthy the knowledge and the honor of being the Lord's 
mouthpiece, had he been too cowardly to speak, though Papacy 
was the system then recognized and respected by the world. 

Knowledge of the truth and law, was the ground of Jesus' liberty 
in denouncing the doctors of divinity in his day as "blind 
guides," etc. It was Paul's knowledge of Christ's having made an 
end of the law, that gave him liberty to announce the end of the 
necessity of circumcision in the flesh, and that authorized him to 
say of the Jewish holy days and Sabbaths that they were merely 
shadows. (Col. 2:17.) 

And some wonder at our liberty in speaking of many things 
similar to the above, viz., that as an organization the nominal 
Gospel church is rejected of the Lord, as was her type, the 
Jewish church; that we speak so confidently of the tribulation 
coming upon her, and apply the words "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her 
plagues"; that we apply some of the symbols of Revelation 
without a question to her; that we so unhesitatingly and fully 
accept the exceeding great and precious promises of Glory, 
Honor, Immortality and Divinity. They wonder that we brethren 
are not in darkness, as most are, relative to "the day of the Lord" 
in which we live (1 Thes. 5:4); that we lay any claim to a 
knowledge of "things to come" which Jesus told us would be an 
evidence of our being sons, led by the Spirit of God. (John 
16:13.) 

But the liberty which we exercise is inspired by a knowledge of 
and belief in the word of God. "Ye shall know the truth, and the 
truth shall make you FREE." (John 8:32.) And as in Luther's and 
Paul's day, so now those too indolent or too cowardly to express 
truth which they see, prove both by word and act that they are 
unworthy of the knowledge, and consequently they are left in 
darkness. Jesus says, "Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of 
my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also 
shall the son of man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of 
his Father with the holy angels." (Mark 8:38.) 



R402 : page 3 



"HOW READEST THOU?" 

LUKE 10:16. 

Tis one thing now to read the Bible through, 
Another thing to read, to learn and do; 
'Tis one thing now to read it with delight, 
And quite another thing to read it right. 

Some read it with design to learn to read, 
But to the subject pay but little heed; 
Some read it as their duty once a week, 
But no instruction from the Bible seek. 

Whilst others read it without common care, 
With no regard to how they read nor where. 
Some read it as a history to know 
How people lived three thousand years ago. 

Some read to bring themselves repute, 
By showing others how they can dispute; 
Whilst others read because their neighbors do, 
To see how long 'twill take to read it through. 

Some read it for the wonders that are there, 
How David killed a lion and a bear; 
Whilst others read-or rather in it look, 
Because, perhaps, they have no other book. 

Some read the blessed Book— they don't know why, 
It somehow happens in the way to lie; 
Whilst others read it with uncommon care, 
But all to find some contradictions there. 

One reads with father's specs upon his head, 
And sees the thing just as his father did; 
Another reads through Campbell or through Scott, 
And thinks it means exactly what they thought. 

Some read to prove a pre-adopted creed, 
Thus understand but little what they read; 
And every passage in the book they bend 
To make it suit that all important end. 

Some people read as I have often thought 
To teach the Book instead of being taught. 



R402 : page 3 



NOT ASHAMED OF THE GOSPEL. 

"I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of 
God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first 
and also to the Greek." -Rom. 1:16. 



These words like all of Paul's words in general, are fitly spoken 
and are like "apples of gold in pictures of silver." Gospel 
signifies good tell, good news, glad tidings, something to make 
one rejoice and be glad; it must have been something of very 
great importance, something far-reaching in its nature, 
something supremely grand and glorious, for it had wrought a 
most wonderful change in Paul. He had not always been of the 
opinion which he now expresses, for he had persecuted those of 
"this way" even unto strange cities, and when they were put to 
death, he gave his voice against them. 

What had caused this change in the mind of the apostle? 

Surely the gospel had not changed in its character; no, but he 
had become better acquainted with it. That is the way it ever is 
with the world: the better they are acquainted with the gospel of 
Christ, the better opinion they have of it, and the higher they 
value it. Paul was expecting soon to visit Rome, that imperial 
city, the mistress of the world, and of course if he spoke in 
public he wished to talk about something which he was not 
ashamed of, and this he declared was the thing: "I am not 
ashamed of the gospel of Christ. " Paul proved the truth of his 
assertion not only by his words, but by his actions as well. 

The mighty mind of Paul, in its natural sweep immense, saw 
THAT in the gospel of Christ which was infinitely above and 
beyond everything else. If he could have seen how man, through 
the blinding effects of pride, and superstition, would have finally 
come to consider the gospel of Christ- if he could have stood 
upon the orthodox platform of our day and have looked out upon 
the pile of "wood, hay, stubble," which is built on the 
foundation, Christ, can any one suppose he would have been 
able to say he was not ashamed of it? If the "mother church," 
which is proud of calling 

R403 : page 3 

him her patron saint, and after whom many of her churches are 
named, should through some of her dignitaries expound to him 
the doctrines of penance, papal succession, confession of sins to 
the priest and absolution, the state of the dead in purgatory, etc., 
can we suppose that he would indorse them and say of them, "I 
am not ashamed?" 

If some one were to represent to him the doctrine of 
predestination as held by our Calvinistic brethren, and undertake 
to prove it by Paul's own writings in Rom. 8:29,33: "For whom 
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the 
image of his son," etc., and again in Rom. 9:15,24: "I will have 
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion 
on whom I will have compassion," etc., and conclude from it 
that God from all eternity planned to bring into being a few, 
favored with advantages of every sort- birth in a Christian land, 
surrounded by Christian influences, and upheld by Christian 



associations and the particular favor of God; but the large 
majority by the same eternal decree were born in the darkness of 
corrupt hereditary taint and association, and although they may 
have dim perceptions of God and truth, and may desire to know 
him, yet, though they may groan and strive, and turn their tear- 
dimmed eyes toward heaven, with untold longings, yet they 
shall go into a night of eternal anguish, "without one cheering 
ray of hope, or star of glimmering day," and the righteous from 
their exalted seats in glory shall look on this display of God's 
wisdom, and justice, and power, and praise him for this 
manifestation of his love. 

This has its good features. It shows God's omniscience. This 
would be our ideal of a great God were it not that it lacks three 
essential qualities of greatness, viz.: mercy, love, and justice. 
None of these qualities would be manifested in bringing into the 
world billions of creatures irrecoverably damned before they 
were born and mocked with protestations of love. 

Is it possible that any thinking man can suppose that Paul would 
endorse this— that this was what he was not ashamed of? But 
would he look with more favor upon the view of our Arminian 
brother, who should say to him: that although the decree was 
made as our Calvinistic brother has stated, yet the provision was 
for all to be saved, the ransom was provided for all, but the 
secret of it is in the words of Jesus, ye "will not come unto me 
that ye might have life. " The table was spread and bountifully 
provided for all, but they "would not and made light of it;" not 
taking into account the fact that more than nine-tenths of them 
never knew that there was any supper provided for them, that is 
to say, that infinite wisdom decreed that a certain number only 
should be informed of it, and be at the table, but had it set for ten 
times as many as he knew would be there to sup, and because 
they were not there, consigned them to eternal torment. Acting 
upon this basis of reasoning, if such it is, our Arminian brethren 
have sent as many missionaries as possible to tell the starving 
millions that there is a supper provided so that the poor creatures 
who are fortunate enough to hear of it may come and welcome, 
but those who do not must starve. 

But this when looked at squarely, our Arminian brethren cannot 
see to be very good news, and so sometimes they conclude 
(though not in a very orthodox way) that these unfortunate 
millions who never heard of the gospel, will be provided for "in 
some way or other," (a good conviction). Can we think this is 
the gospel which Paul had in mind when he said, "I am not 
ashamed of the gospel? Nay, verily! 

But there is still another view that has seemingly strong 
scriptural support, and this includes all men; this surely is a free 
gospel and universal, and Paul is supposed to be its strong 
supporter, for he has given that which is the key note in the 
promulgation of it, viz.: "As in Adam ALL die, EVEN so in 



Christ shall ALL be made alive." 1 Cor. 15:22. So our 
Universalist brother infers from this that in some way, in the 
hour of death, or before, or after, by some means, whether sinful 
or holy, everybody, everywhere shall be saved; and why not? He 
says, did not Christ by the grace of God taste death for every 
man? And if so did he die in vain for any man? But our brother 
of this opinion would not probably dwell with as much 
satisfaction upon the passage, Without holiness no man shall see 
the Lord, Heb. 12:14, and would prefer that murderers and 
pickpockets should occupy a separate apartment in the "many 
mansions." (Here again conviction almost arrives at truth). 

Now candidly, can we suppose that these views, which we think, 
in a plain-spoken way, we have fairly represented as being the 
views held by the churches in general, regarding the gospel, are 
the views held by Brother Paul when he uttered the words we 
have referred to? We cannot think so, and we do think that few, 
if any, who reflect are perfectly satisfied that either of these 
were the views which he held. Then do you stand back aghast 
and say: Can it be possible that all this is error that we have been 
taught so long, and that has so much seeming support from the 
Bible? Do you say, impossible? Then which is your choice, and 
which is good news to you? Can you walk out beneath the starry 
heavens at night and looking up into illimitable space among the 
exhibitions of infinite wisdom and power, and there alone in the 
presence of God lay your hand upon either one of these dogmas 
and say, I believe THIS is the gospel of Christ, of which Paul 
was not ashamed? 

Well, my dear brother or friend, these dogmas are not all errors, 
neither are they all truth. Like the confederation of States, to 
which has been proudly attached the gospel of which Paul was 
not ashamed are "E Pluribus Unum," i.e., one composed of 
many. We understand then that the gospel, of which Paul spoke, 
embraces in its scope many of the ideas held by each of our 
brethren to whom reference has been made, and for whose 
opinions we have respect, but we cannot think that either of 
them is complete alone, and we believe that either of the 
churches who think that its plan or creed is the only and true 
one, while so much at variance with the others, has done much 
to make the man of the world who is uninformed reject the 
instrument (the Bible) upon which he thinks so many variant 
tunes can be played. With force then the question recurs to us: 
what was the gospel or good news of which Paul was not 
ashamed? What was the great and glorious thought connected 
with the gospel that he had in mind? 

Paul's was a critical and calculating mind, and his inspired 
thoughts were stamped with that peculiarity. He "reckons" about 
his sufferings; he "counted all things loss," etc., etc. In this case 
he is "not ashamed of the gospel," for (the reason that) it is "the 
power of God," something above and beyond all human 



institutions, something that the world, the mind of the natural 
man never would have thought of, something supernatural, yes, 
and something from which the mind of man (if left to itself) 
would soon wander; and that is evidently why these truths have 
been torn asunder, and the different parties in the church have 
each taken a piece, and upon it built a superstructure of its own, 
much of it, the "wood, hay, and stubble," to which Paul refers in 
1 Cor. 3:12. Each of these, according to our understanding, has 
already begun to be swept away or to be burned up, and "the 
day" which "shall declare it" is even now begun we fully 
believe, (vs. 13). We feel convinced that the fire which is to 
consume the world (of error) is even "now kindled." 

But, says one, where is the disagreement? Do we not all believe 
that this gospel is the power of God unto salvation? (To every 
one that believeth, our Arminian brother breaks in, but he must 
wait a little). Well, they say so, but in practice deny it. Our 
Calvinistic brother says "unto salvation," and adds (in creed) of 
a few, and unto damnation of the many, i.e., power to save all, 
will to save a few. Our Arminian brother can emphasize the will 
of God to save, but whispers the power, for O ! man opposes His 
will. Our Universalist brother can declare aloud both will and 
power, and take all into glory. 

Let us illustrate the difference between our brethren, and 
suppose three natives of some foreign land, who were totally 
unacquainted with the design or nature of the national emblem, 
"the stars and stripes," were to call at different times upon the 
American Consul in that land, and he was to present to one a 
portion of the flag as a memento, having only the red, at another 
time, to another one, a portion having only the white, and still 
another having only the blue, each might suppose that his 
portion represented in color the whole, and contend that because 
the representative of the nation gave it to him, he was sure that 
was the true color, and so of each of the others, while the fact 
would be that each was right in supposing that he had the true 
color, but erred in the supposition that he had the only color, 
when it was composed of "red, white, and blue, " and that in a 
specific proportion. 

Now, our Calvinistic brother sees so clearly that predestination 
is taught in the scriptures, that he cannot see that there is a 
universal salvation; and our Arminian brother sees so clearly 
that there is salvation provided for all, that he cannot see that 
there is clearly taught the doctrine of predestination and 
election; and our Universalist brother sees so clearly that all will 
be saved, that his conception of God's Love overrides that of His 
Justice. 

But, says one, you seem to agree with each, and disagree with 
each; how is this? They cannot all be right and wrong at the 
same time. Well, not altogether right, but partly so, as in the 
illustration. We are glad to see that each has enough ground for 



his belief to awaken our sympathy and respect. Respect for what 
Paul would have been ashamed of? No, we did not say that 

R404 : page 3 

Paul was ashamed of these brethren, but of the doctrines or 
creeds that have come to be considered the gospel. 

Well, says our Calvinistic brother, is not Predestination or 
Election clearly taught in the Scriptures? 

Yes, my brother, yes. Well, says my Arminian brother, is not 
free will as clearly taught? Yes, my brother; we so understand. 

And is not universal salvation as clearly taught? says my 
Universalist brothers and we answer, we think and believe so. 

Perhaps all of these brethren, including the Papist brother, cares 
to hear no more; if so, perhaps some "fool for Christ's sake" 
will, so we will say on and consider the last question first. We 
consider our Universalist brother's text, "As in Adam all die, 
even so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15:22, as 
unanswerable as regards the universality of salvation: If there 
were not another text in the Bible to teach it, that would. It 
seems to us that nothing can be plainer, and for this reason other 
Scripture somewhat obscure must in some way harmonize with 
it, and so of each of the other texts quoted by our brethren as 
teaching the doctrines of "Election" and "Free will," or 
Arminianism. In the above text, we think no one would 
undertake to make the word "all" in the second place mean less 
than in the first, especially when the first is followed and the 
latter preceded by the words "even so." The misunderstanding 
seems to be as to the kind or mode of life. "As in Adam all die;" 
how do all die by Adam? To answer it correctly, first conclude 
how all lived by Adam. Not spiritual life, was it? Human life 
and its continuance CONDITIONED on obedience, was it not? 
Then he (and all represented in him) lost no more than that, and 
"even so" he (and "all" represented in him) will be made alive 
by Christ, the second Adam. But, says one, is that all the life we 
get through Christ? That is all the universal salvation we can 
find held out to mankind in the Bible, and that we think is "very 
good." God said it was, but thank God there is something more, 
but if any wish to stop there, God has predestinated to let them, 
but if they have heard of the higher life, and neglected so great 
salvation, theirs will be an irreparable loss. 

Then you think, says one, that there are different degrees of 
salvation? O, yes; let us read on a little further (23d ver.): "But 
every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they 
that are Christ's at His coming. " 

Having seen that there are orders or ranks of being, as is also 
shown by the apostle in the 39th verse and onward, we can see 
that it does not follow that because all are made alive through 
Christ, they will therefore come finally to the same kind of 



being, but are brought to life and take position according to 
"order," for "As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; 
and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. " 
(ver. 48). 

With this view, that there are different orders, and that all are 
brought to the restoration of what was lost in Adam, we can see 
how there may be a will in man to gain a position in any given 
order, and how there may be a selection, "Election," or 
"Predestination" (whichever you choose to call it) of God from 
among his creatures of those who are qualified or fitted for the 
different grades, orders, or ranks of being. He has predestinated, 
or established a law, that, "to those who by patient continuance 
in well doing SEEK for glory and honor and immortality, eternal 
life" shall be given. Rom. 2:7. "But unto them that are 
contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, 
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to every soul of 
man that doeth evil," (verses 8 and 9). Now who disobey? Those 
who know the truth surely. You do not consider your child as 
disobedient until it transgresses a known command; neither does 
God, for "like as a father pitieth his children so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him. " Many fear him who do not know much 
about him, and do not know what is commanded, or whether he 
has commanded anything or not. Such cannot, of course, obey 
the truth, nor come under wrath, but will come to life (not 
eternal), the life lost in Adam without any will or choice of 
theirs. It was for this purpose that "He by the grace of God 
should taste death for every man." Heb. 2:9. And God 
commendeth his love toward us, in that while we were yet 
sinners Christ died for us. Yes, "WHEN we were enemies we 
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son." Rom. 5:8-10. 

But does some one say, very well, but Paul says here of the 
gospel, that it is the power of God unto salvation to every one 
that believeth? 

Ah, but brother, now you are reaching that point in the mind and 
teaching of the apostle in which is embraced another rank or 
"order": the power of GOD UNTO; we do not imagine that the 
power of God is staid at all when man is brought back to the 
Adamic condition; that is, to a reconciled condition; he lost that 
life without previously 

R404 : page 4 

knowing the nature of sin or death. True, God told him, but like 
children without experience, they disobeyed, and his posterity 
die for it, or because of it; whether they sin or not they all go 
down in death because of the sin of Adam which "taints us all," 
and come up because of the righteousness of Christ that restores 
us all. We die on Adam's account, and live again on Christ's 
account. Now brought back to the Adamic condition we are 
reconciled to God. Well, is there anything more for us? Yes, 



hear the apostle again: "Much more being reconciled we shall be 
saved by his life." 10th verse. What! Saved more? Yes, much 
more by the power of God unto salvation. Will all men be saved 
much more? We are sorry to part company with any, but though 
this is a blessed restored condition, yet we shall have to leave on 
this plane those who do not believe, for this much more 
salvation is to every one that believeth. Now my Calvinistic and 
Arminian brothers stand by and see the beauty of those texts 
which you have had to stretch and twist so. You need not stretch 
them now; they are all right and true. "Whom he did foreknow" 
would be fitted by desire, and faith, and continuance in well 
doing, each and severally for the different orders, "He 
predestinated" them to, and so this gospel, GOOD news is the 
power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth-to the 
Jew first and also to the Greek. " Why to the Jew first? ("He is 
not a Jew which is one outwardly, " "but he is a Jew, which is 
one inwardly." Rom. 2:28-29), because he believes first, here, in 
time to reach the great salvation. Dear brethren, let us desire 
more, study God's word more, believe more, and have the 
"much more" salvation. "Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed 
them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea 
the deep things of God. " 1 Cor. 2:9-10. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R404 : page 4 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD. 

"But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy 
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises 
of Him who hath called you out of darkness into His marvelous 
light." 1 Pet. 2:9. 

"Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in His 
own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and 
His Father; to Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever." 
Rev. 1:5,6. 

"And hast made us unto our God kings and priests; and we shall 
reign on the earth." Rev. 5:10. 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on 
such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of 
God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years." 
Rev. 20:6. 

The above scriptures clearly teach that a part, at least, of our 
work in the future will be to officiate as the priests of God. As 
the work of a priest is one of intercession and of instruction in 



righteousness, they clearly prove that the glorious work of 
evangelization will go on after the resurrection has taken place. 
The fact that these offices of "king" and "priest" will exist, 
logically implies that there will be subjects to rule and learners 
to teach; otherwise the names would be meaningless and the 
titles an empty sound. 

It is held by some that the reign of the saints will consist of a 
very brief "reign of terror," during which- with Jesus at their 
head-they will trample their enemies into the dust and utterly 
destroy them. We thank our dear Lord for a better hope. Our 
work will not be one of destruction, but of salvation. We shall 
rule as kings, even with a rod of iron; but the grand object will 
be to humble the nations, and so fit them for the reception of 
truth. "For, when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness." Isa. 26:9. 

What a blessed prospect! what a glorious calling! A royal 
priesthood! 

Who that is imbued with the spirit of the Master; who that has 
but tasted that the Lord is gracious, could desire more agreeable 
employment than to show forth the praises of our Savior King, 
to those sitting in darkness? to bind up the brokenhearted? to 
proclaim liberty to the captive? to give beauty for ashes and the 
oil of joy for mourning? 

To tell the old, old story 
Of Jesus and His love? 

R405 : page 4 

To fit us for such an exalted and responsible position we 
require a peculiar training, and we feel warranted in claiming 
that the trials, temptations and discipline of this present life are 
for that very purpose. 

Many a struggling believer, trying hard to overcome, buffeted 
by the enemy, tried by friends, weighed down by hereditary 
weaknesses in self, discouraged and faint, has cried out, from 
the depths of a loving heart: "Why, O! why this suffering? why 
this severe chastisement?" Let us glance for a moment at the 
pathway trod by the Master-our forerunner-and we shall find 
the answer. 

"So, also, Christ glorified not Himself to be made a high priest; 
but He that said unto Him, Thou art my son... Who in the days of 
His flesh, when He had offered up prayers and supplications 
with strong crying and tears unto Him that was able to save him 
from death, and was heard in that He feared: Though He were a 
son, yet learned he obedience by the things which He suffered, 
and being made perfect, He became the author of eternal 
salvation unto all them that obey Him." Heb. 5:5-9. 



"For it became Him, for whom are all things, in bringing many 
sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect 
through sufferings. Wherefore in all things it behooveth Him to 
be made like unto His brethren, that He might be a merciful and 
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make 
reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that He Himself 
hath suffered being tempted, He is able to succor them that are 
tempted." Heb. 2:10,17-18. 

"For we have not a High Priest who cannot be touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as 
we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the 
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help 
in time of need." Heb. 4:15,16. 

The reason, then, that the Church is called on to fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ is, that all the body, 
in like manner to the Head, may be trained to perfect sympathy 
and to perfect obedience through suffering. In this present time, 
we in all our troubles come to our compassionate High Priest 
with boldness, realizing that He, having been partaker of flesh 
and blood, can truly feel for us and pity us; so in the age to 
come, we, the promised seed of Abraham, through whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed (compare Gen. 12:3; Gal. 
3:14,16,29;) shall go forth a royal priesthood, according to the 
order of Melchisedec, fully prepared to sympathize with the 
nations, to lead them to the paths of righteousness, and to 
encourage them in the way of life. 

Shall we shrink then from our cross? Shall we seek to put away 
the bitter cup that is sometimes pressed to our lips? Surely not. 
Tis a loving hand that presents it, 'tis a loving heart (infinitely 
loving) that sees the need of it. It is but the Master fitting us for 
His work; training us for the priesthood; teaching us to rule 
ourselves that we may know how to rule others; opening our 
eyes to the weakness of our own flesh, that we may have 
patience with those over whom we shall be given authority. 
(Luke 19:17,19.) 

Courage, then, my Christian brother or sister, seeking with 
weary step to run the narrow way. Heed not the rugged course; it 
is all hallowed and sanctified by the blessed feet of the Master. 
Count every thorn a flower; every sharp rock a milestone, 
hurrying you onward to the goal. Let every advancing step be a 
"Nearer to Thee": every hillock in the road an "upward toward 
heaven." Keep your eye fixed on the prize. Soon— very soon— 
you may wear the Crown. 

"It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with Him, we shall also 
live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him. " 

W. I. MANN. 



R405 : page 4 

CONSECRATION TO A WORK. 

Among Christians there is much which passes for "entire 
consecration to God," which is in fact a consecration to some 
self-imposed work. 

Some are consecrated and are living sacrifices to business, some 
to their families, some to the temperance work, some to building 
up a denominational church or Sunday school, some to 
ministering to the poor and the sick. Some of these works are 
good enough in their way, but none of them are the proper 
consecration for a follower of Jesus. 

Our consecration, like that of Jesus, should be to do the will of 
our Father in Heaven. Jesus says he came not to do his own will, 
but the will of Him that sent him. (John 6:38.) The fact that you 
have any choice or preference as to what you shall do, is an 
evidence in itself, that your will is not dead— that your 
consecration to God is not complete. 

Consecration to a work of our own choosing merely, will never 
bring us to the great reward. "I beseech you, brethren, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
UNTO GOD. " Then, if He sends you into the "temperance 
work, " or into any other work, it will be acceptable as unto the 
Lord. 

If seeking only to do his will it will bring us to His Word much 
and often, to learn that will, and "He that seeketh findeth. " We 
leave the subject here, merely suggesting that thus seeking, after 
thus consecrating, some who are now— laboring chiefly for "the 
meat that perisheth" or Temperance and moral reforms in the 
world, or for the extension of sectarian church influence, would 
find directions something like the following: 

This is the will of God even YOUR sanctification. (1 Thes. 4:3.) 
Do good unto all men [in any way] as you have opportunity 
especially to the household of faith. (Gal. 6:10.) The great 
harvest field of the Gospel Age is white to harvest. This is the 
"special" work of the hour, and every one who realizes it fully, 
will rejoice in the privilege of being numbered among the 
reapers as well as among the reaped. Forsake not the assembling 
of yourselves together (Heb. 10:25.) but meet for the purpose of 
"BUILDING UP YOURSELVES on your most holy faith." 
(Jude 20.) 



R405 : page 4 



A SHORT SERMON FROM 
A FAMILIAR TEXT. 

"God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life." (John 3:16.) 

We learned this text so long ago, some of us in childhood, and 
have heard it so often, that we are now apt to read or hear it 
without noticing its breadth and depth. 

"God so loved." 

Is this true? Orthodoxy says it was Jesus that so loved the world. 
The Father did not love them; no, he was angry, very angry with 
them, because Satan was too smart for him [We feel ashamed to 
have to write such an idea]; but Jesus loved us, and threw 
himself between us and his angry Father, and thus received the 
fatal blow; at least it would have been fatal to us, but Jesus 
being God, could not really die, and so arose when he wished to. 

How much better to believe that "God commendeth his love 
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners [enemies, verse 10] 
Christ died for us." (Rom. 5:8.) "Herein is love; not that we 
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the 
propitiation for our sins." (1 John 4:10.) 

"God so loved the WORLD." 

What! the world? the whole world? This would be blessed news 
indeed, if true. How is it? The nominal church teaches that only 
those who believe before the second coming of Christ-probably 
not one in one thousand of the world's inhabitants so far-can be 
saved. God's Word tells us that through the Abrahamic seed 
shall "all the families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3.) What 
if the promise has not been fulfilled as yet? Can we not wait 
God's time? Paul tells us that God "will have ALL men to be 
saved [from the Adamic death] and to come unto a knowledge 
of the truth. " What truth? That Christ Jesus "gave himself a 
ransom for ALL, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:4,6.) 

"He gave his only4?egotten Son. " 

This phraseology brings us into conflict with an old theory, viz., 
Trinitarianism. If that doctrine is true, how could there be any 
Son to give? A begotten Son, too? Impossible. If these three are 
one, did God send himself? And how could Jesus say: "My 
Father is greater than I." (John 14:28.) 

"Whosoever believeth in him. " 

Whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and the promises are only to 
believers. But does it seem reasonable that God so loved the 
world and yet made provision for only one out of a thousand, 
allowing the rest to remain in heathenism to perish? The Word 
says: "How then shall they call on him in whom they have not 



believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have 
not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?" (Rom. 
10:14.) They could not, but our loving Father has provided a 
teacher in that glorious Anointed One— Head and body-who is 
the true Light which lighteth EVERY MAN that cometh into the 
world. " And thus shall all men "come unto a knowledge of the 
truth." Understanding this, Paul could say: "The Scripture, 
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, 
preached 

R406 : page 4 

before the gospel [good news] unto Abraham, saying: "In thee 
shall all nations be blessed." (Gal. 3:8.) 

This is good news indeed. 

"Should not perish, but have everlasting life." 

So-called orthodoxy would paraphrase this sentence thus: 
Should not live forever in hell, but have everlasting life in 
heaven. Webster gives the primary meaning of "perish" as "to 
die, to lose life in any manner. " But, says some one, Jesus did 
not speak English, and the translators may not have given us a 
good equivalent for the Greek. Well, Liddell and Scott define 
the original word "to destroy utterly, kill, slay, murder. " The text 
really defines its own meaning by placing "perish" as the 
opposite of "life." Life, everlasting or eternal, is promised only 
to the pure. Our Father intends to have a clean universe, and has 
commissioned the Son to do the work for him. This he will do, 
throwing light into every dark corner, washing, scouring, and 
polishing every vessel that can be made available for the 
Master's use, hanging every one in its proper place, sweeping 
out and "utterly destroying" the rubbish, but evidently saving 
and blessing with life everlasting by far the greater portion of 
mankind, so that the saved will be the rule, and the lost the 
exception— else would Satan triumph over God, which is 
impossible. 

W. I. MANN. 



R406 : page 4 



RUN TO DEATH. 



I was lately passing along the streets of a large city, when my 
attention was attracted to a fine large engraving hanging in one 
of the shop windows. (It was in Fleet street, London.) It 
represented a scene in one of the ancient Isthmian games. Two 
persons nearly divested of apparel, with distended muscles, 
occupied the course, stretching every nerve, while around, 
evidently excited with deep interest, was the "great crowd of 
witnesses." 



They were well along in the course, but the attention of the one 
somewhat in advance of the other is diverted for a moment by a 
flower or some shining object that has been thrown into the 
arena by some one of the many witnesses, by which they are 
"compassed about." 

An effort is made to grasp it; evidently the prize for which they 
are running is lost by this one, and no trace of sympathy is 
noticeable on the countenances of the spectators, but great 
rejoicing is apparent among the multitude, at the persistency 
with which the victor has reached the goal: Ignoring everything 
else, keeping the prize only in view he finally won it. I thought, 
that is a true picture of the Christian race which Paul has so 
faithfully and vividly painted in words, and which we see acted 
upon the stage of life. But how appropriately and timely the 
emphasizing of the thought just now. How faithfully that little 
shining object, whatever it may be, represents the besetments in 
the path of the one who is running for the prize of our high 
calling. 

How insignificant compared with the prize and the honor at the 
end of the course. But unless watchful we shall hesitate; one 
moment may cost all, and may make delay sufficient to reach 
the Judge's stand too late. 

What's that in your path? A little worldly praise? Disdain to 
notice it, it is of no value whatever; you are worse off with it 
than without it. At another point do you see an avenue to 
wealth? Never mind; it would not be abiding if you had it. Press 
on. 

Again; do you begin to think of some of the "weights" of value 
(?) left behind, fearing you will never see them again? Don't 
think of them, only to hope you will never be encumbered with 
them more. Do you say or think: "I fear this race will be the 
ruination of all my worldly prospects?" Of course it will so far 
as having any pleasure in them is concerned. 

You will be a very foolish man to divide your energies now, or 
thoughts either. Press on. 

But do you say: "Why there's my reputation right there in the 
dust. " Poor fellow ! how sorry I am you noticed it; but it's only 
the reputation you once had. Don't you know that none of those 
who are noted racers on this course have any reputation? The 
greatest racer who ever stepped on it "made himself of no 
reputation. " 

But do you say: "This awful run will be the death of me? Yes; of 
course it will; but you are a poor culprit under sentence of death 
anyway, and if you undertake to save your life you will lose it, 
but run yourself to death and you'll have a life that is life 
everlasting, and more-immortal. Don't be foolish now. Press on. 



A heavenly race demands thy zeal 
And an immortal crown. " 



J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R406 : page 5 



THE CHURCH WALKING 
WITH THE WORLD. 

The Church and the World walked far apart 
On the changing shores of time, 
The World was singing a giddy song, 
And the Church a hymn sublime. 

"Come, give me your hand, " said the merry World, 
"And walk with me this way"; 
But the good Church hid her snowy hands 
And solemnly answered "Nay, 

I will not give you my hand at all, 
And I will not walk with you; 
Your way is the way that leads to death; 
Your words are all untrue. " 

"Nay, walk with me but a little space," 
Said the World, with a kindly air; 
"The road I walk is a pleasant road, 
And the sun shines always there; 

Your path is thorny and rough and rude, 
But mine is broad and plain; 
My way is paved with flowers and dews, 
And yours with tears and pain; 

The sky to me is always blue, 

No want, no toil I know; 

The sky above you is always dark, 

Your lot is a lot of woe; 

There's room enough for you and me 

To travel side by side. " 

IHalf shyly the Church approached the World 
And gave him her hand of snow; 
And the old World grasped it and walked along, 
Saying in accents low, 

"Your dress is too simple to please my taste; 
I will give you pearls to wear, 
Rich velvets and silks for your graceful form, 
And diamonds to deck your hair. " 



The Church looked down at her plain white robes, 
And then at the dazzling World, 
And blushed as she saw his handsome lip 
With a smile contemptuous curled. 

"I will change my dress for a costlier one," 
Said the Church, with a smile of grace; 
Then her pure, white garments drifted away, 
And the World gave, in their place, 

Beautiful satins and shining silks, 
Roses and gems and costly pearls; 
While over her forehead her bright hair fell 
Crisped in a thousand curls. 

"Your house is too plain," said the proud old World, 

"I'll build you one like mine; 

Carpets of Brussels and curtains of lace, 

And furniture ever so fine. " 

So he built her a costly and beautiful house; 
Most splendid it was to behold; 
Her sons and her beautiful daughters dwelt there. 
Gleaming in purple and gold; 

Rich fairs and shows in the halls were held, 
And the World and his children were there. 
Laughter and music and feasts were heard 
In the place that was meant for prayer. 

There were cushioned pews for the rich and the gay, 
To sit in their pomp and pride; 
But the poor, who were clad in shabby array, 
Sat meekly down outside. 

"You give too much to the poor," said the World, 

"Far more than you ought to do; 

If they are in need of shelter and food, 

Why need it trouble you? 

Go take your money and buy rich robes, 
Buy horses and carriages fine, 
Buy pearls and jewels and dainty food; 
Buy the rarest and costliest wines; 

My children they dote on all these things, 
And if you their love would win, 
You must do as they do, and walk in the ways 
That they are walking in. " 

R407 : page 5 

Then the Church held fast the strings of her purse, 
And modestly lowered her head, 
And simpered, "Without doubt you are right, sir; 
Henceforth I will do as you've said. " 



So the poor were turned from her door in scorn, 
And she heard not the orphan's cry; 
But she drew her beautiful robes aside, 
As the widows went weeping by. 

Then the sons of the World and sons of the Church 

Walked closely hand and heart, 

And only the Master, who knoweth all, 

Could tell the two apart. 

Then the Church sat down at her ease and said 
"I am rich and my goods increase; 
I have need of nothing, or aught to do, 
But to laugh, and dance, and feast. " 

The sly World heard, and he laughed in his sleeve, 
And mocking said, aside— 
"The Church is fallen, the beautiful Church, 
And her shame is her boast and her pride. " 

The angel drew near to the mercy-seat, 
And whispered in sighs her name, 
Then the loud anthems of rapture were hushed, 
And heads were covered with shame. 

And a voice was heard at last by the Church 
From Him who sat on the Throne, 
"I know thy works, and how thou hast said, 
'I am rich;' and hast not known 

That thou art naked, poor and blind, 
And wretched before My face; 
Therefore I from My presence, cast thee out. 
And blot thy name from its place. 



-SELECTED. 



R407 : page 5 



THE EKKLESIA. 



This is a Greek word which is translated church. It signifies a 
company, assembly or body of people bound or compacted 
together. 

To-day there are many organizations claiming to be the church, 
and having various bonds of union; but we wish to know, upon 
the authority of God's Word, what ekklesia, body, or church, 
Jesus established, and what are its bonds of union; secondly, we 
wish to show that every Christian should belong to that church; 
thirdly, the injurious effects of joining the wrong ekklesia or 
church; and fourthly, having joined the right church, what are 
the results of losing our membership. 



First then, the church which Jesus began to gather during his 
ministry, and which was recognized by the Father at Pentecost 
after their ransom price was paid, was the little company of 
disciples who had consecrated earthly time, talents and life a 
sacrifice to God. They were organized and bound together as 
members of one society, and as such had laws and government, 
and consequently a head or recognized ruling authority. The 
bonds were bonds of love and common interest. Since all were 
enlisted under the captaincy of Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys 
and sorrows, and aims of one were those of the other; and thus 
they had a far more perfect union of heart than could possibly be 
had from a union on the basis of any man-made creed. Thus 
their organization was of the Spirit; their law for the government 
of each was love, and all as a whole were put under obedience to 
the "law of the Spirit" as it was expressed in the life, actions, 
and words of their Lord. Their government was the will of him 
who said, "If ye love me keep my commandments." 

Thus we see the early church organized, governed, and in 
perfect unity and harmony under the rulership or headship of 
Jesus. Contrast this church organization with what now affects 
to be a continuance of the same— viz. : the various 
denominational organizations, each of which binds its members 
to a mental union on the basis of some creed or dogma of its 
own (many of them anything but love-ly) and each having its 
own laws. 

These laws emanate from their heads, or rulers and law-givers; 
so it is clearly seen that these present day churches, have and 
recognize as heads, or directing, ruling powers over them, the 
ancient founders of their various creeds, each contradicting the 
other, while their clergy, in conferences, councils, synods and 
presbyteries, variously interpret and enforce the "traditions of 
the elders" which "make void the Word of God." These take the 
place of the true head of the church-Jesus-and the true teacher 
and guide into all truth, the Holy Spirit. Hear the Prophet Isaiah 
express it. (chap. 9:15.) "The ancient and honorable, he is the 
head, and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail." And the 
whole nominal system is described in the Revelation as 
"Babylon"-confusion-Papal mother and Protestant daughters. 

Will they own this to be so? No, for the lukewarm nominal 
church of today believes herself to be rich and increased with 
goods, having need of nothing; not knowing that she is wretched 
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. (Rev. 3:17.) 

"These are hard sayings, who can receive them?" But these are 
not our sayings: it is the warning voice of the "sure word of 
prophecy... whereunto ye do well that ye take heed." And it is a 
loving voice for again our Lord declares: "As many as I love, I 
rebuke and chasten. " 



There are two senses in which the true church of Christ may be 
considered: All who like the early church were fully consecrated 
to the doing of our Father's will, amenable only to Christ's will 
and government, recognizing and obeying none other -these 
saints, from the beginning of the Gospel Age down to its close, 
when all of this class are sealed, constitute the "CHURCH OF 
THE FIRST BORN," whose names are written in Heaven. 
These are all one in aim, hope and suffering, and in due time 
will be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ to the great inheritance- 
heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised for them that 
love him. 

The other sense in which this same class is recognized, is by 
counting a part for the whole; thus all the living of this class 
may be spoken of as the church; or, again, any part of this class 
of living followers who may meet together may properly be 
called the church; for, by the word of Jesus we know that 
wherever two or three are assembled he will be among them, 
consequently that would be a church meeting— an assembly of 
the "church of the First Born." The general assembly will be, 
when all the church are made like, and glorified with, their head- 
Jesus . 

Such, then, is our definition of the church of Christ; it is 
perfectly illustrated by Paul (Rom. 12:4,5) when he compares 
the church to a human body. In this figure Jesus represents the 
head, and all who are his constitute the body, over and through 
which the head rules. Jesus has been and always will be the head 
over his church as a whole; he is likewise the head and ruler of 
the entire living church, and in every assembly where two or 
three meet in his name he is the head, ruler, and teacher. 

If it be asked, in what sense does he teach? we answer, by 
exercising the qualities of the head, or teacher; by using one or 
more of those present as His mouthpiece in unfolding truth, 
strengthening faith, encouraging hope, inspiring zeal, etc., just 
as the head of your body can call upon one member to minister 
to another. But here a word of caution: If one becomes as useful 
an instrument as a right hand, he should take care that he aspire 
not to become the head. Be not puffed up; pride will paralyze 
and render useless. "Be not ye called Rabbi (master, teacher) for 
one is your master (head) even Christ, and all ye are brethren. " 
And let not the least member despise his office, "for if all were 
one member, where were the body?" "Nay, those members of 
the body which seem to be more feeble are necessary"— "God 
hath set the members every one of them, in the body as it hath 
pleased him. " 

How simple, beautiful, and effectual is God's plan of 
organization! 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz. : that all Christians 
should be joined to this organization. In the light of what has 



just been said as to the class constituting the church which Jesus 
organized, it is evident that if you have given up all your will, 
talent, time, etc., you are recognized by Jesus as a follower, and 
member of the ekklesia, or body of which he is the head, whose 
names are written in heaven. Thus we join Jesus' church and 
have our names recorded as members by consecration. But says 
one: Must I not join some organization on earth, assent to some 
creed, and have my name written on earth? No; remember that 
Jesus is your pattern and teacher, and neither in his words nor 
acts will you find any authority for binding yourselves with 
creeds and traditions of the elders, which all tend to make the 
word of God of none effect, and bring you under a bondage 
which will hinder your growth in grace and knowledge, and 
against which Paul warned you, saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not 
entangled again with the yoke of bondage." (Gal. 5:1.) 

But say some: If it is not proper to unite with any of the present 
nominal churches, would it not be well to form a visible 
organization of our own? Yes, this is what we have— an 
organization modeled after that of the early church. We think we 
have come back to primitive simplicity. The Lord Jesus alone is 
our head or lawgiver; the Holy Spirit is our interpreter and guide 
into truth; our names are all written in heaven; we are bound 
together by love and common interest. 

Do you inquire-how shall we know one another? We reply, 
how could we help knowing one another when the Spirit of our 
Master is made manifest in word and act, and manner and look? 
Yes, the living faith, the unfeigned love, the long-suffering 
meekness, the childlike simplicity coupled with the constancy 
and zeal of maturity, make manifest the sons of God, and we 
need no earthly record, for the names of all such are written in 
the Lamb's book of life. 

Do the sick need visiting or assistance? —these stand ready with 
consecrated time. Does the Lord's work require money?— these 
stand ready with consecrated means. Does his work bring upon 
them the reproach of the world, and of a degenerate nominal 
church— these have also sacrificed reputation— all— all to God. 

But again, do you inquire how shall we deal with one who walks 
disorderly in our midst; if we have no organization such as we 
see about us, how can we free ourselves from such, as the Lord 
requires us to do? We answer: Do just as Jesus and Paul 
directed. 

Now, as in the early church, there are various degrees of 
advancement among the individual members, and Paul says (1 
Thes. 5:14,) some are feeble-minded, comfort them; some are 
weak, support them; but while you should be patient toward all, 
warn the disorderly (those who are drifting away from the true 
spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly for the weak, and 



comfort them; nor for the feebleminded, and support them, but 
patiently, lovingly, warn the disorderly. Whom does he call 
disorderly? Doubtless there are many ways of walking 
disorderly, but in 2 Thes. 3:1 1, he speaks of some who work not 
at all, but are busy-bodies, and says they should do as he did— 
work that they be not chargeable to any; and if any will not 
work, neither should he eat. Thus he said he did, that he might 
be an example to others. He warns us also against immoral and 
unjust persons and those who wrest (twist) the Scriptures and 
thus turn the truth of God into a lie. Then again, vs. 14: After 
you have warned such a one, if he "obey not... note that man, and 
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. "Yet, 
count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. " 

Again Jesus gives explicit directions where there is a matter of 
offence between two brethren, Matt. 18:15,17: "If thy brother 
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee 
and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy 
brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or 
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every 
word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, 
tell it unto the church: (the company of brethren who assemble 
together), but if he neglects to hear the church, let him be unto 
thee as an heathen man and a publican." If, under the 
organization of our Head, we heed his commands, which we 
will do if we love him, how few will be the misunderstandings 
and difficulties among the brethren. 

This organization has its evangelists, pastors and teachers 
appointed and directed by the Lord. They need no laying on of 
hands by the so-called Apostolic succession; for the "Spirit of 
the Lord hath anointed" all the members of the body "to preach," 
etc. (Isa. 61:1), and it is the duty of every member of the body to 
exercise his office for the edification of the other members. How 
complete is the organization of the church of Christ with its 
heaven- written, love-bound and Spirit-ruled membership, and 
how sad the error of mistaking the nominal for the real church! 

The importance of our fourth proposition need not be urged. It 
would indeed, be a dreadful calamity to lose our membership in 
the true church or body of Christ. And no member is out of this 
danger except when keeping a vigilant watch over the old 
nature, counted dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself 
in the form of pride, selfishness, envy, evil-speaking— or what 
not? But if filled with love (the love that prompts to sacrifice) 
and clothed with humility, and under cover of the redeeming 
blood, we are safe in the church (body), having the assurance 
that it is our "Father's good pleasure to give us the kingdom. " 

Yes, the kingdom is the glorious destiny of the true church-the 
"little flock"— now treading the pathway of humiliation and 
drinking the bitter cup of death. The glory that shall be revealed 
in us, doth not yet appear except to the eye of faith, but the 



temptations and trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let us, 
therefore, fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his 
rest, any of you should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 

Thus Paul warned others and thus he feared, lest (even after) 
having preached to others, he himself should be a castaway. (1 
Cor. 9:27.) We may have our names cast out as evil by those of 
the nominal church, and yet "rejoice and be exceeding glad 
because our names are written in heaven. " They may frown 
upon you and despitefully use you and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely, or they may seek to win you back by 
flattery, saying they cannot afford to lose your influence— you 
could do so much good by remaining among them. Oh, how 
necessary in this "evil day" is the faith— 

That bears unmoved the world's dread frown, 
Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile. " 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the warning: "Stand fast in 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not 
again entangled with the yoke of bondage" -not even in the 
slightest degree. 



R408 : page 5 

THE DAY OF JUDGMENT. 

"God hath appointed a day in the which he will judge the world 
in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained"- "Jesus 
Christ the righteous. " "For the Father judgeth no man, but hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son." (Acts 17:31. John 5:22.) 

The word judgment sometimes signifies merely the execution 
of a verdict, or decision reached, but it means in a fuller sense 
the process of trial, including also the decision or result of trial. 
The human race represented in its head, Adam, once stood on 
trial before God. It failed to prove itself worthy of life, and in 
Adam all were condemned, the penalty or verdict being death. - 
"Dying thou shalt die." (Gen. 2:17 -margin.) 

Seemingly, Jehovah had forever sealed the final doom of his 
creatures, the trial being ended and they all condemned to death. 
But not so; he had thus condemned all through one 
representative (Adam), that he might have mercy upon all 
through another representative-Christ Jesus (Rom. 5:19). 

In due time Jesus was placed on trial as a second representative 
man. He was in all points tempted (tried) like as we are, yet 
without sin (Heb. 4:15). In his trial Jesus was a victor; he was 
thus proved 

R408 : page 6 



worthy of life according to his Father's law. Then by giving 
himself (his humanity) a ransom for all (1 Tim. 2:6), he 
purchased all of the fallen race from, or out of death. The object 
of the ransom was not to justify sin, nor to bring back the sinner 
to continue a life of sin, but to afford each an individual trial for 
life in hope that all, having had a taste of the bitterness of sin, 
might return to harmony and communion with God through 
Jesus, and live. It is for this reason that the world is to be judged 
again. They were tried and condemned once already through 
Adam, as we have shown, and a second chance for life comes to 
all the race through Christ Jesus-an individual chance. 

The second judgment or trial of the race, unlike the first, will be 
an individual trial, when every man who dies shall die for his 
own sin and not for Adam's (Jer. 31:29,30). This individual trial 
will be under the most favorable circumstances, and will decide 
their final everlasting destiny. But before they can have such a 
trial, they must first be redeemed from the consequences of the 
first trial. 

It should be remembered that the church selected from the world 
during this Gospel age is not reckoned as a part of the World. 
Jesus said, "They are not of the world, even as I am not of the 
world." (John 17:16.) This Gospel age, has not been the World's 
day of trial or judgment, but the church's only. Only a small part 
of mankind have yet been blessed with knowledge sufficient for 
a full, fair trial as individuals. But we thank God that he has 
"appointed a day (period) in the which he will judge the World 
in righteousness "-fully and fairly, as our text affirms. 

Our hearts rejoice with gratitude and praise as we realize the 
blessings to come to all mankind, when the knowledge of the 
Lord shall fill the whole earth, for all must have full knowledge 
in order to a full and righteous trial. God could have had the 
World's trial-day begin where ours did, (the church's) at 
Pentecost, but it pleased him to permit six days of evil (six 
thousand years) to pass, and then to bring in a seventh day of 
rest from the dominion of evil (the millennium, or seventh 
thousand years), in which the World should have a more 
favorable individual trial under the reign of Jesus. All who will, 
may then have back all that was lost through Adam's sin— human 
perfection 

R409 : page 6 

of life and happiness. 

As heretofore shown, the trial of the church, now in progress, is 
not a trial of men to see whether they are worthy of human life 
and perfection eternally, but it is a trial of new creatures. Certain 
ones, justified from sin by faith in Christ, have presented 
themselves as human sacrifices to death— the death of all human 
aims and hopes and being. Their trial is to see whether they will 
fulfill this their covenant. If they do it, they will be doing with 



their humanity what Jesus did with his, and such shall share with 
Jesus, their Lord, the glory and honor of the divine nature. 

The trial of the World when Satan and evil are bound (Rev. 
20:2) will be less severe and the prize for which they will be 
running (a right to existence as perfected human, or earthly 
beings) will be less glorious than that for which we run. Theirs 
will be a gloriously satisfying portion, however, since the 
natural man cannot receive the things of the spirit, for they are 
spiritually discerned. What a loving and wise provision! All will 
be perfectly satisfied- they on the earthly plane, we on the 
heavenly. 

When the World is on trial (during the millennial age), not only 
Jesus will be their Judge, but his Bride— the overcomers now 
being selected, then made one with him, will sit with him in the 
throne and judge the world, as we read: "Do ye not know that 
the saints shall judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2.) 



R409 : page 6 

THE DAY OF THE LORD. 

"The great day of His wrath is come, who shall be able to 
stand?" Rev. 6:17. 

"The day of the Lord" is a scriptural name for a period of time, 
during which the Gospel and Millennial ages lap; the one 
ending, the other commencing. Concerning it we read— "Shall 
not the Day of the Lord be darkness and not light, even very 
dark, and no brightness in it?" (Amos 5:20.) "Ho (improperly 
translated woe; see Young's translation) you that desire the Day 
of the Lord: The Day of the Lord is darkness and not light." (vs. 
18.) 

It is "The great day of His wrath. " This dark day is at once the 
closing scene of the night of weeping, and the dawn of the 
morning of joy. We desire your attention not merely to the 
Scripture evidence that there will be such a day, or time, but 
especially to the events that will transpire during that day, and 
their chronological order. 

This time of trouble comes first upon the nominal church. We 
read, "The harvest is the end of the world" (age). It includes the 
sifting of the true wheat from among the tares in the nominal 
church, and the burning of the tares. This work has been rapidly 
progressing in our midst during the past seven years. The sickle 
of truth has been gathering and separating from the world, the 
truly consecrated children of God who faithfully follow the 
leading of truth, and such shall be accounted worthy to escape 
the tribulation coming (Luke 21:36), while lukewarm and 
merely nominal Christians shall share it with the world. 



This separation of truth from error, and of truth-seekers from 
time honored systems of error, brought about by the unfolding 
of truth now due to the household of faith, causes great trouble 
and final overthrow to those systems. The light reveals and 
condemns the darkness, and the real "children of light" rejoice in 
it, while those not in the light "weep and lament," as foretold in 
Rev. 18. The tottering and overthrow of the nominal church is 
the beginning of the trouble on the world, since the interests of 
the church and world are so closely linked. The Church, both 
Papal and Protestant has exerted a mighty influence upon the 
masses of the people, and has greatly aided governments in 
controlling them. Therefore the great, the mighty, and the rich, 
will weep and lament her fall. 

The trouble of the nations during "the Day of the Lord," is a 
natural consequence of the transfer of authority and rulership 
from the Devil, who is the prince of this world-age (John 
14:30), to "Him whose right it is"— Christ-who, in the beginning 
of the Millennial Age, "takes to himself His great power and 
reigns;"-"And the nations were angry and thy wrath is come," 
read along connectedly. Rev. 11:17. 

Unquestionably the kingdoms of this world are loyal to their 
prince. They are mainly controlled by evil, selfish, corrupt men, 
the agents and representatives of the "Prince of Darkness," who 
do his will. When the new Prince takes control, the dominion is 
to be given into new hands, and the Lord proclaims: "I will 
overthrow the throne of the kingdoms and I will destroy the 
strength of the kingdoms of the Gentiles." Hag. 2:22. 

Thus by "breaking in pieces "—throwing down- "the kingdoms of 
this world become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ," 
"and he shall reign forever." Rev. 11:15. Under the new rule 
there will be new rulers, and we read, "The saints of the Most 
High shall take the kingdom, (dominion) and possess the 
kingdom forever," Daniel 7:18. "All peoples, nations and 
languages shall serve Him. " At present they do not, and they 
must be brought to submission by chastisement; and this is 
accomplished in "The day of the Lord." The overthrow of 
nations and society will necessarily involve individual trouble. 
But, when the judgments of the Lord are in the Earth the 
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. Isa. 26:9. 

This trouble is graphically described by the Prophet: "That day 
is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of 
wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess. I 
will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, 
because they have sinned against the Lord. Neither their silver 
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them, in the day of the 
Lord's wrath." Zeph. 1:15,18. "Therefore wait ye upon me, saith 
the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my 
determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the 
kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my 



fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of 
my jealousy. For then will I turn to the people a pure language, 
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve Him 
with one consent." Zeph. 3:8,9. 

So extreme is the trouble here described, that the world is 
symbolically said to be burned up by the Lord's anger-yet it has 
a good effect, for after all the indignation against, and 
destruction of governments, the people remain [The destruction 
is that of government life,] and having experienced the misrule 
of the "Prince of this World" they are prepared to have the Lord 
take His great power and reign, and to "serve the Lord with one 
consent. " 

We expect that this distress and trouble, will all come about in a 
very natural way. Very many Scriptures seem to teach that the 
kingdoms of the earth will be overthrown by a rising of the 
people, goaded to desperation by the oppression of unjust 
governments. Such a rising and overturning, Socialists, 
Communists, and Nihilists of to-day are organizing for, and will 
gladly bring about when they can. 

Now, while Scripture recognizes wrong and oppression as 
existing in the nations, and foretells this as the way in which 
they will be overthrown, and says: "Go to now ye rich men, 
weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you; ye 
have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold the hire 
of the laborers, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth." Jas. 
5:1.— yet it does not recognize this Communism as right, but the 
contrary, rather instructing believers to "obey the powers that 
be" as long as they last, saying to us-be patient therefore, 
brethren, unto the coming (presence) of the Lord. " 

Rev. 6:15, figuratively describes that time of falling of 
kingdoms when every mountain (kingdom) and island shall be 
moved. The kings and chief ones as well as bondmen will 
recognize in this trouble that "The great day of his wrath is 
come," and will seek to be covered and protected by the great 
mountains (kingdoms) of earth, and to be hid in the great rocks 
of this world (secret societies). But they shall not be able to 
deliver them in the day of the Lord's anger, for all the kingdoms 
of the world shall be thrown down, and instead of these 
mountains (kingdoms) "the kingdom of the Lord becomes a 
great mountain, and fills the whole earth." Daniel 2:35,45. 

Malachi 4:1, describes the coming day of trouble and sees the 
anger of the Lord there displayed- "the fire of God's jealousy." 
"Behold the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the 
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day 
that cometh shall burn them up. " Here the wicked are 
symbolized by stubble, God's wrath by fire, and the righteous by 
"calves of the stall." vs. 2. 



Peter (3:10,12) describes this "Day of the Lord," and under 
symbol of heavens, refers to the governments. "But the day of 
the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the 
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, [overthrow of 
governments with great confusion] and the elements shall melt 
with fervent heat. The earth also, and the works that are therein 
shall be burned up. " [The elements of the (heavens) 
governments as well as of (earth) society in general, will be 
dissolved in the great trouble (fire) of that day. The word here 
translated elements is the same that Paul uses in speaking of "the 
beggarly elements" of this world. [Gal. 4:9.] 

R410 : page 6 

Scripture teaches that in the Millennial age fleshly Israel will 
be the chief nation, "the joy of the whole earth." And we find 
that whilst other nations fall during the day of the Lord, they 
gradually come into prominence until in the latter part of that 
"day of wrath;" when "the battle of the great day" is fought, we 
find Jerusalem safely inhabited, her people having much cattle 
and goods. (Ezek. 38:12.) They will doubtless go to Palestine, 
not through respect to promises of God, nor with the expectation 
of restoration to national power, but with true Jewish perception 
they will realize before others the dangers to which property, 
etc., will be exposed during this overthrow of order; and they 
will choose to be far away from the strongholds of communism. 
Yet even there they will not be entirely secure, for God and his 
bands say, "Come, let us go up to take a spoil and prey," and 
they come against Jerusalem a great company to pillage and rob 
the wealthy Jews there gathered from all quarters of the globe. 
(Ezek. 38:8,12.) 

Zech. (14:1,4) describes the battle then fought. "Behold, the day 
of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst 
of thee. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; 
and the city shall be taken and the houses rifled, and half of the 
city shall go forth into captivity. " Here God interposes and 
defends them, and here they come to recognize Jesus as the Son 
of God, for "the Lord my God shall come, and all thy saints with 
thee." 

In Zech. 12:3, God declares that he will deliver them, "though 
all the people of the earth be gathered against them." Verse 10 
describes the recognition of him whom they have pierced, and 
their sorrow when, in that day, God "pours upon them the spirit 
of grace and supplication. " 

Here are a number of events: The "time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation, "-the return of the Jews to Palestine 
and the reorganization of the Jewish nation, though not 
independent -the gathering of great wealth to Jerusalem, which 
tempts the hordes of Gog, Togomar, and many peoples, to go up 
"to take a spoil"--"the battle of the great day of God Almighty," 



fought at Jerusalem— the partial success of the invaders, and in 
the hour of darkness to the Jew, the power of Messiah 
manifested, in some way effecting their deliverance and their 
recognition of the long waited for Messiah, with the cry, "Lo, 
this is our God, we have waited for him and he will save us." 
Then they will recognize him as the one whom they had once 
rejected, and as they look upon him "whom they have pierced" 
when God will "pour upon them the spirit of grace and 
supplication," and they shall mourn for their sin, and be 
accepted again into fellowship with God. The Day of the Lord is 
"the day of Jacob's trouble, but he (Israel) shall be saved out of 
it." These events we expect in about the order mentioned. We 
believe that the word of God furnishes us with indubitable proof 
that we are now living in this "Day of the Lord," that it began in 
1 874, and is a day of forty years' duration, as was "the day of 
temptation in the wilderness," when Israel proved God, and saw 
his works "forty years." (Heb. 3:9.) 

And it is astonishing how very rapidly these things, once looked 
at as absurd and impossible, are becoming realities. When we, 
with a few others, declared these things a few years ago, and 
called attention to the fact that Scripture taught that this trouble 
would be occasioned by a rising of the people and the overthrow 
of governments —Communism— the idea was ridiculed. 
Communism was at that time little known or felt; but to-day 
every nation is in dread, and Nihilism, Communism, and 
Socialism are household words, and we see "men's hearts failing 
for fear and for looking after those things coming on the earth, 
for the powers of heaven (governments) shall be shaken. " (Luke 
21:26.) 

Of recent years the Jew has been coming into prominence, 
furnishing the world as capitalists and statesmen, such names as 
Rothschild, Disraeli, Gambetta, and Montefiero, while yet more 
recently, complications of other nations are placing the control 
of Palestine in the hands of Hebrews, and opening it to them as a 
people for their home, whither the poorer classes are now 
flocking in great numbers from Russia, where one-third of the 
race are said to reside. And what can be more probable than that 
the wealthy ones, as already suggested, should flee there to 
escape the anarchy and insecurity of earth's falling empires? 

Thus there is abundant evidence for all who will "take heed to 
the sure word of prophecy," and who are found watching for its 
fulfillment, that the Day of the Lord is indeed upon us- "Who 
shall be able to stand?" "Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth 
his garments." 



R410 : page 6 



THE LAW OF GOD. 

Christians are in the habit of looking at "the law" as a great 
enemy. Why? Because it does not countenance the least sin. It 
says, "walk before me and be thou perfect." Is that not right- 
could a perfect God recognize or make a law in any way 
imperfect? Surely not. The reason men count the law their 
enemy is that all have sinned, and ever since the disobedience of 
Adam they have been in the condition known as "sinful flesh." 
Prior to sin's entrance, the law was Adam's friend, and justified 
him; but the condition of death obtained after sin had entered, 
and man in this fallen condition of death finds it utterly 
impossible to so live and act in harmony with his Maker, that 
God's perfect law would not condemn him. And since all are 
sinners, of course none but a defective law could recognize such 
persons as perfect. The law of God has condemned all, and 
every one who has reasoning faculties seems to recognize that 
he is not perfect. 

God has always had a law; even before the giving of it at Mount 
Sinai. Since God always has been perfect, His laws always have 
been perfect and condemned and opposed even the slightest sin. 
Abel, Noah, Abraham and all the patriarchs recognized the fact 
that they were sinners when they made altars and sacrificed 
thereon, before attempting to hold communion. Thus they 
acknowledged themselves sinners and unable of themselves to 
approach God. How different from the way Adam and God 
walked and talked in the Garden! No sacrifices or offerings for 
sin were there needed, for Adam was justified, or recognized as 
right by God's law. Thus we see that what the patriarchs knew of 
God's law condemned them. 

The giving of the full law from Sinai did not take away man's 
sin. No, it only showed it the more fully. Did the keeping of it 
ever justify any of them? No; "By the deeds of the law shall no 
flesh be justified 

R410 : page 7 

in His (God's) sight. " Was the fault in the law, or in the people? 
"The law is holy," and God's commands "holy and just and 
good." (Rom. 7:12.) The imperfection was with mankind. Since, 
then, the law did not justify them, it must have condemned 
them, even as it had condemned the patriarchs. Not any more 
really (for there is only one penalty-death) but more loudly. 
They were no greater sinners than those of the Patriarchal Age 
who had not had the full law given them, but they were shown 
their condition as sinners more clearly. Why? That they might 
see their own fallen and imperfect condition and learn the 
exceeding sinfulness of SIN. (Rom. 7:13), and by this 
knowledge be prepared for the Redeemer. 

We have seen that God always has had a perfect law which 
condemned every sin in every being, and how it was shown in 



different degrees to the patriarchs and Israel, yet that the effect 
was the same— condemnation— only more fully realized by those 
who saw the law most clearly. Now, how about the great 
heathen world? Surely a righteous law could not say: The 
heathen are RIGHTEOUS; unless they live in harmony with 
God. And if you thought they were living in harmony with God 
you would not send missionaries to them. No, they too, are 
condemned by God's law. And as Paul says: These that have not 
the law (the full written law as given to Israel) "show the work 
of the law written in their hearts," a spark of that principle of 
justice and knowledge of right and wrong which must have been 
an important part of the natural organization of the first perfect 
man, Adam; a spark merely, not quite extinguished by the 
degrading effects of sin. 

What did this spark of conscience do for them? It sometimes 
justified, and sometimes condemned. But if their spark of 
conscience condemned them only ONCE during their lifetime, it 
showed that they were imperfect— sinners-hence subject to the 
sin penalty, death. 

Now, "all unrighteousness is sin," and "sin is the transgression 
of the law," and "the wages of sin is death. " So we see that the 
only voice of the law of God to any who hear it, is: You cannot 
live. "All have sinned and come short of the glory of God": 
Therefore must "every mouth be stopped and all the world 
become guilty before God." (Rom. 3:9,19.) 

There lay the whole human family dead and dying through sin, 
the law hanging up before them, they admit, is grand, "just" and 
"holy. " They were told that "The man that doeth these things 
shall live." (Rom. 10:5, Gal. 3:12.) But O, they could not do 
them. Some tried hard, as Paul describes, Rom. 7:14-24. When 
with their minds they resolved to "do those things and live, " 
they found sin in their members hindering and preventing. When 
the striving ones found they could not deliver 

R411 : page 7 

themselves from death, they exclaimed: "Wretched man that I 
am, who will deliver me from this body of death?" (Diaglott) or, 
from the sin and death which has gotten possession of me. When 
he so cries out, he has reached the place God wanted to bring 
him to, i.e., to realize that he can NEVER deliver himself from 
death and sin. But some one asks: If he dies does not the act of 
dying fill all the requirements of the law, and could he not, after 
thus dying, be raised up by God? No, you err in supposing that 
the act of dying is the penalty. Man has been dying ever since 
sin entered the world, but the penalty will not be entirely 
inflicted until all are dead. The penalty is, that sinners shall have 
life no longer; they forfeit their right to live. 

But when will the law of God release the sinner from the 
bondage of death? Never; if he could not obey the law while 



partially dead, he certainly cannot when completely so. Ever 
since the "fall" from perfect manhood through sin, man has been 
in a dying condition, sometimes spoken of as already dead (see 
Matt. 8:22). And none but a perfect man could keep a perfect 
law. But, says one, did not God send his Son into the world to 
show us how we could work our way up to spiritual life- 
appearing among us on the lowest round of the ladder, did He 
not point out to us the way; he being thus "our forerunner?" 

This view in many respects is held by a great many, mostly 
"Unitarians" and "Universalists" and like many other views has 
a mixture of truth in it; but as a whole is far from being "the 
truth" on this subject. Jesus did indeed "lay aside the glory 
which he had with the Father, before the world;" He did appear 
to "set us an example that we should follow in his footsteps" and 
to be "our forerunner," but more, he is also our "Redeemer" 
from the curse of the Law. The curse of the law upon us as 
sinners is death. How did he redeem us from death? To redeem 
is to purchase back. He therefore is said to have "bought us with 
his own precious blood." Blood represents life- "The life of the 
flesh is in the blood" (Lev. 17:11), therefore shed blood 
represents death or sacrificed life. "He gave his life; " "He shed 
his blood;" "He tasted death;" all have the same meaning. But 
how could his life purchase or redeem or buy ours? He as a man, 
a perfect man, kept the perfect law; and was therefore 
uncondemned by it. Therefore the same law which was the 
sinners' enemy condemning us to death, was his friend and 
guaranteed life to him. But was he not born into the world under 
condemnation of death, as much as any other son of Adam? No, 
he was a direct creation of God- "made in the likeness of sinful 
flesh," but "in him was no sin." If he had done sin or been born a 
sinner, his life would have been forfeited as was ours. 

If born under condemnation as other human beings he would 
have been as much a sinner as we, and as such would have been 
obliged to die for himself and consequently would have nothing 
to give as a ransom for our life. But he was perfect, kept the law, 
had a right to perfect human life forever; "But for the joy set 
before him, " by the promise of the Father to raise him from the 
dead a spiritual body, he renounced the natural, human life, and 
gave it for our ransom. 

But when he arose from death, was not that a taking back of the 
price? Yes, if he had taken back the same life which he had laid 
down; but he did not take back the human; he was quickened by 
the Spirit -"made a quickening Spirit," raised a "spiritual body." 
There is a natural, human body and there is a spiritual body. 

Thus "by his precious (valuable) blood" (life), we were 
"redeemed from the curse of the law" -death. To what kind of 
life were we redeemed? The same which man had before death 
(the curse) came; the same kind that Jesus gave for us, i.e., 
human life. But we are promised spiritual life, and that we shall 



be made like unto Christ's glorious body? Yes; it is a part of 
God's offer to us (during the Gospel age), that if we die to 
earthly and fleshly— natural— life, we may be reckoned as 
"members of his body," and partake of the same kind of life as 
our Head. If we leave our Father's house (the human) we may 
become espoused to the Lord of glory as His Bride. In this 
arrangement, we are reckoned as being justified to the perfect 
natural life first, else we could not give our lives. Being justified 
to life, Jesus says to us, you can either have this natural life, or, 
if you will renounce this natural, as I did, and become dead to 
the world, you shall have instead, the spiritual life and body. "If 
we be dead with Christ, we shall live with him." Rom. 6:4-8. "It 
is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also 
live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him. " 2 Tim. 
2:11. "Ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings." 1 Pet. 4:13. "Joint 
heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together." Rom. 8:17. 

And it is because God thus waits until the elect number, the 
bride, the body, the Church, has "filled up the measure of the 
afflictions of Christ, which are behind, " that the "restitution of 
all things," purchased for the world by the blood of Christ, is 
delayed and yet future. The Head suffered and died over 
eighteen hundred years ago; but all of the suffering and death of 
the body are not yet completed. Not noticing this, has caused 
wonder on the part of almost all, that the benefits and results of 
the ransom have not sooner come. (See typical sacrifices, in the 
Tabernacle Tract.) 

But would it be right for God to reckon the one righteous life 
given, as a full payment for the lives of the millions of sinners 
who have died? Does not the price-one, for a billion or more- 
seem like a short payment? 

This is a reasonable question, and we will allow Paul to give it a 
reasonable answer. He is a logical reasoner, as well as an 
inspired Apostle, and argues that, as God had seen proper to 
condemn all men to death on account of Adam's disobedience, 
so he had a right to reckon the second Adam a representative 
man, and justify to life all the race, in return for the sacrifice of 
this one perfect life. "For as by one man's disobedience many 
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be 
made righteous. "Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation," (condemned to suffer the 
penalty of sin, death,))"even so by the righteousness of one, the 
free gift came upon all men unto justification to life. " 
Remember that none now enjoy life; our condition is a dying 
one. "Dying thou shalt die" was the penalty pronounced on 
Adam. 

The condition of perfect life as it was enjoyed before death 
came, is what all men are justified to, by the obedience of "Jesus 
Christ who, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man. " 



"For as in Adam (or by Adam's sin) all die," so "in Christ (or by 
Christ's obedience, etc.) shall all be made alive." As the first 
Adam's bride was a party to the sin, so we see the second 
Adam's bride is made a party with her Lord in the removing of 
the curse. Oh glorious plan, of our all wise and loving Father, 
and the exceeding riches of his grace toward us, in Christ Jesus. 

But says one, I thought that Jesus had nullified, set aside and 
destroyed the law; and that therefore mankind could approach 
God. Oh no, that was a great mistake. Would it not be strange 
indeed if the Father made a law, which we have seen was "just" 
and "holy," and in fact the only one he could give because 
perfect and holy himself, would it seem proper even to think of 
Jesus as setting aside and destroying that "just" and "holy" law 
or in any way making a league with sin or sinners? No, no. He 
came to do the Father's will and the law is the record of that 
will. Jesus kept it himself and taught the true meaning of it to be 
higher than the letter, and that to be "angry with a brother 
without a cause" was to violate the command "Thou shalt not 
kill. " No, says Paul: "Christ magnified the law (made it larger 
and more minute) and made it honorable," showed in fact that, 
that law could not be set aside or broken. He showed too, by 
keeping it perfectly himself, that God's law was just, and not 
beyond a perfect man's ability. 

But we read, "Christ is the end of the law. " What can that mean? 
The trouble is you have not quoted the connections. The text 
reads: "For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to 
every one that believeth." (Rom. 10:4.) To whom is he this? To 
believers. How? Righteously, not by breaking it, but by 
righteously fulfilling its requirements, and we in him are just 
before the law. Because we in Him are reckoned dead to the 
world and alive toward God through Him— our new life, another 
similar text reads: "There is therefore now no condemnation to 
them which are IN Christ Jesus." Why are those in Christ not 
condemned? Because, since coming into Him by faith they have 
received of His spirit, and with Him can say, "I delight to do thy 
will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart." (Ps. 11:8.) 
They are then alive spiritually though yet living in the dead body 
of sinful flesh which they are supposed to, and which by the 
holy spirit given they are enabled to "crucify." These walk not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit, and to all so walking in Christ, 
there is no condemnation from the law. 

And in the glorious millennial age, when all shall know God 
from least to greatest, when, "the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth; "-"the times of restitution" -there will be 
the same "holy and just" law, and under the "Royal Priesthood" 
after the order of Melchisedec (the order of an endless life) poor 
fallen humanity will be helped back again, to that perfect 
condition from whence Adam fell; a condition in harmony with 
God's law, and therefore in harmony with God. 



But will they receive no punishment for misdeeds of the present 
life? They will 

R412 : page 7 

receive punishment, "stripes" in proportion as they had light and 
lived contrary to it. As our Master explained, "It shall be more 
tolerable for Sodom," in the day of judgment (in the age of trial) 
than for the Jews to whom He spoke, because the Sodomites had 
sinned against less light. (Matt. 11:24.) There will be many or 
few "stripes," in proportion to the amount of light they have had, 
and the use made of it. 

There will be rewards given to some during that age also; "for 
whosoever shall give to one of these little ones (of the little 
flock) a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, shall in 
no wise lose his reward." (Matt. 10:42.) And when the King 
shall sit "on the throne of his glory" (during the Millennial age), 
some will be rewarded for having ministered to the members of 
his body. "Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these" 
(in the throne) "ye did it unto me." Matt. 25:40. 



R412 : page 7 

WHEN we announce, as a part of God's plan of salvation, now 
due to be understood, that the Sodomites (Ezek. 16:48-63) and 
all men who have never yet come to a knowledge of the truth (1 
Tim. 2:4) are to be saved out of Adamic-death, brought to life 
again by reason of Jesus' ransom; and that they may then be 
made acquainted with the truth and have an opportunity by 
obedience to that knowledge, to reach perfection as men, and 
live forever, it seems as strange to those who hear it, as did the 
announcement of the apostles in the end of the Jewish age, that 
from that time God would call and accept of Gentiles as his 
spiritual sons— Gentiles who but shortly before, had been treated 
as strangers and aliens and children of wrath. 

This shows the importance of our apprehending dispensational 
truths, and ever searching God's Word for the ever increasing 
light on "the path of the just. " 



As in the Jewish age, so it is in the end of this Gospel age of 
which it was a shadow or type. It was not until the ending of the 
Jewish age that God sent light upon the Gospel age and its 
broader work. Thus it is now also; not until the very closing 
hours of the Gospel age does light shine out clear and strong 
upon the now dawning Millennial age and its work for mankind 
in general. 



R412 : page 7 



EVIDENCE OF FRIENDSHIP. 

"Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. 
Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not 
what his Lord doeth, [his plans, etc.] but I have called you 
friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made 
known unto you." John 15:14,15. 

The end of Jesus' earthly ministry was come. During those 
three and a half years he had uttered truths which served to test 
his followers, which proved to some a cause of stumbling— to all 
who were not "Israelites indeed:"— truths which had brought the 
opposition of the nominal Jewish church, and of which, even 
some of his followers, had said: "This is an hard saying; who 
can hear it? and walked no more with him. " But now this work 
of separation was all over; even Judas had gone out, and Jesus 
and the eleven are alone. He has been telling them some things 
regarding their new and high privileges, their new relationship 
toward God about to be purchased by his death, into the 
enjoyment of which they should enter after he should ascend to 
the Father, and His work of redemption be recognized as 
perfect. Then would come the "power from on high"- the Spirit 
which would endue them with ability to understand spiritual, or 
heavenly things. 

It may have escaped the attention of some that at this time the 
disciples were not begotten of the spirit, (John 7:39) though they 
were justified by faith. They were justified human beings, but 
not begotten new creatures, consequently Jesus' teachings 
contain little reference to the highest things, except in parables; 
he explained little concerning the "high calling" of the Bride, but 
said: "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear 
them now. Howbeit, when he the spirit of truth is come, he will 
guide you into all truth." How this corroborates Paul's statement: 
"The natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of 
God,... neither can he know them because they are spiritually 
discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. Though justified men, they must be 
begotten of the Spirit to comprehend things above the human 
plane. 

After telling them of the future unfolding of truth and of his 
words, he tells them why his revelations are for them, viz.: 
because he will henceforth treat them as friends and reveal all 
things to them. 

There are two important lessons conveyed in these words of the 
Master, as applicable to us as to the eleven Apostles: first, the 
rule by which He judges who are his friends- "Ye are my friends 
if ye do whatsoever I command you." If we submit our wills 
completely to his will, thus becoming dead to the world and 
alive toward God— then he reckons us friends; second, the rule 
by which we may judge whether he reckons us among this class 



of special "friends," viz.: If he reveals his work and plans to us, 
even all things which he has heard of the Father. 

Now apply these rules to yourself. If you can say, "Not my will 
but thine be done;" not my plan of saving the world; not my plan 
relative to the preaching of the Gospel; not my will regarding 
the nominal church; not my will regarding myself and what I 
shall do or be, but "Thy will be done" in all these things, then 
you are a "friend" in this special sense spoken of by Jesus. Now 
try the other rule: Have you evidence that you are a special 
friend? Is the Spirit leading you daily into more and more of an 
understanding of his words and plan-revealing more and more 
of the "mystery" kept hid in former ages, and showing you 
"things to come?" Do you say yes? Very good, then yours is the 
blessed experience of heavenly wisdom, which at the same time 
is a proof that you are a special "friend." Continue your 
consecration, 

R412 : page 8 

continue your sacrifice, and you shall continue to abide in his 
love and to have fresh evidences of his friendship by growth "in 
grace and in knowledge. " 

If the Word and plan of God are not opening before you: If you 
are not being led of the Spirit into all truth— if he is not showing 
you "things to come," (John 16:13.) then it looks indeed as 
though you were not of the special friends, and it should be your 
first work to gain this divine friendship by self-surrender- 
consecration. 

All who believe themselves acceptable servants of our Master 
should look for, and not be satisfied without this witness of the 
Spirit that they are Christ's friends. 



page 8 

LETTER FROM BROTHER SUNDERLIN. 

FORT EDWARD, N.Y. "Greatly beloved" brother Russell: 

Yours of the 18th came to hand Monday evening, 21st inst. I 
accept with gratitude the sympathy and love expressed, and I 
know that you will rejoice with me on account of returning 
health; in the Lord's good time I have been directed to the 
remedy ("Compound Oxygen") that is now working great good 
to me. 

I always feel like chiding myself when I begin to be lavish of 
special praises to God for health, or any of those things that men 
regard as blessings. It is "Our Father," and sick or well, pain or 
ease, his infinite all abounding love is the same, and by each and 
every means, and all his dealing with me, he is "treasuring up 
his bright designs." 



This has sustained me, and though he let me down, down, 
DOWN, to a lone dreary waste of mind and spirit, where I had 
no strength, I was able by his grace always to gasp "Thy will be 
done." Amen! It must be best; proceed O Lord with thy good 
pleasure in me, and burn up all the dross. 

I thank you and appreciate the kindness that prompted you to 
send me the medical formula, and the doctor from whom it came 
also; but it so happened (?) that just before it came I had written 
to doctors in Philadelphia, regarding my case, and though they 
gave me no particular encouragement, but said: "We don't see 
how you live," I had confidence in the OXYGEN, and though I 
felt as though I could not afford the price, I sent for it. Before it 
came, I was much worse, and it found me in a direful condition; 
but it has just raised me right up— no guess-work about it. 

One week ago last Saturday, it came about noon. I was so bad 
that night that it took five or six doses of morphine to quiet me, 
the next night one, and none since. The third night after it came I 
slept sweetly without any anodyne. 

One week ago, Monday, I could not sit up to have my bed made, 
but got to one side to have it stirred and regulated— four days 
after the "Oxygen treatment" came I rode out. At first getting up 
I hobbled about on crutch and cane-I now walk about the yard a 
little thus, and can walk about the house with cane only. Of 
course it is a new strength, a sort of infantile life; but I am 
thankful for it, while my dear Lord understands that I do not 
undervalue my sickness and pain and sorrow and darkness and 
gloom, which though intended for evil by the enemy, is among 
the "all things" working for good. 

I had hoped to finish my last article for "Z.W.T." but shall not 
be able to, in time for next issue. It is yet hard work to think and 
write, but I do not now feel the labor of hanging on to life. 

With much love to yourself and dear sister Russell, and wishing 
to be remembered to all yours and ours, I am as ever, 



Yours in Christ Jesus, 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 

Our readers will be interested in the above. Brother Sunderlin 
has been in the furnace of affliction for several months and 
unable to write for the TOWER. (His articles in this number, 
were written before his illness.) You will all be glad to know of 
his recovery, though since he has caught cold and got a set-back. 

Regarding the remedy he mentions: It is called "Compound 
Oxygen treatment," and is prepared by at least two firms in 
Philadelphia, Pa. Thinking that a remedy which has done our 
brother so much good might be of benefit to others, we wrote to 
see what terms we could make for our readers. 



We have made arrangements by which you can have what are 
termed "Home treatments," for seven dollars and fifty cents, the 
usual price of which is from ten to fifteen dollars. You can either 
address Drs. Feltwell and Fondey, Philadelphia, Pa., saying that 
you are a Watch Tower reader; or you can send your order to us 
and we will attend to it for you. 

This remedy is specially recommended for Consumption and 
Nervous Debility and Spinal Weakness. By enclosing stamp for 
postage, and addressing as above, some printed descriptive 
circulars will be sent you. 

EDITOR. 



R412 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Q. If I understand your teachings, you claim that God intends 
to restore all mankind to the original perfection of manhood in 
which he created Adam. I can see that you have a strong 
argument in the fact that Jesus tasted death for all, and thus paid 
our Adamic debt, which was the cause of death and 
imperfection. Particularly strong is the argument when we 
remember that only a fragment of the race ever heard of the only 
name given under heaven or among men whereby we must be 
saved. I admit, then, that the ideas advanced are consistent with 
both Justice and Love; that the arguments and inferences are 
strong, and the entire plan Godlike, but my question is, Is there 
any positive statement of Scripture to the effect that man will be 
restored to Edenic perfection and bliss and life? 

A. We claim that the teachings on this point are positive, and not 
merely inferential; that only the strong prejudice of early 
training hinders Christians from seeing it to be so. Only this 
prejudice and training leads any one to suppose that God will 
punish willful sin with a life of torment when he positively 
declares, "The wages of sin is death" (cessation of life), and that 
"all the wicked will he destroy." (Psa. 145:20.) 

We inquire how else could Jesus be the true light that lighteth 
every man that cometh into the world? (John 1:9.) How else 
could the news of a Savior be "good tidings of great joy to all 
people? (Luke 2:10.) If only a few have yet heard the "good 
tidings" in any sense, must there not be a restitution to life as 
well as a future proclamation of the only name given? 
Otherwise, God's plan is a failure. But we have the positive 
statement that "God will have all men to be saved, and to come 
unto the knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 2:4.) Notice, they are 
to be saved first, saved from the Adamic death through the 
efficacy of the ransom price, and afterward brought to a 



knowledge of the truth under the favoring circumstances of the 
reign of Christ. 

For a pointed text in support of restitution we refer you to Acts 
3:19-21. Here Peter not only tells of the "times (years) of 
restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets," but he points out that this restitution cannot and will 
not take place until Christ our Lord comes. And he comes when 
his church or bride has been selected, to receive her unto 
himself. 

This restitution is mentioned by all the Prophets. Some refer to 
one feature and 

R413 : page 8 

some to another. Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, tell much of the 
restoration of fleshly Israel to favor and to their own land. This, 
which is a part of the general restitution, a slight beginning, is 
already commencing, and, as we have heretofore shown, was 
due to commence in 1878. There, in fact, the favor did begin in 
the decree of the Berlin conference, which placed Palestine 
under English protection and opened the door for the restoration 
now beginning. And before long it will be found that the results 
of the recent Egyptian war will accrue yet more, to Israel's 
favor, and their repossession of Palestine. 

The Prophet Job, in his own experience, is made a type of the 
restitution. He first lost all earthly blessings-human health, 
wealth, friends, etc.; then he had all these restored to him 
exactly as at first, except that the wealth was increased. So 
humanity was degraded to the dunghill, but is to be restored to 
its "former estate," and will have increase of pleasure and wealth 
in the increased blessings of knowledge, invention, etc. 

The Prophet Moses taught restitution in type. In the same way 
(in type) he wrote of Christ as Jesus said: "Moses wrote of me. " 
(John 5:46.) Every fiftieth year was a jubilee year to Israel, in 
which land and all possessions lost, were fully restored. Thus 
this Prophet spoke pointedly of the coming restitution of all 
things, for which, unconsciously and ignorantly, "the whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. " 
(Rom. 8:22.) Read Lev. 25. 

Ezekiel not only speaks of the restitution of living Jews, but tells 
of the restoration of the dead ones to their former estate. Among 
them he mentions the Sodomites, and says they will be restored. 
We remember Jesus' statement, that "it rained down fire and 
brimstone, and destroyed them all." (Luke 17:29.) Hence we 
know that Ezekiel's prophecy is concerning men, dead for nearly 
a thousand years before he prophesied. Nor need we be 
surprised at the restitution when we remember that Christ died 
for their sins as well as for ours, and that in his estimation the 
Sodomites were far less guilty than some of the Jews of his day 



who had greater light. (Matt. 11:23.) The time of their restitution 
will be the time of their trial or judgment; and Jesus says it will 
be more tolerable for the Sodomites than for some of the Jews, 
in the day of judgment -the Millennial or judgment (trial) age of 
the world. [See article-The Day of Judgment-in another 
column.] 

Read very carefully the Lord's words through Ezekiel, on the 
subject of restoring to a former estate (chap. 16:48-63), 
remembering that Jesus by the grace of God tasted death for 
every man, to be testified in DUE time. (1 Tim. 2:6.) It is 
evident that the due time to receive this "glad tidings" never yet 
came to the Sodomites and billions of others, but there can be no 
doubt that it will come "in DUE TIME"-in the times of 
restitution of all things. 

As we saw in the June number of the TOWER, there is a 
meaning in the word RESURRECTION, little appreciated until 
recently by any of us. We there saw, that the Greek word 
anastasis, from which our word resurrection is translated, means 
to raise, or lift up to perfection. We saw that the saints would be 
lifted up to the perfection of their nature-the DIVINE (2 Pet. 
1:4), while all men who then submit themselves to God will be 
lifted up to the perfection of their nature-the HUMAN. We saw 
that Lazarus and others who were raised to a measure of life 
only, as a consequence, did not experience a resurrection, and 
that this is never called a resurrection in Scripture. Jesus was the 
first being, resurrected. (Col. 1:18.) If this, the proper meaning 
of resurrection, were recognized, how much obscurity would be 
removed. "There shall be a resurrection (raising up to 
perfection) both of the just and unjust." (Acts 24:15.) 

Yes, restitution is abundantly and clearly taught in God's Word, 
if we but get ourselves freed from the bondage of prejudice and 
of man-made church creeds, so that we can "see light in His 
light." 

But understand us clearly, we do not teach everlasting salvation 
for all men. Our claim is that Scripture teaches a salvation of all 
men from Adamic-death and its attendant weaknesses, in order 
that each shall have a full opportunity to secure everlasting life 
by obedience. 

Q. You say that you are not a sect— that you claim no name but 
that of Christ, and object not to be called Christians, though not 
of the denomination so called. But are you not as much of a sect 
as any of the others, only without a name and without a limited 
and written creed? 

A. No, the word sect means a division, or a separation. Every 
sect separates itself from all other Christians by a doctrinal fence 
or creed. Any who would be of them must go inside their pen, 
believe what they believe, deny what they deny, and be called 
by their sectarian name. This practice has become so common 



that many suppose it to be God's arrangement; and any one 
found outside all of these numerous pens, is supposed an enemy 
of God and of truth. 

We are opposed to these pens, but love the many children of 
God, whose growth in grace, and knowledge, and love, is 
hindered by these restraints. We are opposed to these sectarian 
pens, because they are not of Jesus, nor of the apostles, but of 
Satan and Anti-Christ. They prevent the Lord's sheep from 
feeding in the green pastures of truth which the true shepherd 
has provided. 

We stand outside of all these fences and recognize the Lord's 
sheep, whether in or out of the nominal churches, as our 
brethren and sisters; and we urge all in the name of our Master 
to come out— jump the fence or break it down, and come out into 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not 
entangled with any yoke of bondage. Thus free, we find his yoke 
easy and our burden light. If all denominational lines and fences 
and names were obliterated, all Christians would stand just 
where we stand now, each taught of God through his Word, and 
each one a brother who exhibits the Spirit of the Head. 

All of these sects are condemned to destruction, and the hour of 
their downfall has come. It will cause pain and distress to all 
who are worshiping and serving these systems of men, instead 
of God; but it will be a blessing in disguise, for thus they will be 
liberated and brought to a refreshing knowledge of God. "Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins," and 
that ye receive not of her plagues." Rev. 18:4. 

Thus you see we are not a sect, and that if all Christians would 
do as we do in this matter, all sects (divisions) would disappear, 
and we would be all one in Christ. Soon under the lead of one 
Master and Teacher, Jesus, we should all come to see things 
from his standpoint. 

Q. If men are to be restored to perfection, and the earth is to 
become as the Garden of Eden, I suppose that you teach that 
men will not go to heaven, but that God created the earth for 
man, and man for earthly existence? 

A. Yes, but do not forget that the church changes its nature, 
from animal to spiritual, from human to divine. These are called 
"new creatures"— a new creation. The new creatures when 
perfected will be like and with Jesus-spiritual beings, and in a 
heavenly or spiritual condition— a height of glory 
incomprehensible to the human mind -an exhibition of the 
exceeding riches of God's grace. The earth then blossoming as 
the rose, will be all that could be wished for, by those possessing 
the human nature. See chart in "Food for Thinking Christians," 
page 105. 



R413 : page 8 

"MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN." 

In answer to numerous inquiries we would say that this work is 
progressing, and will issue as soon as possible, though doubtless 
that will not be for some time. We desire that when issued it 
may be not only a book for study, but valuable for reference on 
all Bible topics. We request your patience. 

page 8 

BIBLE STUDENTS' HELPS. 

Realizing the necessity of helps in Bible study, as needful as 
tools to the mechanic, we have for some time past made it our 
business to seek and negotiate for some of the more 
indispensable helps at wholesale rates or less, for the benefit of 
our readers, very many of whom could not afford a large outlay. 

We have heretofore mentioned the superior value of The 
Emphatic Diaglott, a literal translation of the New Testament, 
which furnishes in addition the Greek text, and a word-for-word 
English translation of the same— very valuable to a Greek 
scholar, and doubly so to the student who is not. We still have 
some copies of this work slightly damaged on inside of cover 
(scarcely noticeable) which we can mail you for $1.50 per copy, 
the usual price of which is $4. This we consider superior to all 
other helps. 

Cruden's complete Bible Concordance, well known standard 
work, very useful in finding Scriptural passages, we can mail for 
$1.20 per copy, cloth bound. 

"Young's Bible Concordance" gives each word in order under its 
Hebrew or Greek original, with the literal English meaning of 
each. A very valuable work for careful students. By express, 
$1.75; by mail, 51c. extra for postage. Cloth bound. 

Oxford Teacher's Bibles. -We can supply you with any of these 
at the wholesale price. We have one job lot of these at $1.30 per 
copy. They contain partial concordance, maps, etc. Limp cover, 
gilt edge, small sized type. 

The "Millennial Day Dawn," when ready, will prove, we hope, a 
very valuable helper. 

R413 : page 8 

WATCH TOWER TRACT FUND. 

We have a fund which is spent as fast as it accumulates, in 
printing and distributing tracts, slips, and extra-sized editions of 
the "TOWER," such as this number, free. We state this in order 
that if any have a money talent and think favorably of this 



method, they may have the privilege of sharing with us in these 
methods of preaching the "good tidings of great joy." 

EXTRA SIZED 400,000 EDITION. 

This October number is a little larger than our usual issue. We 
send out this month 400,000 copies, and as it will be read by 
many totally unacquainted with the views presented, we desire 
to give them sufficient mental food to excite an appetite for 
more, which we will be glad to furnish on application. 

Order all you can use of this number for judicious free 
distribution. 

TRACTS FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION. 

"THE TABERNACLE and its teachings," a treatise on the 
meaning of the typical offerings and sacrifices. 

"FOOD FOR TfflNKING CHRISTIANS.- Why evil was 
permitted, etc." 

"THE MINISTER'S DAUGHTER," a leaflet suitable for 
awakening thought on the love of God. This is the best tract for 
general distribution, and for enclosing with a letter to a friend. 

The above can be had FREE on application, for free distribution. 



R414 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1882. 

NO. 5. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars 
by mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money 
Order or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



page 1 

-THOSE who must send postage stamps for subscription, 
please send one or two cent ones. 

—WE have been so delayed by the extra issue of October that 
we have omitted the November issue. Subscriptions will last one 
month longer. 



R414 : page 1 



TO NEW READERS. 



The TOWER comes to you as unpretentiously as the ministers 
of the early church. We present no list of titled and world 
renowned contributors —none whose fame would command your 
attention to the subjects we present. But we come to you with 
the Bible as God's Word, and seek to enlist your attention to its 
statements and your obedience to its requirements, and thus to 
lead the hearts and minds of some of God's children away from 
the jarring confusion of precept and doctrine, prevalent among 
the various divisions (sects) of Christians, into the harmony, 
beauty, simplicity, and confidence, which come from the study 
of God's Word and its acceptance as a harmonious whole and a 
self interpreter. 

In our last number you saw some scriptures applied more 
pointedly than you have been accustomed to apply them, and 
other scriptures quoted for which you never before could find a 
place of application without distortion. It would be but natural 
that you should wonder how these things could be true, yet not 
recognized long ago by earnest Christians; and why so many of 
those in the churches manifest a bitter opposition to things so 
full of harmony with God's Word, and so fully vindicating the 
Justice, Wisdom and Love of our Heavenly Father. 

In answer to your supposed queries, we suggest that if a broad 
view of God's dealings be taken, it shows that He has a plan 
with reference to men. While he was pleased in past times to 
reveal an outline of that plan, it was nothing more; no details 
were given. The details of the plan began to be recognized since 
Pentecost. The light of revelation shines with special brightness 
on the ends of the ages. Upon the ending of the Jewish age 
which was the beginning of the Gospel Age, glorious light shone 
out relative to the blessed privileges about to be enjoyed in the 
Gospel Age. Remember, too, that it came from the Scriptures, 
written long before, but which were never before appreciated 
and understood. Matthew Mark, Luke, John, Peter and Paul, all 
quoted the prophecies and applied them to the events taking 
place and due to take place in their day -the opening of the 
Gospel Age. The prophecies had been there for centuries, but 
the revelation or understanding of them, was reserved for those 



in the ends of the ages. (See 1 Cor. 10:11.) So now in the closing 
of the Gospel Age and dawning of the grand Millennial Age, we 
should expect the light to shine out brightly relative to God's 
plans for this incoming age. And so it does. Search and see. 
Gem after gem of precious truth now glows with unparalleled 
luster to the diligent searcher because God's due time has come 
for such to understand it. Soon the blessed bow of promise shall 
span the whole heavens, and weeping earth shall dry her tears 
and shout for joy. 

It is no more surprising that these truths relative to God's plan 
for the blessing of all mankind should have been but dimly seen 
heretofore, than that the call of the Gentiles to be heirs of the 
Abrahamic promise, (Acts 11:18. Eph 3:5,6. Gal. 3:29.) should 
have been but dimly seen until the Gospel Age began to dawn. 
We can understand prophetic Scriptural statements only as they 
become due. Thus— "Light, (knowledge, was long ago) sown for 
the righteous." When due, the light springs up and gradually 
unfolds. Thus our Father has made abundant provision for the 
household-that the servants shall bring forth things both new 
and old, and the household have meat in due season. 

The cause of the opposition on the part of many to the truth now 
due, is the failure to recognize this progressive and unfolding 
character of God's revelation of his plans. Most Christians take 
for granted that good men of the past who walked in the light 
then due, had all the truth worth knowing. Knox, Calvin, Luther, 
Wesley and others were, we believe, followers in our Lord's 
footsteps of self-sacrifice and devotedness to God; but more 
truth is due in our day than in theirs. According to God's plan, 
the light should shine more and more until 'tis perfect day. 
Therefore many Christians of to-day make a great mistake, and 
sit in comparative darkness, when they might be walking in 
glorious light, because they search the theology of these men 
instead of the Word of God. 

O, that all would turn away from musty church creeds of times 
past and give more earnest heed to the ever living, ever fresh, 
ever unfolding, ever new Word of God. Again, others take the 
Bible and search it only for the purpose of seeing how nearly 
they can make it to fit either their mental or written creed. If 
your habit has been such, we hope you will at once resolve to 
lay aside all human teachings as authoritative and hereafter 
judge all you hear or read by the statements of Scripture. If you 
believe anything, make sure that you have Scriptural statements 
warranting it. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good and 
cast away all else. 

The action of the nominal church to-day relative to the light now 
shining clearly resembles that of the Jewish church relative to 
light in the end of their age. They reject every new ray of light 
because it would conflict with some cherished theory or 
statement of their creed. They are so enwrapped with their own 



plans and arrangements for converting the world, that they are 
unwilling to hear that God has a better, grander, and infinitely 
more comprehensive way of dealing with evil, and blessing and 
teaching the world. Their ears are so stopped by the din and 
confusion of their own religious efforts that they cannot discern 
the plan of Jehovah. 

Satan indeed is doubtless interested in the promotion of the 
Babel confusion of sects, and stimulates and encourages that 
zeal which is not according to knowledge, and thus he hinders 
their hearing Jehovah's voice, saying, "Be still and know that I 
am God, (the mighty one); I will be exalted among the heathen; 
I will be exalted in the earth." (Psa. 46:10.) The power to do this 
is with our Father and not with us. When he gives the saints with 
Christ their Lord, the heathen for an inheritance- when He gives 
the kingdom under the whole heavens to the people of the saints, 
THEN, and not by poor human effort, will God's kingdom come 
and His will be done on earth as it is in heaven. (Dan. 2:35,44 
and 7:18,27.) 



R414 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Notwithstanding many discouraging circumstances and the 
severe trial of faith which has been, and is still testing the 
household of faith, we rejoice in the assurance of our Father's 
Word that "The Lord knoweth them that are His," and we know 
that all things shall work together for good to them. " His Word 
repeatedly assures us that in the days of the Son of Man-during 
the presence of Christ— we must expect that He will sit as a 
refiner and purifier of silver to purify and purge of all dross. We 
have before seen that this purifying relates to all things-to 
questions of governments and subjects, capitalists and laborers, 
masters and servants; in a word it is the purifying of all things, 
political, social, scientific and religious. Scripture affirms that 
this testing and purging commences with the Church— God's 
Temple." (Read carefully Malachi 3:1-4.) 

If then, we are living in the transition period which closes the 
Gospel Age and introduces the Millennial Age, called "The day 
of the Lord," should WE be surprised at these tests of the 
Refiner, whom we recognize as being now present? "Beloved 
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, 
as though some strange thing happened unto you: But rejoice 
inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his 
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. 
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ (not as evil doers) 
happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God resteth on 
you... The time is come that judgement must begin at the house 
of God." 1 Peter, 4:12-17. (The word judgment sometimes refers 



to the process of trial, and sometimes to the result of trial-the 
sentence. In the first sense the judgment of the church began 
with the beginning of the Gospel Age; in the latter sense it 
belongs to the end or harvest of the age. This testing now going 
on separates the true and the false, the wheat and the tares in the 
nominal church, and already the welcome "well done" begins to 
be realized by the faithful, who even here begin to enter into the 
joy of their Lord as the light of His Word reveals the glorious 
future.) 

We should be arming ourselves with the whole armor of God's 
Word, and bracing ourselves for our own final testing, by 
girding up the loins of our minds with the girdle of truth, that we 
may be able to withstand in this evil day, For "a thousand shall 
fall at thy side and ten thousand at thy right hand." (Eph. 6:13; 
Psa. 91:7.) 

And some of them of understanding shall fall to try and to purge 
and to make white. (Dan. 1 1:35) This will shake loose from all 
earthly supports and confidence in man's wisdom. It will have 
the effect of binding some still closer to the Master's teachings, 
and to a more close inspection of every thought advanced or 
received to see whether it be God's teaching they are building 
with, and whether they are firmly built upon the foundation-rock 
that Christ died for our sins. 

R415 : page 2 

In the midst of this testing time however, the Lord sends many 
encouragements for which we praise Him. Among others are 
many encouraging words from the faithful in Christ Jesus, 
telling us how they continue to grow up into Christ; how they 
daily become stronger and better able to overcome the 
allurements of Anti-christ and the spirit of the world. 

A brother writes from London, Eng., of his visit to Spurgeon's 
Tabernacle, as follows: 

"It was on an occasion in which his audience was supposed to be 
entirely of strangers, and we were very gently led to suppose 
that possibly if we were not brought to the light in this age, there 
might be a chance in another, but that after all it is better to be 
converted at once so as to make sure of it. This man has vastly 
changed in regard to what he preaches since I have known him. 
He has evidently read the book "Food" and is breaking it gently. 
It may be bias, though I think not, but I fancy that the "Food" 
must have been read in many thinking quarters, because I very 
distinctly recognize in many of the leaders of pulpit thought, the 
spirit of the work. I believe that the fruit is ripening. 

Another from Titusville, says- he thinks the influence of this 
truth now permeates to a greater or less extent, every pulpit in 
that region. We mention these things that you may be 
encouraged, for often we might feel like Elijah that we are 



measurably alone; but like him should know that there are others 
who do not bow either to Baal or Babylon. 

Many letters must go unanswered, and many must wait a long 
time. If the letter does not seem to need an answer, or if some 
printed matter will answer its queries, we simply read, fill its 
orders, and omit special answering. You will not be surprised at 
this when we inform you that of this present edition we print 
20,000 copies, and that the letters received have for some time 
past, averaged from 500 to 600 per week. To answer every one 
would be impossible. There are at present four persons engaged 
in answering letters, besides what the Editor answers personally, 
and even then we can only attend to the most important ones. 

However, we are always glad to hear from you, if you will take 
the public letters of the Editor in the TOWER as your answers, 
except on special matters. But know that every letter receives 
attention. 

We published 200,000 copies of the last number of the TOWER, 
and issued them from New York City for the sake of economy 
and dispatch. On our return to Pittsburgh we met much to 
encourage us— kind words and donations, etc.,— some small 
sums, and some larger. The Master knows, not we, which were 
the largest, for sometimes he reckons a widow's mite as more 
than the larger offerings of those who have more abundantly. 

One German brother who sent $100 did not sign his name; we 
hope he will send his address that he may receive the paper 
regularly. These things gave encouragement, which doubtless 
the Lord saw we needed, and we at once made arrangements for 
an issue of another 100,000 edition of the same October number, 
which will hereafter be without date, as a missionary number. 
When these have gone out upon their mission, carrying to God's 
children "Glad tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all 
people," which will be in about a month, we hope to be ready to 
send forth still another 100,000. 

We wish that those especially who have contributed to the 
"Tract Fund," could read some of the letters which come from 
children of God in whose hearts there has for a long time been 
pent up the flame of ardent love to God— almost smothered by 
false ideas of his justice as viewed from an unscriptural 
standpoint. 

There are thousands of saints preaching the glad tidings by 
loaning the TOWER, and reading and explaining it to others. 
We have plenty of the October number, and you may order all 
you can use judiciously, without charge. 

Below are extracts from a few of the many good letters:— 

STANWOOD, MICH. 



DEAR BRO.-The "Foods" you sent me have been distributed 
and are doing good work for the blessed Master. A number have 
been brought to the light through reading them. The truth is 
setting us free in this section, and we feel in our hearts that it has 
been instrumental in God's hands in doing much for us. 

The question with me has been how to present this truth to 
others in the most effectual manner. I am trying to speak to the 
people every week two or three times, but I feel my incapacity 
to such an extent that the cross is heavy at times. I have often 
thought I would not speak any more in public until I was better 
qualified if I could have my own way about it. What shall I do, 
who is sufficient for these things?... Praise the Lord for his mercy 
endureth forever. 

Yours in hope of being one of the Bride company. 



["My God shall supply all your need." "Study to show thyself a 
workman approved unto God, rightly dividing the word of 
truth." Phil. 4:19; 2 Tim. 2:15. EDITOR.] 



BERNE, PA. 

DEAR BRO.:-Please try and publish a German tract, setting 
forth the "glad tiding of great joy;" thousands are waiting for 
such a tract. I could distribute thousands of copies with 
advantage. Yours, 

(We would be very glad if some German brother with necessary 
ability, would volunteer to translate Oct. Z.W.T. into German. A 
Swedish translation is also much called for. Would be glad to 
hear a similar report from some capable Swedish brother. Here 
is a place in the harvest field for some one. -ED.) 



R415 : page 2 



LOVE DEFINED. 



"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have 
love one to another. " 

Love is that tender solicitude and affection with which 
anything commanding admiration and respect, is regarded. That 
which is not lovely never can be loved in the true sense of the 
word. A degenerate nature may desire and find a morbid 
satisfaction in that which is unlovely, but that is not love. Love 
wherever found is a gleam of the divine likeness, and is 
spontaneously awakened by the presence of that which is noble 
and pure and good. This wonderful principle binds in holiest and 
most delightful union and harmony all intelligent beings 
controlled by it. God is the most glorious exhibition of its 



nobility and grandeur. It is the law of his being, and shall 
ultimately be the controlling law of all his universe. 

But one inquires, if only that which commands admiration and 
respect can be truly loved, how could God love sinners and tell 
us to do the same? We reply that God never loved sinners as 
such; he loved the jewel he had brought into perfect being 
because it was truly lovely; and when, under temptation it lost 
its excellence and glory, his love for its perfection pitied it in its 
fall, while his justice condemned it; and that love devised the 
wondrous scheme for its recovery. 

Let us here note the attitude of Jehovah towards those whom he 
so loved as to give his only begotten Son to redeem them. For 
six thousand years he has permitted their adversary to have 
dominion over them: Famine and pestilence have stalked 
abroad; hatred and strife, and war and bloodshed, have filled the 
earth with untold agony and woe, until the grave closed over 
generation after generation. Six thousand years, but no 
deliverance yet; God still stands off, and still the king of terror 
reigns. When the long promised Deliverer comes, it is to rule 
with a rod of iron —to dash in pieces as a potters vessel the 
kingdoms of earth, which from human standpoint seem 
necessary for protection against greater evils. In fear and dismay 
men look upon God as an enemy, and seek to hide from his 
presence; yet "God is love," and 

He knows, not they, how sweet accord 
Shall grow at length from out this clash 
Of earthly discords, which have jarred 
On soul and sense: They hear the crash, 
But do not know that on His ear, 
Breaks harmony-full, deep, and clear. 

Now the love of God is vailed, but soon it shall be revealed in 
the glorious restoration to Edenic perfection and bliss. Soon "the 
redeemed of the Lord (all mankind) shall return and come with 
singing unto Zion, (the church in kingdom power,) and 
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain joy 
and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away." Thus 
viewing God's dealings, we see that his wisdom often veils his 
love. 

True love while it seeks to shield and protect, will justly judge 
and endeavor to eradicate a fault— expose it, let the light shine on 
it and show it up to those affected by it, that it may be removed, 
and grace and beauty take its place. 

A very false notion of love obtains among the majority of 
Christian people, and under this false notion our adversary 
endeavors to shield some of the most dangerous and deadly 
errors that seek to sap the very foundation of the Christian's 
hope. Let this deadly thing which the adversary dares to present 
to God's children be touched by the sword of the spirit 



R416 : page 2 

which is the Word of God, and he who wields it is said to be 
uncharitable, loveless. But does this make it so? By no means. 
Jesus was full of the love of God, but he spoke most 
emphatically against evil-doers:- "Ye blind guides which strain 
at a gnat and swallow a camel;" "Woe unto you for you shut up 
the kingdom of heaven against men; ye neither go in yourselves, 
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in." (Matt. 23:13- 
33.) And again he said to erring Peter, "Get thee behind me 
Satan, (adversary) thou art an offence unto me, for thou 
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of 
men." (Matt. 16:23.) But how differently the Lord's rebukes 
affected his loving disciples and the proud pharisees. 

Paul was a noble pattern of his Master's spirit in his zeal for the 
truth, and his care for fellow members of the church. His usual 
manner toward all, like that of Jesus, was kind, generous, and 
affectionate, but did Paul cover the truth, shield error, or fail to 
warn an erring brother or the flock of God against the 
encroachments of the enemy? If he had so done, as an unfaithful 
steward he would have lost his stewardship. Though Peter was a 
noble soldier of the cross and fellow servant in the Lord, Paul 
withstood him to the face when, by giving way to the old nature 
for a time, he was to be blamed. (Gal. 2:11.) Note in connection 
with this, the sympathy and love existing between these 
brethren; (2 Pet. 3:15.) evidently the rebuke was accepted in the 
spirit of meekness. And again we find Paul faithfully warning 
the church against some ("many") who had become the enemies 
of the cross of Christ. (Phil. 3:18.) 

Does some one object that we must "judge not that we be not 
judged?" We reply that to exercise human judgement in 
condemning others would be wrong; but to apply the judgement 
of God as expressed in his Word is right. We are commanded to 
do so. And the various descriptions of evil deeds, false 
teachings, and seducing doctrines, are given that we may judge— 
"That the man of God may be thoroughly furnished, " for 
reproof, for correction of error and instruction in righteousness. 
(2 Tim. 3:16,17.) It is therefore the duty of every child of God to 
judge what is right and what is wrong, what is true and what is 
false. That against which we are cautioned is judging by other 
standards than the Word of God-condemning on our own, or 
any other human authority. That Paul judged according to God's 
Word and taught the church to do the same is very clear. (See 1 
Cor. 5:3; Gal. 2:11; 1 Thes. 5:21; 2 Tim. 4:2; 1 Cor. 6:2,3. Note 
also Paul's prayer that love might abound in judgement, Phil. 
1:9,10). 

No doubt Paul's faithfulness in seeking to build up and establish 
the church in purity of doctrine and life, was often 
misunderstood, and failed to be appreciated by them. This is 
very apparent from 1 Cor. chap. 4. "But (he says) it is a very 



small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment. 
He that judgeth me is the Lord. " Then speaking of his labor and 
suffering for them, he says: "I write not these things to shame 
you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. " (Read the chapter 
throughout.) 

Jesus said: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, 
if ye have love one toward another," and Paul says: "Let love be 
without dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that 
which is good. " When contending with an unseen, but wily and 
powerful foe, what mere hypocrisy is that profession of love 
which fails to warn of immediate or approaching danger. 

The new creature in Christ is a jewel of infinite value, "and 
every one that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is 
begotten of him." (1 John 5:1.) Dearly beloved, "Be kindly 
affectioned one to another, with brotherly love; in honor 
preferring one another;" "Reprove, rebuke, exhort (each other 
with all long-suffering and doctrine. " Give and receive in the 
spirit of meekness, remembering that "Love vaunteth not itself, 
is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly 
(unbecomingly) seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, 
thinketh no evil. " 

By this mutual love, and this care one for another, will all men 
be able to discover who are Jesus' disciples— "Let love be 
without dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that 
which is good." So shall you "be blameless and harmless, the 
sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and 
perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world. " 
MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R416 : page 3 



OUR NEW NAME. 

Thy name, Oh, Heavenly Bridegroom! 
Can we ever hope to bear? 
Shall we see Thy matchless glory, 
And in Thy kingdom share? 

With smiles of loving welcome, 
Wilt Thou say to us, well done? 
When our pilgrim days are ended, 
And our race for life is run? 

Yes, I hear Thee sweetly saying, 
In words of love divine, 
"If now with Me thou'lt suffer, 
My glory shall be thine. 

If now with Me thou'rt crucified, 
New life to thee I'll give, 



And through eternal ages, 
My bride shall with Me live." 

Oh, glorious fount of blessing ! 
We will haste without delay, 
Our little all to Thee to give, 
Who dost such joys repay; 

We care not, Lord, for earthly fame, 
Its honors, or its pride, 
But let us bear Thy sacred name, 
And own us as Thy bride. 

Thy name above all others grand, 
Which Thy waiting bride shall own; 
When Thou shalt call her to Thy side, 
And share with her Thy throne; 

Through realms of fadeless glory, 
Shall all its power confess; 
And every tongue on earth shall praise, 
"The Lord our righteousness." 



MRS. A. AGENS, N.J. 



R416 : page 3 

A BIBLE READING. 



THE ATONEMENT. 

This subject is again coming up for consideration, and we 
would not hinder it if we could. Rather would we be found 
aiding in the investigation. When we know that a doctrine rests 
on the Word of God we can rest on it without fear. Many of 
God's children, though walking in the light, are inclined to lean 
too much on the arm of flesh; and if we mistake not God is 
going to shake them loose. Blessed will they be who are 
standing on the rock of his truth. 

All do not have equal facilities for searching the Word, so we 
wish to help. We would say, however, that there is but little 
excuse for the most of us, seeing that good reference Bibles are 
so cheap. A teacher's Bible and a full concordance, a prayerful 
heart and an honest mind, with time and patience, are all we 
need- God will give the rest. 

Study carefully and prayerfully the following texts; use them as 
starting points with your reference Bibles; you will find plenty 
more. Keep a list of all you find; compare any theory of the 
atonement, no matter where it comes from, with every text on 
your list; if it agrees, believe it; if not, reject it. Let God's Word 
be the end of all controversy between you and every doctrine 
brought before you. Don't be afraid to investigate. "Light is 



sown for the righteous." "Prove all things, hold fast that which is 
good." 

Here are some of the things that Jesus did for us in the atoning 
work: 

He died for us. 1 Thes. 5:10; Rom. 5:8. 

He died for all. 2 Cor. 5:14,15; John 11:50-52. 

He died for our sins. 1 Cor. 15:3; 1 Pet. 2:24. 

He justified us. Gal. 2:17; Rom. 4:25. 

The law could not. Gal. 5:4; Rom. 3:20. 

Our works could not. Gal. 2:16; Rom. 3:27,28. 

Faith in his work justifies. Gal. 3:13,14; Rom. 4:24. 

He bought us. 1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23. 

He redeemed us. Gal. 3:13; 1 Pet. 1:18-20. 

He ransomed us. Matt. 20:28; 1 Tim. 2:6. 

He washed us. Rev. 1:5; 1 John 1:7. 

He sanctified us. Heb. 13:12; Eph. 5:26. 

He saves us. 1 Cor. 1:21; 1 Tim. 1:15. 

He was an offering for us. Heb. 9:28; 10:10. 

He was sacrificed for us. Eph. 5:2; 1 Cor. 5:7. 

He knew no sin. 1 John 3:5; Heb. 4:15. 

He was made sin (a sin-offering) for us. 2 Cor. 5:21; 1 Pet. 

2:22-24. 

The just died for the unjust. 1 Pet. 3:18; consider also the 
meaning of the sacrifices of 4,000 years. 

His blood bought us; 1 Pet. 1:2. Purchased us; Acts 20:28. 
Redeemed us; Rev. 5:9. Justified us; Rom. 5:9. Washed us; 
Rev. 1:5. Sanctified us; Heb. 13:12. Saves us; Acts 4:12. 

"A little Scripture is better than a good deal of reasoning. " 

W. I. MANN. 



R417 : page 3 



MAN'S INHERITANCE. 



When God created man, he endowed him with qualities of 
being like his own. Qualities of justice and judgment fitted him 
to be a ruler; qualities of mercy and love prepared him to be a 
reasonable, kind and wise ruler. Such is a brief description of 



earth's first king- Adam. An image of his Creator, (not 
physically, but mentally and morally,) he is to be invested with 
authority over earth and its affairs, like as God is ruler over all, 
as we read: After our likeness let them have dominion over the 
beast of the field, the fowl of heaven and the fish of the sea. 
[Gen. 1:26]. Thus was he installed lord of earth. He was but 
another form of creation, a step lower than angels, as lower and 
under him, came the brute creation. Accordingly we read: "Thou 
hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned 
him with glory and honor. Thou madest him to have dominion 
over the works of Thy hands. Thou hast put all things under his 
feet." [Psa. 8:5-6]. 

All of this glory, honor and rulership was invested in him, to be 
used in harmony with his nature, which being perfect, was in 
perfect harmony with the will of God. This was his inheritance, 
but 

HE LOST IT. 

As God had foreseen, man disobeys his superior ruler, the King 
of Kings and Lord of Lords. This cannot be allowed to go 
unpunished. He had been informed from the first that 
disobedience to God would be sin, and that its legitimate 
punishment and effect is death. While man always was mortal, 
i.e. liable to death, if disobedient to God's laws, yet the loving 
Creator had made every provision necessary to his welfare, in 
the garden prepared for his trial. And not only had He arranged 
that the soul (person) that sinned should die, but also that if 
obedient the person should continue to live. The means for life's 
continuance was in "every tree of the garden," i.e., the food 
provided for man's sustenance was amply sufficient to meet all 
the wastes of his system, and would have preserved the 
freshness and vigor of his perfect being forever. This would be 
everlasting life. 

When man became a sinner the penalty "death" must be 
executed. It mattered not so far as the penalty was concerned, 
whether Adam should die the same moment that he disobeyed, 
or the same year, or a thousand years after. He must die. The 
word "day" used in connection with the penalty, is the general 
term used now as well as in past times, for a period or epoch of 
time, as: "The day of temptation in the wilderness -forty years;" 
the days of creation, etc. The marginal reading clears up the 
meaning: "In the day that thou eatest thereof, dying, thou shalt 
die." [Gen. 2:17]. This was fulfilled not by God's striking Adam 
dead with a thunderbolt but simply by cutting off his access to 
the life-giving food supplied by the trees of the prepared garden. 
Accordingly an angel drove Adam from the garden and 
prevented with flaming sword, his access thereafter to the tree 
(trees or woods) of life. [Gen. 3:24]. 



Thus was the Lord of creation driven out into the world which 
God, foreknowing his fall, had left in an unprepared or "cursed" 
conditions. The garden which we are told was "prepared" was 
doubtless an illustration of what the whole earth will be when 
man and his perfect conditions are restored-in "The times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of 
all his holy prophets. " 

Thus thrown upon his own resources for obtaining by sweat of 
face, elements to sustain life, Adam found it a hard lot, and by 
its effects was enabled to know what evil is, and the exceeding 
bitterness of sin. And oft, no doubt, he desired, perhaps prayed, 
that he might be permitted again to dwell in Eden, and promised 
that with his present knowledge of sin and evil he would more 
highly prize the good things there enjoyed and more fervently 
love and obey Him "from whom cometh every good and perfect 
gift." But though God's plan was no less loving than this, it was 
broader, wiser and more comprehensive. God's plan was to let, 
not only Adam, but also the entire race, learn just this same 
lesson of the bitterness of sin and disobedience which each must 
individually learn to fully appreciate. Then bringing all back to 
the Eden condition, sin might be forever banished, and the entire 
race live in harmony with God. 

Toil and care told in time upon even the perfect physical form of 
a perfect man, resulting finally in his complete overthrow and 
wresting from his grasp the last shred or spark of life. He is 
dead. After nine hundred and thirty years of struggle with his 
foe— death— he is conquered. The penalty of sin was inflicted and 
continues, to this moment, since he still is one of the prisoners in 
the great charnel house of death, which has since swallowed up 
the race, and will hold them all until the second Adam, who 
ransomed the race, and who declares, "I have the keys of hell 
and death" [hades-the grave] [Rev. 1:18] shall take his great 
power and reign, releasing "the prisoners of the pit" [grave], "the 
captives" of sin and death. 

But not only did the casting out from the life-preserving fruits of 
the garden tend, to the impairing of Adam's physical powers, but 
of his mental qualities also. It was not possible that he should 
retain perfect mental vigor, when he became physically 
impaired, thought being the product of the mental organism 
made active by the physical vitality. 

We see then that Adam's mental powers decreased with his 
physical deterioration, and the moral qualities of his mind 
suffered the most. While the energy of body and mind were 
taxed to their utmost to take care of self, it is but reasonable to 
suppose that the quality of benevolence (love) which as he was 
in God's image, must have been one of the ruling characteristics 
of his being was crowded out, and the qualities of 
acquisitiveness (selfishness) and combativeness were developed 
instead. This same idea followed out would show us that all the 



higher, grander, nobler qualities were suffered measurably to 
decline, while all of the lower ones (common to the lower 
animals) were the more developed. 

As man lost the grandeur of his being, and its powers decreased, 
his rulership over the lower creation, as well as over self gave 
way, until today we find him afraid of all wild beasts, and that 
they no longer recognize the rulership of their fallen lord. And 
the influence once exercised by our father Adam is barely 
discernable in the occasional man who can master and tame 
(partially) the ferocious beasts. Here we have a brief glance at 
the first dynasty of earth and its overthrow. Now we see the 
result: "By sin came death." In the expressive language of Paul, 

"DEATH REIGNED" 

King of Terrors under "him that has the power of death, that is, 
the devil" -"the prince of this world." All bow before him; all 
are under his control. From the cradle to the tomb, every ache 
and pain attests his power over us, and the same agency which 
first placed us under his rule (sin) conspires yet, to more quickly 
destroy the race. His rule or reign must continue so long as there 
is sin to be punished, or until the entire race is reduced to the 
condition of lifelessness. But Jehovah foresaw all this, and in his 
plan has 

A DELIVERER PROVIDED. 

Such a ransom and deliverance was a part of God's plan from 
the first; and we read "for this purpose the Son of God was 
manifested, that He might destroy the works of the devil"-sin 
and death. [1 John 3:8.] And not only so, but also, "him that hath 
the power of death, that is, the devil." [Heb. 2:14], and thus 
release from his grasp all of the race. 

But as Satan and death are acting in harmony with a law of the 
universe, viz: that no sinner shall be permitted to live, and that 
every creature shall be perfect in its own plane of existence, the 
one who would deliver the race from his authority must satisfy 
these claims of the law of the universe. This the fallen ones 
could not do for themselves, as God had from the first 
foreknown and arranged for in His plan. Carrying out this plan 
He had already condemned the entire race on account of one 
man's disobedience. His purpose from the first being that he 
would provide another man, who, being without sin, should give 
himself "a ransom for all" the race-that "as by one man's 
disobedience [the] many [all] were made sinners, so by the 
obedience of one shall [the] many [all] be made righteous" 
(justified from sin and death). Rom. 5:19. 

But who is the one righteous, pure, holy, sinless, one? How 
could there be such an one among a race all of whom were 
condemned. "There is none righteous, no not one," the scriptures 



answer. But when mankind had learned effectually his own 
weakness and inability to deliver himself from death, his 
extremity became 

R417 : page 4 

God's opportunity, and "God's eye pitied, and His arm brought 
salvation. " The very chief of God's creation higher than angels 
and archangels [Heb. 1:5-8], He who is called "the beginning of 
the creation of God" [Rev. 3:14] is selected as the one who shall 
undergo the labors of redeeming humanity. We are not to 
suppose this was an irksome or unwilling work, for we cannot 
suppose a being in perfect harmony with Jehovah who would 
not take delight in doing his will. Nor would obedience be the 
only motive which would actuate, partaking as all perfect beings 
on whatever plane they exist must, of the divine quality— love- 
he would love to do the work for the sake of its benefits to 
mankind, releasing them from death. This no doubt was a part of 
the joy set before him, for which he, endured the 

R418:page4 

cross despising the shame. [Heb. 12:2]. 

Aside from this joy at the opportunity to release the human race 
from death, was that of "bringing many sons to glory," i.e., a 
part of the race "a little flock." "To these gave he power to 
become sons of God. " "For, as many as are led by the spirit of 
God, are the sons of God. " These, according to God's plan, may, 
by intimate association with him be reckoned as the bride of 
Christ and as such enter the heavenly family. To these sons this 
mighty one would be a leader or "captain of their salvation. " 
And yet another part of this 

"JOY SET BEFORE HIM, " 

was that He himself should, because of his obedience, labor, 
sacrifice, etc., be accounted worthy of still higher honor and 
more intimate relationship and communion with Jehovah-the 
object of his supreme love and devotion, than he had ever yet 
possessed, even to partake of his divine nature. So we read: "He 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted him and given him a 
name which is above every name," [Phil. 2:8-9], "that all men 
should honor the Son even as they honor the Father. " [John 
5:23]. 

But how shall this redemptive work be accomplished? We have 
seen that God's plan was, that since by man came death, by man 
should also come the resurrection of the dead. [1 Cor. 15:21]. 
Then to redeem man, this mighty one must become a man in 
every particular. He must partake of "flesh and blood," [Heb. 
2:14], and consequently must have all the qualities of the fleshly 
race, not the sinful and depraved qualities with which we now 



are burdened, but he must be a perfect man, standing exactly 
where Adam stood, except that he would know more perfectly 
the exceeding sinfulness of sin and its dire effects which he saw 
everywhere about him, and also for what purpose he had come. 
He took not the nature and form of angels, for that would not 
have answered, but he took the nature and form of a man. 

All things are now ready. "In the fullness of time, God sent forth 
his Son, born of a virgin," "born not of the will of the flesh but 
of the will of God"— in a word, as much of a specially creative 
act on God's part as was the creation of Adam; the difference 
being that the one could say, "The earth is my mother," the other 
was "born of a woman. " Had he in any way been a descendant 
of Adam he would have been under the curse of death, as are all 
other members of that race. He would have been as unable to 
keep the law as other men in whom sinful dispositions and 
depraved human nature are born. But while of the same (human) 
nature he is a new being, distinct from the race. He is born, 
grows in wisdom and in stature but manifests powers beyond 
others because he is perfect, they imperfect. Now he has reached 
maturity (according to the law) at thirty years of age. He knows 
as no one else does the great work for which during those thirty 
years he has been coming-his body preparing -it was "for the 
suffering of death" -that he "should taste death for every man"- 
"that through death he might destroy death," and liberate the 
dead race— "in due time." Now he is come, the second perfect 
sinless man, and offers this perfect life as a ransom for the race— 
"Lo, I come, (as) in the volume of the book it is written of me, to 
do thy will, O, God." [Heb. 10:7]. This was his covenant, to die, 
as he afterward expressed it, saying: "For this cause came I into 
the world. " And here in type he was buried in the water and rose 
again, thus making the picture of that which he covenanted to 
do. 

Now as the perfect one he has done all that he can do, given 
himself up to die as the Father may will, but though the death 
has not actually occurred (at baptism) it is so reckoned, (as with 
us when we covenant), and the new nature's powers and will, 
which belong to the spiritual body, which he is to be when the 
work of death is complete; ("raised a spiritual body,") these 
powers and qualities were given him as soon as the human — 
earthly— body was consecrated. This was at his baptism when 
the spirit descended and a voice from heaven acknowledged His 
begetting again to the spiritual plane and to the Divine nature. 
"This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased." [Matt. 
3:17]. Henceforth the life of Jesus is that of a dual being, the 
outward form being the man Christ Jesus, whose life and being 
were daily spent for the good of others— a body already given up 
to death. 

The new being within-the Divine nature- was the spirit power 
of God. And in this he is the pattern and leader of "all who come 



unto God by Him," "who become partakers of the Divine 
nature"— the "little flock" called his bride-His body. We must 
surrender ourselves to God— be baptized into his death-in order 
to be begotten of the spirit and receive the earnest of our new 
spiritual being, the fullness of which will be received when we 
are completely delivered from this fleshy condition to our 
spiritual bodies. 

Thenceforth he "did not his own human will" but was "led of the 
Spirit," and the actions now were of God, as Jesus testified: 
"The word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's, which 
sent me." [John 14:24 and 17:8]. "The Father that dwelleth in 
me, He doeth the works." [John 14:10]. If we as our head "are 
led by the Spirit of God"-even unto death- we also become "the 
sons of God," [Rom. 8:14], who will also "work in us to will and 
to do of His good pleasure. " [Phil. 2:13]. 

And we who are now "new creatures (in Christ Jesus") should 
take courage from the life of our beloved master; as Paul says: 

"CONSIDER HIM 

who endureth such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest 
ye be weary and faint in your minds. " If you sometimes find it 
hard to endure the frowns of the world and to be thought of and 
treated as a deceiver by your friends, think of Him weeping in 
Gethsemane, condemned before Pilate, crucified as a 
malefactor, forsaken and denied by his loved ones, "yet He 
opened not His mouth. " And if your human nature sometimes 
shrinks, although reckoned dead, think again of Him. Remember 
that He was tempted in all points like as we are, (yet without 
sin), and can and does sympathize with us, and though you may 
sometimes cry out, as he did: "Father, if it be possible, let this 
cup (the ignominy) pass from me, " forget not to add, as he did, 
"yet not my will but thine be done. " The human will of Jesus 
though given up at consecration- baptism felt the crucifixion so 
that He needed the heavenly "grace to help in time of need" to 
keep the human will perfectly obedient to the will of the new 
being-the divine. 

This dying process continued during the three and one-half years 
of His ministry, from the moment of His consecration and 
acceptance at baptism, until on the cross He cried: "It is 
finished. " But what was finished there-the work of atonement? 
No, the work of atonement signifies the making at one of two 
parties. In this case God was one and humanity the other party. 
Man's sin had brought upon him God's curse, death, instead of 
his blessing; and by its degrading influence (as we have seen) it 
had so marred the mental and moral likeness of man to his 
maker, that he no longer took "delight in the law of God," but in 
sin, and it will be readily seen that there was much work 
necessary to bring about full reconciliation between God and 
man. First— Justice must be met, a ransom must be given for the 



sinner, else God could never, to all eternity, recognize him as 
having a right to live. Secondly-Man must be brought to his 
original condition of perfection-in God's image— before he can 
be of himself perfectly in harmony with God's perfect will and 
law. Now, while this work, as a whole, was Jehovah's plan from 
"before the creation of the world," its accomplishment only 
began with Jesus, and will not be completed until the end of the 
millennial reign, when Jesus shall deliver up all things to the 
Father, having put down (destroyed) all opposition to God's 
laws, (sin). 1 Cor. 15:24-28. 

When Jesus cried, "it is finished," he referred only to the first 
mentioned part of this work of atonement, viz: The giving of the 
ransom; this was now complete; the penalty of Adam's sin was 
now met, for "Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scripture" -"gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due 
time." "Who is a propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." [1 John 
2:2.] 

Having thus "purchased us from death with his own precious 
blood, " all the race belongs to him. A race of sinners they were 
having no right to life; a race of ransomed beings they are 
against whom justice has no claim, who may be restored to 
perfect life at the pleasure or will of Jesus their redeemer, who 
proclaimed, that in due time "all that are in their graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of Man and come forth. " And again: "I 
am he that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive 
forevermore, and have the keys of hell [hades— the grave] and 
of death." [Rev. 1:18]. Yes, says Paul: "For this purpose Christ 
was manifested, [in the flesh] that he might destroy death, and 
him that has the power of death, that is the devil. " 

But while we are thus informed of the plan of God to destroy 
"death" yet, nearly two thousand years have passed since the 
ransom was paid and still death reigns. Why does not the 
purchaser take possession of "the purchased possession?" Ah, he 
has a grand plan with regard to some of the race he has 
purchased-He will by trial of faith and patience develop 

R419 : page 4 

and separate from the world "a little flock" whom he will 
associate with Himself as His bride. They will be a peculiar 
people, zealous of good works, and full of faith, who walk in his 
footsteps of self-sacrifice and entire giving up of their human 
nature -will and body-receiving instead the Divine nature-will 
and body. 

When the church— body— of Christ is made perfect through 
sufferings and trials, and united with Him [which event we 
believe to be so close at hand], then the great work and reign of 
earth's new monarch-the second Adam-begins. Though 
possessing the power over evil ever since He rose from the 



grave its victor, yet he has not exercised that power up to the 
present time because evil is necessary to the development of his 
body. But when we are complete he shall take to himself his 
great power and reign. [Rev. 11:17]. This statement is applied as 
having its fulfillment at the end of the gospel age during the 
sounding of the seventh (symbolic) trumpet. 

Now let us enquire, how long will Christ reign— or exercise 
authority and rule? Answer. "He shall reign forever and ever," 
[Rev. 11:15], that is, being associated with the Father, Christ 
(and we in Him) shall always belong to the reigning and ruling 
power-Jesus at the Father's right hand (next in authority) and 
we at his right hand, consequently "above all principalities and 
powers." But in the especial sense of ruling over and subduing 
earth, the reign is limited to the period of time necessary to the 
restoring of all earth's people and affairs to a condition of at- 
one-ment or harmony with God, the Father, as Paul expresses it: 

"HE MUST REIGN TILL HE HATH PUT ALL 
ENEMIES UNDER HIS FEET. 

The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. " For "He (the 
Father) hath put all things under his (Christ's) feet, " but it is 
evident that the Father did not put himself under the control of 
Christ. "And when all things shall be subdued unto Him, then 
shall the Son also, himself, be subject unto Him (the Father) that 
put all things under Him, that God may be all in all," (or above 
all). 

Man having been restored to his original dominion, every 
inferior creature will recognize him as its Lord, and every 
human being will recognize "Christ as Lord to the glory of God 
the Father." [Phil. 2:1 1]. And thus will be completed the great 
work planned before our creation, commenced at the baptism of 
Jesus and ending with the close of the millennial reign. [Rev. 
20:6] viz: At-one-ment. 

Then, "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," and 
His "will be done on earth as in heaven." 

That this is God's plan, is implied in the term "Restitution," and 
is the legitimate conclusion to be drawn from Paul's argument. 
[Heb. 2:6-9.] He starts out with the original plan of God in 
creating man perfect -"Thou madest him a little lower than the 
angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor and didst set 
him over the works of Thy hands. Thou hast put all (earthly) 
things in subjection under his feet. " But as we have seen, sin has 
marred all this 

R419 : page 5 

glory and honor, and has degraded us far below angels; taking 
the dominion out of our hand and permitting "death to reign." 
And if we look about us we will say with Paul that it seems as 



though God's plan were a failure, for though six thousand years 
have passed, "We see not yet all things put under him" [man]. 
But is there any hopeful sign to indicate that man may yet be 
restored to his honor and glory, and set over the earthly works of 
God's hand? Yes, we have the assurance that ALL God's 
purposes shall be accomplished, [Isa. 14:24], and that a "seed of 
the woman" should yet destroy the serpent-evil— and "bless all 
the families of the earth. " And though this work is not yet 
accomplished yet we see a beginning of it. As Paul says, "we see 
Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels," [the 
condition of a perfect man], for the suffering of death... that He, 
by the grace of God, should taste death for every man. " Thus far 
had the plan progressed in Paul's day, and if he were living now, 
he would doubtless add, as we can, that the church, as his body, 
is about complete; that the gospel age of suffering with Him and 
"filling up the measure of the afflictions of Christ which are 
behind" is ending and the millennial age in which we shall "live 
and reign with Christ a thousand years" is dawning. 

As those who expect to be of the bride— the body-of Christ and 
be glorified together with Him, we rejoice to think that the time 
is so near at hand when we shall be changed, leaving forever the 
human form and nature, and being made "like unto Christ's 
glorious body. " But one thing which adds much to our interest 
and rejoicing is the thought of the necessity of our development 
and changing, as the body of the great deliverer, before death 
can be destroyed and the race liberated and brought to the liberty 
of the sons of God, as Adam and angels— free from the bondage 
of corruption-death. For we know that "they without us shall 
not be made perfect. " We must be perfected on the spiritual 
plane as divine beings before they can be perfected on the 
earthly plane as human beings. 

Seeing then what high honors and glory await the overcoming 
sons of God, and the blessings awaiting the world through us, 
can any one wonder that we long for the happy moment of 
change? Surely not, and not only we, but the world, also, are 
waiting and hoping [though ignorantly] for a good time coming, 
for the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together 
until now waiting for the manifestation of [the Church] the sons 
of God, (Rom. 8:22,19)- the sun of righteousness which "arises 
with healing in his wings" to heal, and perfect, and restore all 
things to the perfect will of God. 

Thus earth will have had, when man is restored, the following 
great 

OVERRULING POWERS: 

First-Man under God. 

Second-Death and evil, under Satan. 
Third-Righteousness under Christ. 



Fourth-The first restored, i.e., man under God. 

In the second and third of these dynasties, viz.: The reigns of 
Satan and of Christ, the active rulers are invisible to humanity 
and their powers only recognizable by the effects and results. 
The devil is called "the prince [ruler] of this world, "-"him that 
has the power of death, that is, the devil. " The effects of His 
reign and rule have been, as we have seen, to degrade man in 
every way. How wonderfully successful he has been is evident 
as we look about us. Sin, misery and death are on every hand, 
and yet Satan, the ruler, is invisible, seen only through his 
agencies, and he has plenty of them, for "his servants ye are to 
whom you render service." We claim, then, that all persons, or 
institutions, or governments, which aid in the work of death and 
degradation and oppression of right and truth, are Satan's agents. 

God classes all present governments of earth as Satan's. "The 
prince— ruler— of this world" would not permit any government 
which would not act in harmony with him, as long as he has the 
control, which will be until the end of this age, when the 
Redeemer takes his great power and reigns. Satan has ruled 
among the nations for ages, except the one nation, Israel, of 
which God says: "You only have I known of all the [nations] 
families of the earth. " (We have seen that they were used thus as 
a type of the higher spiritual Israel, the church, which was to be 
in the world, but not of it.) The time came, however, that God 
gave over even this nation as the others when they went into 
captivity to Babylon, and God's prophet said of the last reigning 
prince, "Take off the diadem, remove the crown; this shall not 
[continue to] be the same, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it 
[the kingdom] until He come whose right it is, and I will give it 
Him" [The Christ]. Ezek. 21:27. 

At the same time, God indicated that the government of earth 
was given over to depravity's rule, and pictures it to 
Nebuchadnezzar as 



A GREAT IMAGE 

illustrative of human power, divided into four parts, 
Nebuchadnezzar's government representing the head; the 
succeeding, Medo-Persian government represented by the breast 
and arms; and the belly and thighs representing the third or 
Grecian government; while the fourth and last part, the legs and 
feet represent the last phase of earthly government, the Roman 
Empire, which, in a divided form, still continues, and is to be 
followed by Messiah's Kingdom— the kingdom of heaven, which 
"shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms [not 
people], and it shall stand forever." Danl. 2:44. 

Thus, as a glorious image, did these earthly kingdoms appear to 
the natural man; and as glorious they still are regarded by the 
world. Extolled in prose and verse, through all generations, are 



their deeds of blood and violence, which shock the feelings of 
all possessed of the spirit of love. Their history is one successive 
record of crime and death, each of their heroes claiming higher 
honor than his predecessor because he had butchered greater 
numbers of his fellow-beings, and made more widows and 
orphans and more misery. No wonder that when God pictured 
the same four earthly governments to the holy prophet Daniel, 
he gave it as a beastly picture. (Danl. 8). They are indeed beastly 
governments. How perfectly they represent, in their evil and 
death-dealing power, their master, the devil. The picture, or 
likeness of the fourth 

R420 : page 5 

(Roman power) to Satan is so strong that Jesus, when presenting 
it in symbol in Revelation, almost invariably calls it "the 
dragon," "that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan," &c, 
thus using the names of its prince as a name for the kingdom. 

While God thus permits evil to triumph now, seemingly without 
restraint, and uses it as an agency for punishing sin, yet it is 
under an over-ruling guidance by which God "causes the wrath 
of man to praise Him, and the remainder He will restrain. " 

The inventions and arts of the last three centuries (machinery, 
printing, application of steam, electricity, etc.,) have come about 
gradually, but we believe are none the less of God— His 
agencies now in preparation for the blessing of humanity during 
the coming reign of righteousness. These scientific attainments, 
which will so fully bless in the future, are even now exercising a 
powerful effect upon humanity, enlightening the understanding, 
and, by increasing the dependency of one upon another, it 
naturally tends to promote sympathy, affection, and fraternity 
between the various members of the human family. 

But all of these blessings, while they serve to lift mankind in a 
measure out of evil, are only temporary helps. Satan is still equal 
to the occasion, and though he could not now induce millions of 
men to follow for years a leader for his glory's sake, he can 
foment angry strife between nations upon pretexts of honor, etc., 
and, though men do not now fight as incessantly as of old, yet 
the "arts of war" more than keep pace with those of peace, so 
that to-day the standing armies of earth are far larger and far 
better prepared for mutual destruction than ever before. 

The progress of science and art fails to bring now the blessings 
which will result in the future, because avarice (selfishness) has 
crowded out love and benevolence. Capital and power combine 
to oppress the poor, and they in turn despise and envy the rich. 

Nor can we wonder if the masses of mankind notice this 
condition of affairs; and that as knowledge increases among 
them, they should seek to band themselves together for self- 
protection, especially if they see, as in Europe, kings, emperors, 



nobles, and landlords rolling in wealth and luxury, while some 
of them barely eke out an existence on the commonest 
necessaries of life, without luxury or comfort. All that they can 
earn more than will purchase meal, potatoes, and salt, with 
coarse fabric for clothing, is required as tax to support these 
corrupt governments, which, like great boils, absorb the strength 
and vitality of humanity. So we see that Satan is still ruling over 
earth. Satan may change tactics according to the necessities of 
the hour, but he is ruling still. 

God's Word informs us that, by the general uprising of humanity 
and overthrow of governments, the new age will be introduced. 
In the coming struggle the two spiritual powers, Christ and his 
saints, and Satan and his angels, will each have earthly armies 
whose causes they will support and advance. Satan's will be the 
kings, chief captains, rich men, and mighty men, [Rev. 19:19] 
while Christ will espouse and bring to victory the cause of the 
oppressed, who, inspired by justice and right, will be used to 
some extent as agents to their own liberation from the thraldom 
of evil and oppression. 

How we see the preparation for this time of trouble in the world, 
going on all around us, and how unconsciously each one takes 
his place to play his part in the closing act of the reign of sin and 
death. In this country, less oppressed and in every way more 
blessed than others, 

CAPITAL AND LABOR 

are arraying themselves against each other as if against enemies; 
labor fearing that capital will grind the life out of it unless it 
organizes and protects itself; capital fearful of losing the upper 
hand of labor. Look abroad and see the Nihilists of Russia, the 
Land Leaguers and Liberals of Great Britain and Ireland, and the 
Socialists and Communists of Austria, Germany, and France, 
and tell me, do not all of these things, visible to our natural eye, 
corroborate what our spiritual eye of faith has seen by the light 
of the prophetic page— that "the day of the Lord is a day of 
trouble," and that we are now in the "harvest" of the gospel age, 
the chief reaper present, and the work of separation going on [in 
the church] between wheat and tares? 

THE RESTORATION. 

The third dynasty of earth, like the second, will be the ruling of 
an invisible power through seen agencies of earth. As now Satan 
reigns unseen, then "The Christ of God" will reign and rule 
unseen. As now sin abounds, so then the opposite— righteousness 
—will rule. As Satan now has agents in men and governments, so 
with Christ's reign, every man coming into harmony with truth 
and righteousness will be reckoned a servant of God. The 
kingdoms of this world being all overthrown, [Dan. 2:44,] will 



be re-established on principles of justice and equity, based upon 
the golden law of love to God and men. 

The chief nation of earth during that age, the Word informs us, 
will be fleshly Israel, in glory and prominence exalted above all 
other nations -"The joy of the whole earth." And next in 
positions of favor and blessing will come other nations in 
proportion as they conform to the law of the Kingdom of God. 
Thus will the light of knowledge and truth emanating from the 
spiritual city-the church -the New Jerusalem, [Rev. 21.] bless 
all nations, and result in healing and blessing all mankind, until 
ultimately, having put down all opposition, and brought all men 
to the condition of perfection and righteousness, the third empire 
will give place to the fourth, which is the first restored, viz. : man 
over earth its lord and himself in perfect obedience to the King 
of Kings and Lord of Lords. Thus, "God [will be] all in all." 
Amen. "Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, on earth as it is 
in heaven. " 



R420 : page 5 

CHRIST OUR PROPITIATION. 

It has been claimed by some, as disproving the necessity of 
Jesus as our Ransomer, and his blood (death) as our ransom 
price, that the word propitiation, used by the apostles, merely 
means that Jesus was the channel through which God exercised 
pardon-the mercy-seat or place of mercy-and that therefore the 
accepted idea, that Jesus made satisfaction or appeasement for 
our sins is erroneous, and not the proper meaning to attach to the 
expression, "propitiation for our sins." 

In proof of the above, they call attention to the fact that in Rom. 
3:25, the same word is rendered propitiation which in Heb. 9:5 
is rendered mercy seat. Here they leave the matter, evidently 
considering it proved. 

We object, that in so construing it they are at variance with the 
Greek scholarship of the world. We read- "He (Jesus) is the 
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world"; and again- "Herein is love, not that 

R420 : page 6 

we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son-the 
propitiation for our sins." (1 John 2:2 and 4:10). In both cases 
the Greek word rendered propitiation is hilasmos. Its definition 
by able Greek scholars is- "What appeases "-"What 
propitiates." 

These are the only instances in which this Greek word 
(hilasmos) is used in Scripture, and we know of no translation 
which uses any other word than propitiation as a translation of 



it. As the word propitiation is but vaguely understood, we here 
give you Webster's definition of its meaning- "The act of 
appeasing wrath and conciliating the favor of an offended 
person"- "atonement or atoning sacrifice." Read the above texts 
in the light of this definition, and you will see that as John 
understood the subject, there was need of a redeemer and a 
ransom. 

Concerning Heb. 9:5, and Rom. 3:25, we would say: The Greek 
word here used is entirely different from the above; it is 
hilasterion; nevertheless, it stands related to the former. Young 
translates it "place of appeasement. " In the Tabernacle was the 
Ark, and the top of it, a solid lid of gold, was the spot upon 
which the High Priest sprinkled the blood of the sin-offering, 
which God accepted as the satisfaction for sins of the under 
Priests and of Israel (typical of the church and of the world 
also). This slab of gold forming the cover of the ark, was 
therefore called the "Mercy-seat" (or spot) because there, by 
God's arrangement, mercy was obtained. In the Hebrew the 
word is kapporeth, meaning- "place of (sin) covering"; and in 
the Greek, hilasterion, meaning- "place of appeasement. " 

With this explanation, we trust all will be able to see the true 
meaning of "propitiation, " and "place of propitiation or 
appeasement" (mercy-seat), and not allow any one to cover the 
meaning of these very forcible expressions. 

Rotherham's translation of Rom. 3:25 reads thus: "Whom God 
set forth to be a propitiatory covering through faith in his 
blood," etc. 



R421 : page 6 



CONSIDER HIM. 



The attention of all mankind has been turned with perplexity 
and questioning to Jesus of Nazareth. For four thousand years 
men expected, Prophets wrote, and Poets sung of a coming 
deliverer; and for nearly two thousand more, all eyes have been 
turned to Jesus of Nazareth saying, Can this indeed be he?-a 
babe of humble mother-a boy of marked intellectual ability and 
moral integrity —a young man of thirty years just emerging from 
obscurity. Three and a half years more gathered about him a few 
disciples who hung upon his words, almost persuaded that this 
was indeed the sent of God, until his young and beautiful life 
was suddenly and ignominiously terminated in death. Then hope 
was blighted and sadly they turned away saying, "We trusted, it 
had been he who should have redeemed Israel. " 

In the short period of his public career (three and a half years) 
when the eyes of all men were centered on him, they all 
marveled at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, 



saying, "never man spake like this man. " Some thought he was 
one of the Prophets risen from the dead-others that he was that 
great Prophet whom Jehovah had promised to raise up. Some 
said he was an impostor and a fanatic, but he claimed to be the 
Son of God- the Christ-the promised deliverer. 

No other character on the pages of history ever attracted such 
universal attention for so great a time, yet his career was so brief 
and he was distinguished by none of this world's marks of 
greatness. The spirit of Jehovah gives us the history of this 
wonderful being and to his Word alone we turn for the answer to 
our questionings. 

In the first chapter of John's Gospel, we find the most concise 
and comprehensive sketch, therefore let us consider its teaching. 
(N.B. Read with open Bible referring constantly to it.) 

The Greek word, logos, translated word in vss. 1 and 14 of this 
chapter, would be properly translated by the words, intention, 
plan, purpose, or expression. Apply this definition to the 
following passages where the same word (logos) occurs: Acts 
10:29. "I ask therefore for what intent (logos) ye have sent for 
me." Acts 4:29. "Grant unto thy servants that with all boldness 
they may speak thy word" -declare thy plan, purpose, or 
intention. Acts 8:4. "They that were scattered abroad went 
everywhere preaching the word," plan or purpose of God. Acts 
18:11. "Teaching the word (intention, plan or purpose) of God 
among them." Mark 4:20. "Such as hear the word (intention, 
plan or purpose of God) and receive it." Matt. 24:35. "Heaven 
and earth shall pass away, but my words (plans or purposes) 
shall not pass away. " 

With this understanding, then, we may thus read John 1:1. "In 
the beginning," before anything was created, and when none 
existed, but Jehovah, "was the word"-plan, intention, or 
purpose of God. Yes, God had a well defined, and matured plan, 
formed in his own mind before it found expression in the 
slightest development. The great Architect of the universe and 
Author of all life, first counted the cost, and reckoned that all 
should culminate to his honor and glory. (Luke 14:28-31; Rev. 
4:11.) 

"And the word (plan or purpose) was with God." So far, it 
existed only in his own conception; it was his own thought, 
intention, plan, purpose, not yet expressed. 

"And the word was God." The term logos, not only applied to 
the plan existing only in the mind, but also to the expression of 
that plan. We understand this text then, to mean that the word- 
plan or purpose of God, found its first expression in the creation 
of him, who was "The beginning of the creation of God"- "The 
firstborn of every creature" or better translated "born before all 
creation" (who afterward became the man, Jesus). Rev. 3:14 and 



1:5. Col. 1:15; and though now fully exalted to the divine 
nature, still "His name is called the "Word of God." Rev. 19:13. 

This being, in whose creation, Jehovah's plan began to find 
expression, is here called a God- "And the Word [expression of 
the plan] was God." The word God signifies mighty one; but not 
always the All-mighty One. It is the translation of each of four 
Hebrew words— el, elah, elohim, and adonai, all signifying the 
mighty, or great. It is a general name, often and properly applied 
to our Heavenly Father, as well as to Jesus, angels, and men. 
(Deut. 10:17. Gen. 32:24,30; Judges 13:21,22; Jer. 16:13, 10:11; 
Exod. 7:1.) In Psa. 82 the distinction between beings referred to 
by the word God is very marked: "God (elohim) standeth in the 
congregation of the mighty (el); he judgeth among the Gods" 
(elohim). Here the first word, God, evidently refers to Jehovah, 
the All-mighty one, while the others evidently refer to other 
mighty ones— the church, the sons of God, of whom Jesus is the 
head or chief. Again vs. 6, "I have said ye are Gods (elohim); 
and all of you are children of the Most High (el yon, the highest 
God,) but as men ye die." We, now, though sons of the Most 
High die and appear to men nothing more than others. In us, as 
in our Leader and Head, God is manifest in our mortal flesh. 
(See John 10:35 and 2 Cor. 4:11). 

The Hebrew word Jehovah is the distinctive name of the 
Almighty Father and is never applied to any other being-"I 
appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac and unto Jacob, as God 
Almighty, (el-God shaddai- almighty) but by my name 
JEHOVAH, was I not known to them." Exod. 6:3. In our 
common version (O.T.) its distinctiveness as a name is lost, 
being generally rendered the Lord. 

"And the word was God." The Son of God (afterward called 
Jesus,) is here called THE WORD, because Jehovah revealed his 
word— plan or purpose, through him. It was an eastern custom 
for kings to have an officer, called the King's Word or Voice, 
who stood upon the steps of the throne, at the side of a lattice 
window, where there was a hole covered with a curtain. Behind 
this curtain the king sat and expressed his commands to this 
officer, who communicated them to the officers, judges and 
attendants. It is from this custom, it is thought, that the 
phraseology of the text is derived. 

Primarily then, the word refers to the plan of God, and it is 
afterwards applied to the messenger of that plan -the Son of 
God. 

Vss. 2 and 3. "The same (being) was in the beginning (of 
creation) with God. All things were made by him, (as the agent 
of Jehovah) and without him was not anything made that was 
made. " He then, as here plainly stated being the first and 
chiefest of Jehovah's creature, was honored by him, as the agent 



through whom all things, both animate and inanimate were 
afterwards created— "Without him was not anything made." 

Jehovah had no beginning but is "from everlasting to 
everlasting;" (Psa. 90:2) hence that which is here called the 
"beginning" must refer to the beginning of creation. 

"In him was life. " How brief this expression, and at first sight 
how simple and seemingly absurd. If the surface meaning were 
taken, the statement of such a self-evident truth would indeed be 
absurd-that in the Son of God, who was Jehovah's agent in the 
works of creation, was life. But let us look deeper, and we will 
see that it is just like God's grand and eloquent brevity. Since the 
accomplishment of the work narrated in verse 3, the Son of God 
had laid aside the glory of his pre-existent condition, and 
become a man. As a man, he had lived 30 years— the maturity of 
manhood— and had consecrated his human being to death. Here 
he received the earnest of his after, high exaltation— the 
begetting of the Spirit, to the divine nature, to which he was 
born in the resurrection, when the consecration of the human 
being to death, was actually accomplished. In the Son of God— 
the Word-Jesus, then, from 30 years of age, was this Divine life 
which he never before possessed. (See "Narrow way to Life, " 
page 134, of "Food for Thinking Christians.") "And the life (this 
divine life) was the light of men. And the light shineth in 
darkness, and the darkness apprehendeth it not." (Diaglott.) 

Verses 10 and 11. "He was in the world and the world was made 
by him; and the world (of mankind) knew him not. He came 
unto his own, (people— the Jewish nation) and his own received 
him not. " 

But, though the world knew him not, neither did his own receive 
him, yet, nevertheless-vs. 9, "That was the true light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world. " This light has 
not yet enlightened every man. It now lights only those referred 
to in vs. 12— "as many as receive him and believe on his name. " 
To this class— believers— "gave he privilege (margin) to become 
sons of God" on condition that they follow in his footsteps, 
sacrificing the human nature. These, throughout the Gospel Age, 
"walk in the light," and like their Head, Jesus, are "lights in the 
world." (Phil. 2:15.) But still the world fails to apprehend the 
light, and will, until Jesus and all the members of that 
overcoming company —followers in his footsteps— constituting 
the Heavenly City (Rev. 21:2) are as a "city set on a hill" which 
"cannot be hid;" Matt. 5:14. Yes, this heavenly city "shall be 
established in the tops of the mountains, and shall be exalted 
above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it: (Isa. 2:2.) "and 
the nations shall walk in the light of it." (Rev. 21:24.) Then this 
"true light shining in its strength, from the exalted Divine 
Christ-head and body, will enlighten every man that cometh 
into the world. " 



That this interpretation of vss. 4 and 5 is correct, is proven by 
vss. 6,7,8, and 15. (Note what positive proof.) John came six 
months before Jesus' baptism, and begetting to the divine nature, 
bearing witness of the coming light, saying, "There cometh one 
after me, who is preferred before me, FOR HE WAS BEFORE 
ME." 

R422 : page 6 

Jesus had already come as a human being, and had, as John 
declared, existed before him, not as a man, for John was six 
months older than Jesus; but in his glorious pre-human 
condition. In what sense, then, did Jesus come after John's 
preaching? We answer that at the time of his consecration and 
typical baptism, he came as the Anointed One, the Christ, the 
divinely begotten Son of God, and consequent light of the 
world. 

Vs. 14. "And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us." 

As in verse 3, we are informed of the glory and power of the 
pre-existent Word, and in vs. 4, ignoring the subsequent human 
nature for which he left that glory, we are informed of that 
divine life which is ultimately to enlighten every man that 
cometh into the world; so vs. 14 goes back to tell how he left the 
glory which he had with the Father, gave up his spiritual being, 
and became a human being. 

"And we beheld his glory (the glory of his perfect humanity), 
the glory as of the only begotten of a father. " His perfect human 
nature shone with such lustre in contrast with all imperfect men, 
that he seemed not to be a son of the fallen race, but the only 
begotten of some perfect being— and such he was, a new creation 
of God, the second direct human creation of God, just as 

R422 : page 7 

Adam was the first. Jesus was born of the virgin Mary, while 
Adam was born of the virgin Earth.* 

Jesus, because a perfect man, was full of grace (favor) and truth. 
He lived in full and constant favor with God, and therefore God 
made known his truth-his plans-to him. 

Vs. 16. "And of his fullness have all we (believers) received." 
Yes, of that same fullness of favor with God, which Jesus 
enjoyed because of his sinless perfection, have all we received 
because of our justification through faith in his blood. Thus 
Jesus lifts believers out of condemnation and sin, up to the plane 
which he occupied, into fullness of favor and communion with 
God- "justified freely from all things." 

"And grace for grace," or favor on account of favor: that is, 
being lifted from the condition of rebels and sinners to that of 
justification by faith, was one act of favor; then that favor 
opened the way for another favor— viz., the call to become 



partakers of the Divine nature, to become heirs of God and joint- 
heirs with Jesus by suffering with him. 

Yes, with Paul, because of this grace (of justification) wherein 
we stand, we rejoice in hope of the glory of God— a further 
grace. (Rom. 5:2.) 

Vs. 17. "For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ. " Here a contrast is drawn between the 
Jewish and Gospel Ages: In the former, only the Law was given, 
(the shadow of good things to come during and after the Gospel 
Age.) But it could never give life, because none were able to 
measure up to its requirements. "But grace"— the payment of our 
ransom price, and not only so, but also the additional favor- 
"truth," or the knowledge of God's plan, and our high-calling as 
revealed through it— both these favors came by Jesus Christ. 
"The appearing of Jesus Christ, our Savior, brought life (the 
"restitution" to perfection of humanity) and immortality 
(believers' high-calling) to light." (2 Tim. 1:10.) This special 
favor ("grace,") and this wonderful knowledge ("truth") belong 
only to the Gospel Age. 

In the brief space here considered what a glorious biography we 
have presented to us, of the once glorious spiritual, subsequent 
perfect human, and now "highly exalted" Divine, Immortal 
WORD. Her it stands on the sacred page in its simple, eloquent 
brevity as dictated by the spirit of Jehovah. Behold what grace 
the Father bestowed upon him- "That all men (and all created 
beings) should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. " 

If all the world my Savior knew, 
Then all the world would love Him too. 

Thank God the happy day is dawning in which this knowledge 
shall fill the whole earth. 

Beloved followers in his footsteps, "behold what manner of love 
the Father hath bestowed upon us that we (as partakers with 
him, and joint-heirs of the same things) should (also) be called 
the sons of God. " 

Turning again to the Scriptures, we inquire, 

WHY THIS EXALTATION 

of one of God's creatures so far above all others? Paul replies- 
Hath not God power to make one vessel unto more honor— what 
if God wills to show the riches of his glory on the vessels 
prepared unto glory; Who art thou that repliest against God?- 
Shall the thing formed say unto him that formed it Why hast 
thou made me thus? (Rom. 9:21-23,20.) No, Paul, we would not 
question Jehovah's absolute right to do what he will with his 
own. If he has created angels perfect and glorious on their own 
plane of being, and men perfect and glorious on another, a little 



lower, and Jesus still higher, the Lord over all, each rejoices in 
the perfection of his being, and all redounds to the glory of God. 

But we would inquire why the additional glory of Jesus, and his 
exaltation to the divine nature? 

Paul would here point us to a principle in God's government as 
expressed by Jesus and Peter- viz. : that "God resisteth the 
proud, and giveth grace to the humble"- "Whosoever shall exalt 
himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall 
be exalted. " And again Jesus intimates that if any of God's 
creatures are exalted above others, it is for the blessing and 
service of all— "He that is greatest among you shall be your 
servant." (Matt. 23:11,12.) 

Paul seems to have in mind and to contrast the pride and 
ambition of Satan with the humility and obedience of Jesus. The 
former aspired to exalt himself above the stars (sons) of God, 
even to usurp Jehovah's throne. But of Jesus, Paul says that 
"though being in God's form (a mighty spiritual being), yet (he) 
did not meditate a +usurpation (of God's authority) to be like 
God, but divested himself, taking a bondman's form, having 
been made in the likeness of men; and being in condition as a 
man, he humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross." (Phil. 2:6-8. Diaglott.) Here we see the 
grandest intelligence next to Jehovah, recognizing his rightful 
authority, and bowing in meek and loving submission to his 
will. 

"WHEREFORE"-on this account, says Paul- "God hath highly 
exalted him. " 

In his glorious exalted condition and divine nature, we now see 
Jesus prepared for the work of blessing. Of this he informed his 
disciples after his resurrection, saying, "All power in heaven and 
in earth is given unto me;" and Prophets and Apostles, in types, 
and symbols, and wonderful sayings, tell of the glory that shall 
follow. Now taking Jehovah's standpoint of view, which his 
word reveals, we look away back to the dim and distant 
universal void, and beholding the former glory of the first- 
begotten, we exclaim in the sublime words of the poet— 

The mighty God, from out whose hand, 
The planets rolled like grains of sand. 

And who can estimate the exceeding, and ETERNAL WEIGHT 
of that glory to which he is now exalted, and which the 
revolving ages shall accumulate. 

And yet this was not Jehovah, but only his honored agent, 
looking up to him as his rightful Lord, and rendering implicit 
obedience to his will. 

Now we are prepared to understand the words of Jesus to John 
onPatmos. (Rev. 1:8,11,18.) "I am Alpha and Omega, the 



beginning and the ending, which is, and which was, and which 
is to come, the Almighty"— Almighty since Jehovah had given 
to him all power in heaven and in earth. And again he declares, 
"I am alpha and omega, the first and the last; I am he that liveth 
and was dead, and behold I am alive forevermore, and have the 
keys of hades (the grave) and of death." In or through him as 
here declared, we see the whole plan of Jehovah consummated. 
Beginning with creation we have seen him as the alpha of the 
plan, and faith looks into the revealed future and beholds him as 
its omega. 

With such an example before us as Jesus' humiliation and 
consequent exaltation, let us, as the Apostle says, consider him 
lest we be weary and faint. Let us call to mind our high calling 
to become his bride, and as such to be joined in heirship with 
him whom God hath appointed heir of all things. To appreciate 
this wondrous calling is to lay aside every weight and hindrance. 
To make its fulfillment sure, is to humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God that he may exalt us in due time to be "the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife." (1 Pet. 5:6. Rev. 21:9.) 

With such a hope clearly in view, who would not gladly trail his 
bit of earthly reputation in the dust, and take joyfully the 
spoiling of his earthly treasures, while he is counted the filth and 
offscouring of the earth? Dearly beloved, keep the prize for 
"him that overcometh" before you; keep your garments 
unspotted from the world; make your calling and election sure 
by being "faithful unto death. "-"Consider Him." 



*A father is a life-giver— The life which comes to us through 
Adam is an impaired and forfeited one; but the life which Jesus 
had, was not received through Adam, but from his Father— God. 
He was no more contaminated with sin by his association with 
Mary, than was Adam by the dust of the earth from which he 
was formed. God was directly the Father of both Adam and 
Jesus, therefore the life of both was perfect and unforfeited. 



+The Greek word harpagmon, here rendered usurpation being a 
word of very rare occurrence, a great variety of translations have 
been given. The following may serve as examples: "Who did not 
think it a matter to be earnestly desired."— Clarke. "Did not 
regard as an object of solicitous desire."— Stuart. "Thought not a 
thing to be seized."— Sharpe. "Did not eagerly grasp. "- 
Kneeland. "Did not violently strive. "-Dickenson. "Did not 
meditate a usurpation. "-Turnbull. This last is adopted by the 
Emphatic Diaglott. It is the clearest expression of the same idea 
which is conveyed by all. 



R423 : page 7 



AN UNPLEASANT DUTY. 

Duty is not always pleasant but it would be sin to shirk it. 

Less than a year ago, and frequently since, we warmly 
commended to our readers a publication called "Zion's Day 
Star." This we now regret, because that commendation makes 
necessary a statement to the opposite effect concerning that 
paper. 

We are not of those who disfellowship Christian brethren on 
account of some differences of opinion, but when it comes to the 
point of denying the very foundation of all Christianity, we must 
speak out and withstand all such to the face, for they become 
"the enemies of the cross of Christ." (Phil. 3:18.) This 
opposition to the cross, the world has always had. The thought 
of "redemption through his blood" has always been to the Greek 
(earth's wise) foolishness, and only the faithful have recognized 
the cross as the power of God unto man's salvation from death. 

"Zion's Day Star" at the time of our commendation was in fullest 
accord on the fundamentals of Christianity; teaching that the 
death of Jesus was the ransom price paid for our liberation from 
sin and its penalty, death-that "Christ died for our sins 
according to the scriptures." And its editor was then so true and 
faithful to the foundation doctrines, that he refused the articles 
of a valued correspondent in Michigan, because said 
correspondent had repudiated the Rock foundation, viz: our 
being "bought with a price, even the precious blood of Christ. " 
But we are pained to say, this is all changed, and the "Day Star" 
has locked arms with those who deny that the Lord BOUGHT 
them. 

Not only so, but as though anxious to lead in the race for open 
infidelity, the "Day Star" openly affirms that Jesus was the Son 
of Joseph as well as of Mary, thus implying that he was as much 
a sinner through partaking of Adamic imperfection and curse as 
any other man. It not only implies but asserts that he by nature 
was a child of wrath even as others; and then adds, "By and by 
as the truth (?) shines more clearly, it will be seen that the 
difference between Jesus, and the members of his body, is not so 
great as has been supposed. " This it characterizes as a "grand 
truth." 

One wrong step leads to another, so we are not so much 
surprised to find an attempt made to cast discredit on the first 
chapters of Matthew and Luke, giving the impression that they 
are Papal interpolations to prove the doctrine of the "Immaculate 
conception. " 

We protest against such misleading statements*. Many who 
have no access to proofs on these matters, might reasonably 
suppose that there existed some good ground for questioning the 
authority of the scriptures referred to, while the truth is, there is 



no ground for the statement whatever. All of the oldest and 
recognizedly reliable MSS. contain these chapters which record 
the fact of Jesus' miraculous conception and birth, a fulfillment 
of the prophecy: "A virgin shall conceive and bear a son and 
shall call his name Immanuel. " Such a method, of saying of any 
text which does not fit human theories-it is evidently an 
interpolation— would soon destroy the Bible as a teacher, for 
thousands of people know thousands of texts which oppose their 
theories, and which they would like to think and to have others 
think spurious. We are very glad that few are so bold as to make 
such claims where they have no foundation whatever in fact. 

The fact that the "Day Star" does not advocate the more open 
and blasphemous forms of infidelity, makes it none the less 
poisonous and injurious. The Apostles say little about the 
general unbelief of the world, but they do warn us repeatedly of 
those who will privately bring infidelity into the church. Peter 
says: "among you will be false teachers who will privately 
introduce heresies of destruction, even the having bought them, 
Sovereign Lord, denying." (2 Pet. 2:1, literal Greek rendering of 
Diaglott.) 

We are well aware that the foregoing remarks will be 
misunderstood by some, and credited to wrong motives. It will 
be thought uncharitable and unkind. To such readers we can 
only say, that personal feelings for the Editor of the "Day Star" 
are warm and strong, and it gives us more pain to thus write, 
than you to read. But it becomes a matter of duty to God, and to 
His children to show errors in their true light, particularly when 
so fearfully destructive. We can only say with Paul when writing 
under Similar circumstances. "It is a very small thing that I 
should be judged of you," 



*We purpose, the Lord willing, to perfect arrangements by 
which any of our readers who desire, may possess at small cost a 
copy of the N.T., which will give the various readings, 
omissions, etc., of the three oldest and best Greek MSS. of the 
N.T., viz: the Sinaitic, Vatican, and Alexandrian. Those who 
have the Emphatic Diaglott will find the various readings of the 
Vatican MSS. in the foot notes. The Diaglott was ready for press 
before the readings of the Sinaitic, the oldest and last found 
MSS. were obtainable in full. 

R423 : page 8 

(your human judgment.) "Yea I judge not mine own self" (by 
my own human judgment.) "He that judgeth me (and all of us) is 
the Lord," and his judgment is expressed in his Word. 

True, there are several other publications teaching very nearly 
the same things, which we do not thus publicly oppose, nor have 
we ever publicly commended them. Should the "Day Star" at 



any time alter its course, and return to the rock foundation of 
faith— the ransom given for our sins— we shall gladly and warmly 
welcome it back, and in that event, you may expect that its name 
will again be mentioned in the TOWER approvingly. 

One word more— regular readers are well aware that while we 
are neutral on no doctrine, we believe that liberality should be 
exercised by all Christians, to all Christians who are building on 
Christ the Rock, even though they are building poorly; but we 
call you all to witness that the differences above alluded to, are 
most vital. They assault the foundations of Christianity, who 
deny the ransom price. It became a question of whether we 
would be faithful to God in defending his truth, or be acceptable 
to men by passing quietly by and ignoring error. The latter 
course would have been the easiest and most agreeable to the 
flesh, but the former was duty and has been performed to the 
best of our ability. 



R423 : page 8 



THE ENEMY. 



We have been asked what we meant by our sickness being 
intended for evil by the enemy, and who the enemy is, referred 
to in our letter, which appeared in October number. At first we 
were inclined to be surprised at such a question, but when we 
considered that people have long been taught that sickness and 
death are manifestations of God's providence, and that it is not 
an uncommon thing to hear the officiating clergyman at a 
funeral speak of the "singular providence which has taken the 
deceased out of the world," we concluded that possibly others 
might wonder at the statement referred to. To such we reply: 

The letter was not worded as carefully as it would have been, 
had it been intended for publication. 

We said we did not under- value our sickness, and pain, and 
sorrow, and darkness, and gloom, which though intended for 
evil by the enemy, is among the "all things" working for good. 

We suppose, what puzzled the inquirer, was, that we should set 
a value upon what came from the enemy, or if good, how could 
it have come from an enemy. 

First, then let us make sure that the things spoken of, (sickness, 
pain, &c.,) are the work of the enemy, Satan. 

In the first chapter of Job you will see how Satan wished to have 
God afflict Job, thinking, doubtless, thus to spoil Job's trust in 
God. Did God do it? No, but he allowed Satan to do it, while he 
(God) comforted and strengthened him. 

In Acts 10:38, we are told that Jesus healed certain ones "that 
were oppressed of the devil." In 1 Peter 5:8, it is said "be 



vigilant because your adversary the devil as a roaring lion, 
walketh about seeking whom he may devour." In Hebrews 2:14, 
we are told plainly that the devil has the power of death. We 
think this is sufficient to prove that he is our enemy, and that he 
is the cause of sickness, pain, death, and ought always to have 
the credit (?) of it. But do you say: how is it that through 
affliction he does us good? He does not do us good in any sense 
whatever. 

What any of God's agents do, (according to God's estimate, 
Matt. 5:28, 1st John 3:15), is what they intend to do, and not 
what they accomplish. If our Heavenly Father were to leave us 
where Satan has done his work with us, our case would be truly 
hopeless, but Our Father's infinite love and wisdom takes us out 
of the ruin, out of death. 

Satan's work, disease and pain when finished is death; all tends 
that way, and is so intended by the arch enemy. It is our faith in 
Our Father's wisdom and love that sustains us, that causes us to 
hope, and enables us to profit by our afflictions. This is what 
Paul meant when he said: (2 Cor. 4:17,18), "Our light affliction, 
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of Glory, while we look not at the things 
which are seen. " 

So let us never say, nor intimate by word or deed, that sickness, 
pain and death are manifestations of God's providence, when a 
great share of Jesus' time was spent in undoing that same. They 
are manifestations of Satan's envy and malice. So Satan's 

R424 : page 8 

work is utter ruin, and all our hope is in the resurrection. "For 
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might 
destroy the works of the devil." 

We have a guarantee of the final destruction of the enemy, and 
of our liberation from death, in the resurrection of Christ, and 
also in the support which we receive from the Spirit while 
suffering at the hands of the enemy. This is the "earnest of our 
inheritance until the redemption of the PURCHASED 
possession." Eph 1:14. If an enemy should come along and pull 
up a young fruit tree of mine, thinking to kill it, and I should 
immediately transplant it and graft better fruit into it, there 
would be no thanks due him; he intended to ruin it. 

Perhaps some one suggests that Paul says: (Hebrews 12:6), 
"whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth" Yes, chasteneth, i.e. "instructs, trains up;" 
he comes in with the comforting influences of his spirit and 
turns our sufferings into blessings. 

But there are times when we wander or neglect to do what he 
teaches us is duty; we then feel that he "scourgeth every son that 
he receiveth. " We have no rest of spirit; we smart under the rod; 



we weep and mourn; we turn again and do his will and receive 
his smile; we have been "corrected. " But that our Father 
administers corporal punishment; that he sends pain and death, 
we find no warrant in scripture for believing. But does not the 
prophet say: (perhaps one would ask), speaking of Christ, that 
"he was smitten of God and afflicted?" No, he says: "surely he 
hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows, yet we did esteem 
him smitten of God, and afflicted." Isa. 53:4. 

Just so, now those who suffer with Christ, those who bear with 
patience, pain and sorrow, and are thus disciplined, and accept it 
as such, and thus fill up the afflictions which are behind, " are 
often thought to be "smitten of God." This is what Job's friends 
thought. 

Now we claim, (and we hope you will examine scripture to see 
if it is not so), that all physical pain which the "body of Christ" 
are visited with, comes from Satan, but is turned into instruction 
and discipline, (chastening), and accrues to the good of the 
world in the coming age; the future rulers having been touched 
with a feeling of the world's infirmities. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R424 : page 8 

COLONIZING PALESTINE. 

The movement is irresistible. If we cannot stem the tide, let us 
at least guide it into fruitful channels. We cannot suffer 
ourselves to stand by with folded hands when this new exodus is 
taking place. We Jews have held for nearly two thousand years, 
that the consummation of the ages of suffering we have passed 
through will only be reached when we again possess the land of 
our fathers. Is that trust to die away just at the moment when it 
appears about to be fulfilled? Or, is it to be expected that the 
return will be brought about by means so mysterious as to be 
beyond the co-operation of human beings? God works his will 
through the wills of men, and if the prophecies are to be 
fulfilled, it will be because they are to be fulfilled by human 
wills and energies. These may seem to be high topics to drag 
into connection with a practical plan for placing a few Jewish 
colonies in Palestine. But it is from small beginnings, such as 
these, that great events often arise, and the return of a small 
body of Jews to the Holy Land can never fail to bring to mind 
the possibility and the practicability of the larger return to which 
all Jewish history and all Jewish aspirations have hitherto 
pointed. -Jewish Chronicle. 



R424 : page 8 



JESUS died, not to permit us to sin willfully, but to release us 
as a race from the condemnation and weakness which came 
upon us unwillingly— which came as a result, directly or 
indirectly, of Adam's fall. His sacrifice for sin atoned for the 
Adamic sin; that is, for all sins directly traceable to weakness 
and ignorance, resulting from Adam's transgression; all this is 
covered— fully covered-by the precious blood of Christ. But 
when once justified, and made free, and sanctified by his blood, 
if then we sin voluntarily, there remaineth no more a sacrifice 
for sin; that is, such an one, having already received his full 
share in the benefits of that sacrifice for sins, need look for no 
further interest in the blood, which, with knowledge, he has 
counted "common," or ordinary; nor need he look for further 
favor from the one he knowingly and willingly trampled under 
foot. (Vs. 29.) 

Dear brethren, we can hold out no hope to any, either in this age, 
or that coming, who, after being fully enlightened, after tasting 
of the good Word of God, and the powers of the coming age, 
shall sin willfully-become knowing and willing rejectors of the 
Son of God and his cleansing blood. No; such, we believe, merit 
the second death, and with a thousand chances would probably 
be the same adversaries of God— just as Satan, who, despite all 
the manifestations of God's goodness and love during ages past, 
remains an adversary still. 



R424 : page 8 

DR. ABBOTT ON 
"CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY." 

Dr. Lyman Abbott, the well-known editor of the Christian 
Union, in an editorial in a recent number of that paper, 
announces his belief in the probability of the doctrine of 
conditional immortality and of the annihilation of the 
incorrigibly wicked. As the article is lengthy and contains much 
relative to other points than those above mentioned, only that 
part of it relating to these particular doctrines is here given. 
After mentioning the final triumph of Christ over all things and 
the consummated glory of the redeemed, he says: 

"In the New Testament picture of this hour of triumph I see no 
shadow of scowling faces, of angered and unrepentant rebels; in 
the New Testament echo of this song of the redeemed I hear no 
interrupting of wail or wrath from any far-off prison-house of 
despair. After the last enemy is destroyed, shall sin, worst of all 
enemies, still live, and work his ruin eternally? When God hath 
put all enemies under Christ's feet, shall this worst of all 
enemies still rule in triumph over some remote, reserved corner 
of creation?... The more I study my Bible, the more unscriptural 
seems to me the conception of endless sin; the nearer I come 



into fellowship with God my Father, my Savior, my Comforter, 
the more intolerable grows the thought of it to me. And I thank 
God for the good hope in His Word, which permits me to look 
forward to and haste toward the day when this terrible tragedy of 
sin and pain will come to an end. If I believe in the hopeless 
doom of incorrigible sin, and also in the undimmed glory of a 
perfected kingdom of love, I must believe in the annihilation of 
the incorrigibly wicked ...Fire in the Bible is generally an 
emblem of destruction, not of torment. The chaff, the tares, the 
fruitless tree, are thrown into unquenchable fire, not to be 
tortured, but to be destroyed. The hell- fire of the New Testament 
is the fire of Gehenna, kept burning outside of the walls of 
Jerusalem to destroy the offal of the city; here was the worm 
that dieth not and the fire that is unquenched; emblems of 
destruction, not of torment. ...I find nothing in the new 
Testament to warrant the terrible opinion that God sustains the 
life of his creatures throughout eternity only that they may 
continue in sin and misery. That immortality is the gift of God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, that man is mortal and must put 
on immortality, that only he can put it on who becomes through 
Christ a partaker of the divine nature, and so an inheritor of Him 
'who only hath immortality,' that eternal life is life eternal, and 
eternal death is death eternal, and everlasting destruction is 
destruction without remedy-mis is the most natural, as it is the 
simplest, reading in the New Testament."— Selected. 



R424 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Should we vote or hold public office? 

Ans. "Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto 
God the things that are God's." (Matt. 22:21.) If we have 
changed our allegiance from this world to Heaven— if we "are 
not of this world"-if "our citizenship is in heaven" (John 17:16. 
Phil. 3:20.) then we are aliens, pilgrims and strangers and not 
citizens of this country, and should claim and use only such 
favors as are accorded to aliens. If we are wholly consecrated to 
God, we have neither time nor influence to devote to politics. If 
we see clearly that present governments are those of the "prince 
of this world" and must all be shattered and give place to the 
Kingdom of God for which we pray, "Thy kingdom come, " then 
we shall have no further desire to be mixed up with them in any 
way. 

The "little flock" is so small and insignificant anyhow, that their 
votes would not turn the scale. Let the world manage its own 
government while we wait for ours. 



