Planning Summer Activities
1 We know from experience that good results come from well-thought-out plans. (Prov. 20:18; 21:5) Jehovah assures us that he will help us to make our way successful.—Prov. 16:3.
2 In planning summer activities, you may find it helpful to review your summer goals and determine which activities should take priority over others. This will be helpful if you find available time is running short. (Luke 14:28-30) Obviously, in establishing priorities, Kingdom interests should be put ahead of other considerations.—Matt. 6:33; 1 Pet. 2:11.
3 Among our primary spiritual considerations would be attending and fully benefiting from the rich spiritual program at one of the “Kingdom Unity” District Conventions this summer. Joining with our brothers in united worship of Jehovah must be among our first priorities.—Ps. 95:6; 100:2.
4 Summer months provide an excellent opportunity to auxiliary pioneer. Young people who are on school vacation are encouraged to spend at least one month this summer as auxiliary pioneers. Why not get other youths interested in working along with those who enroll! Time spent in this way adds to one’s spiritual growth.
5 Some may want to schedule reading the entire Bible during the summer period. When reading the Bible, you may find it helpful to make notes or underline points of interest either for personal application or for future use in the field service. Reading God’s Word is beneficial for everyone.—Ps. 1:2; 2 Tim. 3:16.
6 Another priority is to spend a reasonable amount of time in field service, making good use of your Bible knowledge. (Prov. 15:2) It may be possible to assist a nearby congregation in working territory that has not been covered for quite some time. Or how about not-at-homes in your own territory that is covered often? If the same residents are consistently not at home, are not such homes like unworked territory? Make it your personal concern to try different times to approach those who have not been at home. Why not try late afternoon or evening witnessing as a starter? Then try calling on different days. Since so many people subscribe to the worldly view that weekends are for fun, you may find that calls during the week will enable you to reach these people. For those who cannot be found at home regardless of when you call, you might try contacting them by letter.
7 Those who will be taking vacation trips will want to locate the nearest Kingdom Hall so they can attend the meetings and share with the congregation in field service. We want to maintain our wholesome, theocratic “routine.” (Phil. 3:16) While visiting other congregations, there will be opportunities to make new theocratic acquaintances. We do enjoy and benefit from ‘widening out’ our affection to include others. (2 Cor. 6:11-13) We can learn much about new ones by listening to their comments and observing the zeal they manifest when in the field service.
8 Some time will properly be set aside for reasonable recreation. (Eccl. 3:4) As to the amount of time scheduled and the type of recreation pursued, one should guard against the negative aspects that the spirit of the world promotes. We know how easy it is for such matters to get out of hand. (1 Tim. 4:8) Many have accepted views such as ‘be good to yourself . . . you deserve it.’ (Luke 12:19) But as we plan our summer activities we do so with the prayerful view of Psalm 90:12. By the time summer ends we will have no cause for regret if we have planned wisely and used our time profitably. We will have a wealth of pleasurable, theocratic memories.

