Presenting the Good News—With Tact
1 As we call on people in their homes or meet them on the street, in stores or other places, there is a need for us to be tactful. Why? Because we live in the “last days” with their “critical times.” Paul wrote that people living in these days would be “self-assuming, haughty, . . . not open to any agreement, . . . without self-control, fierce, . . . headstrong.” (2 Tim. 3:1-4) So it is apparent that these times call for tactfulness by Jehovah’s people when telling out the good news.
2 But what is tact? One dictionary definition is: “A keen sense of what to do or say in a difficult or delicate situation in order to maintain good relations with others or avoid offense.” Certainly as Christians we wish to maintain good relations with people and avoid needless offense. So, ‘as far as it depends on us, we will be peaceable in word and action with all men.’—Rom. 12:18.
3 It helps when we can put ourselves in the position of the person to whom we speak. Perhaps when we call we have interrupted something important. Often the householder is not expecting someone to call at his door. So we have to be tactful, thoughtful, showing deep concern for the individual along with a loving desire to help.
4 Paul was a fine example of a tactful Christian witness. Recall that in speaking to the Athenians, he did not berate or condemn them for their idolatry and worship of so many false gods, even though his spirit was irritated by such things. (Acts 17:16) Tactfully Paul used their interest in the worship of many gods as a fine introduction to his speech to the people of Athens.—Acts 17:22-31.
5 We too will meet people who have their own religion and will tell us so. What should we do? We must be tactful. We should not be pushy, belligerent or critical. Rather, we should seek to find points of agreement, if possible, and pursue them. There is no need to refute or challenge every objection raised by an individual who does not agree with our message.
6 Tactfulness includes being a good listener as well. By listening to and considering the thoughts of a householder, we will know what he is thinking. Often we can tactfully pursue his line of reasoning to develop a good conversation and give a witness. Questions are helpful, but we must be careful that they do not put the householder on the spot. Rather, they should be used to draw him out and get his viewpoint. We can then follow Paul’s example: “I have become all things to people of all sorts, that I might by all means save some.”—1 Cor. 9:22.
7 At all times our words must be carefully chosen so as not to give offense. (Prov. 25:11) Then householders will appreciate that we are making friendly calls with an encouraging message. If our words and facial expression convey personal interest, kindness and friendliness toward all, most people will note this and often respond in a receptive way. Remember Paul’s advice: “Let your utterance be always with graciousness, seasoned with salt, so as to know how you ought to give an answer to each one.”—Col. 4:6.
8 Even when people are definitely not interested, our tactful manner will seek to avoid offense. Thus we can leave a favorable impression and pave the way for the next Witness who calls. Let us continue to present the good news in a tactful way so that we may impart what is good and favorable to those who listen to us.—Eph. 4:29.

