What Makes a Pioneer?
1 What makes a pioneer? Individuals answer that question differently. Some may say that pioneers are a unique type of people that seem to have more time available to use in the field ministry. Or they may point to certain health or age advantages, having financial security or secular learning ability, which make it possible to be a pioneer. These may be factors but they do not entirely explain what enables a person to get into the regular pioneer service and what keeps him there.
2 There are many persons with reasonably good health and adequate financial resources who are not pioneers. Yet others who have relatively poor health and limited material means are faithfully sharing in the pioneer work. Could more who are in good health, perhaps retired with a fixed income, or persons temporarily out of work consider regular or auxiliary pioneer service? In the final analysis, individuals whose circumstances permit it become pioneers because they want to. That desire is the result of many factors including love, appreciation, zeal and loyalty. When the desire is strong enough, seemingly mountainlike obstacles can be overcome.—Matt. 17:20.
3 As a person makes progress in the truth, getting filled with accurate knowledge and exerting himself in the field service, he will experience the joy of helping others to learn the truth. His service takes on meaning and brings a sense of accomplishment. The fruitage of hard work becomes a cause for joy. (Eccl. 2:24) Such good work is the result of cultivating and practicing godly qualities. (2 Pet. 1:5-8) It is from these basic elements that the desire to pioneer springs. (1 Pet. 4:2) The recent all-time peaks in regular pioneers show that many have cultivated this desire.
4 Those who reach the goal of pioneering and stay in full-time service will receive many added blessings from Jehovah. (Prov. 10:22) Parents may ask, How can we help our children to cultivate the desire to pioneer? If you can take the lead by pioneering, your children will be encouraged to follow your example. From an early age, train them to become good students of God’s Word. (2 Tim. 3:15) Remember, it has the power to motivate. (Heb. 4:12) It can teach young people right principles and how to apply them. (Heb. 5:14) Such instruction combined with a good parental example provides a solid basis on which to build.—1 Cor. 3:10-13.
5 Training should include the basic idea of helping people. (Matt. 9:36) Encourage youths and the ones who are new in the truth to follow the example of Jesus in this regard. This will help them to view people as Jehovah does. (2 Pet. 3:9) Show them why helping others is such a vital part of Christian worship.—Matt. 22:39; John 21:15-17.
6 Young people of high school age have to consider their long-range goals in life and how they will use their varied resources. Why not aim for pioneering? Older ones who are retired or nearing retirement age can consider pioneering. The way we use our opportunities makes a big difference in the blessings we receive.—Luke 8:18.
7 Are you positively trying to make room for regular pioneer service in your life? Are you satisfied with your present priorities? If not, why not reevaluate them? Ask yourself, ‘What is there that prevents me from getting into the pioneer service?’ Do you want to? (Col. 3:23, 24) If you do, there is a good possibility that you, too, have what it takes to be a pioneer.

