“Let Your Kingdom Come”
1 The phrase “Let your kingdom come” is one of the most familiar, but perhaps least understood, passages in the Holy Scriptures. Happily, Jehovah’s Witnesses are blessed with the Biblical understanding of these important words of the Lord’s Prayer.—Matt. 6:9, 10.
2 In 1981 at the “Kingdom Loyalty” District Conventions, we received “Let Your Kingdom Come,” a 192-page book designed especially to assist us in our vital preaching activity. Since its release just two years ago millions of copies of this book have been produced in many languages for distribution earth wide.
3 In July we will continue using this publication in our field service activity. Its timely message will be helpful to us as we carry out our commission to preach the “good news of the kingdom.” (Matt. 24:14) How can this book be used effectively in our field ministry?
4 Why not use a simple introduction? Call attention to the very first chapter, entitled “‘Thy Kingdom Come’!” and the artist’s conception of what life will be like under Kingdom rule. The first two sentences of the opening chapter would serve as an appropriate introduction. There we read: “Few words of prayer have been repeated more often than the above. Perhaps you the reader have uttered that prayer.” From that point you could briefly inform the householder of the contents of the book, referring to the table of contents, and then offer it on a contribution of 75c.
5 Perhaps you have already developed an approach that is quite appropriate and effective. If so, why not share that with others as you work with them in the ministry? When using this publication, you will be talking about the theme of the Bible, God’s Kingdom, and what it will do for mankind. So the offer is very timely and fits in closely with what our work is all about.—Matt. 28:19, 20.
6 During July we will also be using the brochure released in 1982 at the “Kingdom Truth” District Conventions. The brochure is entitled Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! This outstanding 32-page publication of magazine size can be a delight for young ones and those with limited reading ability. It traces vital Bible history. It presents information from the time of the rebellion in Eden to the time of the restored Paradise on this earth under the Kingdom of God. This illustrated and easy-to-understand brochure effectively imparts life-giving knowledge and instruction about Jehovah, his Son Christ Jesus and the promises of the Holy Bible.—John 17:3.
7 During July look for opportunities to offer these publications to as many persons as possible. Doubtless thousands more earth wide will yet join with us in unitedly praying, “Let your kingdom come.”

