Accept the Responsibility of Return Visits
1 There are a number of motivating reasons for sharing as fully as possible in making return visits. We want to accomplish thoroughly the work that we have been given to do, even as Paul did. (Acts 20:21, 24) If we are thorough in calling back on all interested persons, we will maintain a good conscience while striving to accomplish our ministry fully.​—2 Tim. 4:5.
2 Knowledge Makes Us Responsible: The fact that lives are at stake should move us to be diligent in making return visits. (John 17:3) Our knowledge of Jehovah’s judgment and the nearness of Armageddon should incite us not only to warn the wicked but also to help those who are ‘sighing and groaning because of the detestable things happening on earth.’ (Ezek. 9:4) They need to be brought into association with Jehovah’s visible organization.
3 People need help to understand the truth accurately. (Acts 8:30, 31; 18:26) This is another reason for us to accept our responsibility to return and “water” the seeds of truth that were sown. How much spiritual progress would we ourselves have made had it not been that someone returned time and again to help us acquire an accurate knowledge of Jehovah and His wonderful purposes?​—Matt. 7:12.
4 Show Love and Zeal: Making return visits is a fine way to demonstrate our love for people. A blind brother serving as a regular pioneer said: “Ever since my baptism, my desire has been to tell others of what I had learned from the Bible. I was happy that my handicap did not prevent me from doing this. . . . I learned also to keep a mental record of each house on the street, and in this way, I was able to make return visits on persons interested in Bible study.” This blind brother can truly see with his heart, and he does not hold back from making return visits and expressing his Christian love for others.
5 When making return visits, we often have opportunity to make good use of the Bible and give reasons for the hope in us. (1 Pet. 3:15) This not only helps the householder but also fires up our own zeal and appreciation for the truth. Making return visits brings a joy that can be obtained in no other way. And the quality of that joy need never diminish. It can be renewed constantly by our zealously making return visits.​—Prov. 10:22.
6 We must take seriously our responsibility to make return visits. Jehovah’s people do not hold back what is good from others, and this can be seen by our worldwide activity during the 1991 service year. (Prov. 3:27) We made 344,926,952 return visits and conducted 3,947,261 home Bible studies. There were 300,945 new disciples who dedicated themselves to Jehovah and were baptized. This marvelous increase would never have occurred had it not been for our willingness to accept the responsibility of making return visits.​—1 Thess. 2:8.

