Introductions to Get Householders to Listen
1 What is the most important part of your house-​to-​house presentation? Most of us would agree that it is the introduction. If you are unsuccessful in arousing the householder’s interest within the first 30 seconds or so, he will probably terminate the conversation.
2 What factors should you consider in preparing an effective introduction? Analyze the customs and needs of the people you are likely to meet. Is it customary to exchange pleasantries, or will you be expected to come quickly to the point? Are there many young couples in your area? What are their concerns? Are people in your neighborhood conscious of problems facing mankind in general?
You might get them to listen by saying something like this:
▪ “Good morning. My name is ​——​——. I’m bothered when I read about people starving and being killed in wars. Are you?” Other questions that may help start a conversation are: “What is the solution to the world’s problems?” “Do you think anyone can rid the earth of today’s problems?” “Suppose a ruler had qualifications like these mentioned at Isaiah 9:6, 7? [Read and comment on scripture.]”
3 In some territories, people may show greater concern for their home and family than for global matters such as world peace.
You might arouse interest by asking:
▪ “What kind of life do you see for yourself and your family in ten years? The Bible’s view of the future is most encouraging because it foretells the coming of a ruler who will govern by perfect standards. Notice what Isaiah 9:6, 7 says about him.”
4 Do you live in an area where crime and safety are the topic of the day? Some may lend a hearing ear if you use the first introduction under “Crime/​Safety” on page 10 of the Reasoning book.
You could say:
▪ “Hello. We’re talking with folks about the matter of personal safety. There is a lot of crime around us, and it affects our lives.” Then a question such as “What is the solution?” or “Do you think anyone can rid the earth of these problems?” or “What if a ruler had qualifications like these?” may help start a conversation. You could then read Isaiah 9:6, 7.
5 All of us, including young people of school age, can use these simple one-​scripture presentations. In fact, you may wish to try one when offering magazines. Remember, our goal is to assess the extent of the householder’s interest before offering literature. Do you not agree that such a Scriptural presentation would be a fine way to discern whether our listener manifests genuine interest? We are sure that many will enjoy using these presentations during January, both when offering magazines and when presenting the regular offer for the month.
6 If you make effective use of the first 30 seconds of your visit, both by your demeanor and by your introduction, you will likely achieve the important goal of getting householders to listen.

