Let All Know That Worldwide Security Is Near
1 Soon, the “Prince of Peace” will establish true peace and security earth wide. Our faith in this Bible promise should motivate us to share it with others. (Isa. 9:6, 7; Mic. 4:3, 4) During the months of January and February, we will be offering any 192-​page book published in 1983 or earlier. Congregations that do not have a stock of such books may offer the book Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace.”
2 On page 8 of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, we have presented a number of introductions that you may want to use in the ministry during January. Three transitions that may be helpful in directing the attention of householders to the Worldwide Security book are suggested in the following paragraphs.
3 Transition No. 1: After your introduction, turn to page 13 and say: “Isaiah 9:6, 7 is quoted word for word from the Bible in this first paragraph. Allow me to read it to you.” Then ask: “Who is the ‘Prince of Peace’?” Allow for a reply, then continue: “This book clearly identifies the ‘Prince of Peace’ and explains how he will bring worldwide peace to the earth in our time. Are you interested in reading it, and would you like to learn more about the promised new world?” Depending on the response, you can determine if the book should be left with the person.
4 Transition No. 2: After reading Isaiah 9:6, 7, turn to page 4 and ask the householder: “What peaceful conditions do you see in this illustration?” Allow for a reply, then continue by saying: “There is peace among the people and peace with the animals. Some may think that human governments will bring such a peace. But real peace and security as foretold in the Bible must be God-made, not man-​made. Don’t you agree?” Allow for a reply, then read paragraph 4 on page 5 and explain that this book answers many questions about the Kingdom and peace on earth. If the householder is genuinely interested in the Kingdom message and wants to read the book, offer it to him.
5 Transition No. 3: In areas where people are inclined to interrupt and not allow you to finish your presentation, you might use this approach: “May I ask you a question?” If the householder agrees, continue: “Jesus said at Matthew 28:19, 20 that his followers would make disciples of people of all nations. The question is: Would the whole world have to be converted before he would rule as the ‘Prince of Peace’? What is your opinion?” Allow for a reply, then say: “The Bible answer to that question is found here on page 21.” Then read paragraph 2 on page 21, and point out how the scriptures cited in this book answer that question and many more about worldwide security and the “Prince of Peace.”
6 You may have selected an introduction that you like from page 8 of Our Kingdom Ministry. After reviewing the transitions in this article, you may find one in particular that you will enjoy using. Take the time to practice your introduction and transition before going in field service. Your preparation and your personal conviction that true peace and security will come by means of the “Prince of Peace” and his Kingdom will add to your persuasiveness and enthusiasm in offering the Worldwide Security book.

