R571 : page 1 

VOL. V. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY, 1884. 
NO. 6. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 
101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 



we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



page 1 

SEND US the addresses of all the moral and religious Swedes and 
Norwegians you can gather; for samples of the Swedish paper. 



THE safest way to send money is by "POSTAL MONEY 
ORDER." The rates have recently been reduced. "POSTAL 
NOTES" are no safer than money. 



R571 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

With the opening of another year we look backward over the past 
and forward into the future. 

The year just buried will be one long remembered by quite a 
number of our readers, as the one in which they first gained a 
knowledge of God's word and the gracious plan therein revealed. 
To some it has been full of trial, as the great Refiner and Purifier 
has had them in the furnace to separate the dross from the gold, and 
to cause them to reflect his image (Mai. 3:3). Happy are they who, 
being tried by the fire, have not been found wanting, but have had 
their hearts more firmly established in the truth, and who have let 
go of the traditions of men and taken hold more firmly than ever of 
God's gracious favor in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

Looking forward, we can but expect the same work to continue 
until every part of our faith-building is tried, and the wood, hay and 
stubble all consumed; for "the day that cometh [is now present] 
shall try every man's work of what sort it is." (Mai. 4:1; 1 Cor. 
3: 13-15.) If in the past your building has stood the test and not been 
destroyed, rejoice; but still with trembling, remembering that the 
trial is not all over yet. "Be not high-minded, but fear." "Let him 
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." If there is in your 
building anywhere that which will not stand the test of fire, it must 
go— replace it quickly by that which will abide. 

If there is anything lacking in your consecration— if in anything you 
have a will not surrendered to and harmonized with God's will- 
take heed to it, for he will discover it. If, as one of his jewels, you 
are being polished to radiate his light, take heed that in you there 



shall be no self-will, which as a grit might cause a flaw and mar 
your beauty and acceptableness with him when making up the 
number of his jewels. 

It is not probable, that trials, besetments and difficulties in the 
"narrow way" will be less in the year begun than in the one ended. 
The furnace gets hotter rather. Yet, let us remember that the greater 
our difficulties the greater the supply of "grace to help in every time 
of need," for which it is our privilege to call at "the throne of the 
heavenly grace." Call to mind the words: "My grace is sufficient for 
thee," and, "Count it all joy when ye fall into temptations," knowing 
that if exercised thereby they will work out for us an exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory. 

The past year has made us acquainted with a larger number of 
sacrificers (Priests— 1 Pet. 2:9— the Levites did not offer sacrifices) 
than we had before known. Men and women who not only hazard 
but spend, of their consecrated time, money, talent and reputation, 
in spreading the "glad tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all 
people." Through these consecrated agencies the truth is reaching 
other sheep of the flock, who were famishing and ready to perish by 
the way for want of its sustaining power. And these methods and 
exertions are being abundantly blessed, not alone in feeding and 
refreshing the hungry, but also in the growth and development of 
those so engaged. Every exertion in the Lord's service, and done 
unto the Lord, is sure to bring a compensating reward and blessing 
upon the heart of the laborer. 

The year commenced offers fresh opportunities for sacrificing 
service. None should feel discouraged at opposition, and because 
few will believe our report —our Gospel. It is the few who have "an 
ear to hear" that we should expect to reach. If you at any time feel 
discouraged, call to mind the Master's experience. If the majority 
heard his words, you might expect them to hear yours; but if as a 
mass they rejected his words, they will reject yours also. If they 
have called the Master Beelzebub, what more should we expect? It 
is sufficient that the disciple be as his Lord. (Matt. 10:25; John 
13:16.) Then, with thanks for the past and present, and earnest 
prayer and confidence for the future, let us go forth with the whole 
armor of God girded on yet more securely, with the girdle of truth 
and trust; and grasping yet more firmly our shield of faith in his 
protecting care, and with the sword of the Spirit-his own Word-in 
hand, let us fight a good fight until we finish the work given us, that 
we may be of those accounted worthy to enter into the joys of their 
Lord. 



A HAPPY NEW YEAR. 



New mercies, new blessings, new light on thy way; 
New courage, new hope, and new strength for thy day; 
New notes of thanksgiving, new chords of delight; 
New songs in the morning, new songs in the night. 

New wine in thy chalice, new altars to raise; 
New fruit for thy Master, new garments of praise; 
New gifts for His treasures, new smiles from His face; 
New streams from the fountain of infinite grace. 

New stars for thy crown, and new tokens of love; 
New gleams of the glory that waits thee above; 
New light of His countenance, radiant and dear! 
All this be thy joy in the happy New Year!" 



page 1 

We give below extracts from some 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Prospect, Pa. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I called at your place about ten days 
since, but you were not in, and as I had not time to wait to see you, 
although I should like very much to have a conversation with you, I 
scribbled a little note to you on the back of an envelope. I 
appreciated the November TOWER very highly, especially the 
revelation regarding Elijah. I can well conceive how this all appears 
foolishness to the world; but, thank God, my heart is open, and it is 
sweet to believe. Many antagonize our faith, but this very harsh, 
angry, blind, antagonism, both of those within and out of the 
Church, convinces me, or is to me another strong proof, of the 
correctness of our faith. How blind the world is! Even the educated 
will not believe. Why are we regarded with such contempt and our 
paper cast out as an evil thing? Surely it accepts the whole 
Scriptures, has the most thorough faith in Christ and his work, and 
only teaches holy living and more entire consecration to God. 
Thank God for the light he has granted to me, for the increased 
peace he is granting to me day by day! Not for the whole world 
would I be back again in the blindness and worse than Egyptian 
bondage of the church (nominal). I now feel free— as if a great 
burden had been lifted from me. Oh, that people would open their 
eyes to see! But God's will be done. 

The TOWER is condemned without a thorough reading; this is 
plain to me from it being classed with the Day Star. Please let it be 



well known that there is no similarity between them. We build on 
the rock Christ Jesus, the Son of God, and affiliate with none who 
do not acknowledge him as such. 

It is so lonesome here! There are none with whom we may hold 
Christian communion and fellowship; with whom we may converse 
on this glorious theme and plan. God grant us patience till the 
glorious day when all these crooked things shall be made straight! 
At present, here as elsewhere, the Church, or image, is engaged in 
the worship of that certainly good man, Martin Luther, to the 
exclusion of all else, at the same time giving warning to any other 
who may attempt to throw off the yoke as he did. 

Affectionately yours, . 

Mountain Valley, Va. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, Sir:-I have been carefully reading the copies 
of the WATCH TOWER which you sent me, and have gained much 
information therefrom, but I am much perplexed as to how I should 
proceed. In the first place I am not a Christian; and have never 
made any profession, although I have been desiring to become a 
Christian for some time. I have listened with great attention to all 
the preachers who preach in this country, mostly "Cambellites," 
"Baptists," "Missionaries" and "Methodists," but up to the present 
time they have failed to convince me of the truth and harmony of 
their teachings. Since I have seen the TOWER, I have become very 
much interested, and would like very much to have some preaching 
from you, or from one of your belief. Yours is entirely a new 
doctrine in this neighborhood and but very few have read any of 
your papers. Some, but they are few, say they would not read them 
if they had them. I would like very much to read your "Food for 
Thinking Christians," as also would many of my friends. And now I 
have one question to ask, If I should become convinced that this is 
the true doctrine, how am I to become a Christian? In other words 
"What must I do to be saved?" Please answer this by letter for my 
benefit as I need advice. Awaiting your answer I remain 

Yours truly, 

[We print this to show the effect of these doctrines upon the 
worldly.-Ed.] 

Yankton, Dakota. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-For several months I have been 
corresponding with one of the most zealous opposers of this 
"nameless sect" as he says they are called. He and his son, as 
general Bible agents, have traveled extensively over northern 
Indiana, Illinois, Iowa and Southern Dakota. In canvassing for 
Bibles, they have found the people greatly interested in these new 
truths and have opposed them with all their might, having gathered 



and destroyed over 300 copies of "Food for thinking Christians," 
thinking they were full of error of the most dangerous kind. 

Having explained its beautiful harmony in the main, with the Bible, 
as well as I was able, he promised to study it carefully and 
prayerfully; he writes me that having studied it faithfully for five 
months, he now has digested the most of it and believes it to be 
God's truth. He regrets exceedingly that he has destroyed the books. 
It is his intention to go to Chicago soon. He is much interested in 
the "Watch Tower" and says he will subscribe for it when he settles 
in Chicago. 

Your Brother in Christ. 



R571 : page 1 
Brunswick, Maine. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have read THE TOWER from January 
last with absorbing interest. God bless and speed the good work. I 
have long believed in a pure consecrated and holy ministry and 
church. But never have I so fully enjoyed my privilege as for the 
past few weeks and especially since Aug. 30, 1883. I spent forty 
years, five months, and ten days in the wilderness; but glory be to 
God I then entered Canaan. I am an evangelist and have been 
preaching the truth as I understood it for many years. I intend to 
keep on doing so. God has been wonderfully opening to me the 
Scriptures of late. I find a few hungry ones everywhere I go. 

Yours truly, 
page 1 

Basham's Gap, Ala. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
was received with a hearty welcome; it is being read and re-read 
with increasing interest. For the past thirteen years I have been a 
member of the M.E. Church, adhering strictly to its discipline till 
within the past year. I read the Bible closely to see if they kept in 
close connection with the Word, but I found they did not. Then I 
sought to understand the will of God from his Word. I began to 
earnestly seek after truth, I compared the teaching of the Bible and 
the creeds together and I found that they would not stand the test as 
they are built principally of hay, wood and stubble. I looked to 
Jesus for help seeing what must be the end of all these man made 
creeds, yet I saw no way of escape. At last the TOWER was handed 
me and thank God the mist of darkness has been removed 



page 2 



and rays of light are being thrown upon the work of God, which I 
now read with more interest and understanding. To-day I stand 
upon holy ground trusting in God's Word to guide me into all the 
ways of truth and soberness, believing in Jesus my Saviour, praying 
for my fellow travelers to be freed from Babylon's captivity, 
teaching all those I am competent to teach, distributing the TOWER 
to earnest seekers, wading through trials, bearing patiently the 
reproach of men, denying myself worldly gains, and trying to 
follow the footprints of Jesus. I have not language to express my 
gratitude for the help already received from your stand-point, and 
stand ready to receive more of the food for which my soul is 
earnestly hungering. 

Yours in Christ, 



Westmoreland Co., Pa. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-My wife and I have been very much 
interested in reading a second time the articles in June, July and 
Sept. Nos. of the ZION'S WATCH TOWER on "The Seven 
Churches" and "The Seven Last Plagues." We have also been 
reading again Feb. and July Nos. the articles "Before Abraham was 
I am" and "Hear, O Israel! Jehovah Our God is one God." 

Oh how the truth has opened up to our understanding. We cannot 
help but believe, and accept it, for it is now so clear to our own 
vision. We don't accept just because our brethren in Christ say— this 
is so, or that is so- but when we search and examine using God's 
word as our standard of measure and when we find that the 
explanations given stand the test, we feel like rejoicing. 

We feel glad that the light is shining so brightly, and that those to 
whom the truth is being revealed so liberally and wonderfully are 
freely giving, as freely they have received. 

I wish we-of this way-were able to have some of the articles, in 
the Nos. above referred to, published in tract or pamphlet form. But 
it might be, like many of the other pearls (of truth) which we have 
scattered-they would be trampled under foot, often by our dearest 
friends whom we had expected and hoped might appreciate them. 

I have felt lately that the Lord has been using me. This affords me 
great satisfaction. But the Devil has been trying every artifice to 
hinder me, and obscure my vision, and cause me to stumble. He 
knows where I am most easily beset. It does take watching. How 
weak I am. My temper and my pride I find hard to control. When I 
have fought well and gained a victory for the Lord's cause, even 
while I rejoice, the devil steals in and before I know it I am puffed 
up, and therefore I almost fear to rejoice. I try to be meek and 
humble and to empty myself of "self," of "pride"; but how often I 
catch myself, even when contending for the truth-even while I 
rejoice and am feeling thankful to God that he has opened my 
understanding, revealed to me the truth, and given me ability to use 



my talents. Even while thus rejoicing and giving God thanks, the 
adversary steals in and endeavors to puff me up. This has been a 
great stumbling block to me from the beginning of my Christian 
experience. 

While a member of the M.E. Church I could never speak nor pray 
in public on account of this "fear" of what people would think of 
my remarks or prayer, or that I might make a blunder. My thoughts 
would get confused as soon as I would begin to anticipate that I 
might be called on. Thus you see how the devil takes advantage of 
my natural weakness, want of self confidence, and my fear of 
making a blunder— the root of which I think is "pride." Oh what a 
hindrance, what a thorn this weakness has been to me all my life, 
not only hindering me from publicly speaking for Jesus, but it has 
hindered me from speaking in public on all subjects. 

How can I overcome it? The weakness is perhaps constitutional. 
Will the Lord remove it? 

Your brother in Christ, 

["Resist the devil and he will flee from you."— Editor.] 



R572 : page 2 

THE SCHOOL OF CHRIST 

In the hope of strengthening the children of God, who have placed 
themselves in the school of Christ, we would offer a few practical 
suggestions on methods of study and discipline. And first we 
remark, that none should expect to make progress in the truth who 
do not devote time and patient, persistent effort to it. Who would 
expect to become proficient in any branch of mathematics, science, 
or philosophy, without such study? And how much more important 
is Bible study. 

The Bible seems to be an unfailing mine of wealth, at least none 
have ever yet exhausted its treasures; and we must give it patient, 
faithful study, if we would attain that degree of proficiency in it 
which the great teacher has a right to expect, and which the 
exigencies of the time in which we live necessitate. If Paul said we 
should need the whole armor of God to be able to withstand the 
fiery darts and wily arts of the adversary in this evil day, in all 
probability we shall not be able to stand, with much less than the 
whole armor. 

We well know the difficulties and disadvantages under which many 
labor. We know the business, household and family cares that press 
upon the majority, but did you ever think that this very pressure of 
seeming necessity, is permitted to give you an opportunity to 
overcome and to sacrifice? If all the hindrances were taken out of 
the way your privilege of running the narrow way for the high 



calling would be gone. The Lord says, Be not overcharged with the 
cares of this life (Luke 21:34,) and again Paul says, "God is faithful 
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but 
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be 
able to bear it." 1 Cor. 10:13. 

If, then, you are strongly tempted to be overcharged with the cares 
of life, know this, that such is not the will of God, and look out for 
the way of escape which he indicates. We are all more or less the 
creatures of habit, and generally we cling to them long after the 
necessity which first demanded them has passed. The brethren 
generally have their hours of labor fixed by the prevailing business 
customs, and have their evenings left free from care for study, but if 
they should find business demanding all their time and all their 
effort for any length of time, this is not the Lord's will; they are 
being overcharged and oppressed of the devil for the very purpose 
of retarding their spiritual progress; and a way of escape by change 
of business, or otherwise, should be sought with the Lord's 
assistance. 

With the sisters the case is somewhat different; they have their time 
and arrangements more at their own command, but habit and early 
training prompt them to spend all available time in care for many 
things which ought to be dispensed with. Habits of close economy 
prompt many to do things which might be done by others, long 
after the necessity for such economy is past. And so they carry 
burdens themselves long after their children are able to share them. 
That daughter will be much better prepared for the after duties of 
life who early learns to share a mother's cares; and so, also, that son 
who learns early to feel and share the father's cares. Thus, much 
valuable time may be gained and utilized in the study of the word 
of God. 

We know also that many have not formed habits of study and 
consecutive thought, yet all these difficulties may be overcome. It 
should be borne in mind also, that mere reading is not study. To 
take a Bible or a paper and sit where we are subject to interruptions, 
etc., is not study. Your children could never prepare their lessons 
for school in such a way. How then, you ask, shall we study? First, 
we would say, have some regular place, and time also, if possible, 
as free from interruptions as you can make it. Let the helps for 
study all be there. Then read critically, searching out references, 
and endeavoring to bring the subject in hand clearly before your 
mind. Take one subject at a time and master it before you leave it. 
Keep a file of your old papers on hand and within easy reach, and 
make an index of subjects. We are sorry to find that some have 
given away back numbers, which cannot now be replaced, but we 
hope none will do so in future. If you want sample copies for 
friends you can send for them. 

After studying any subject, take pencil and paper and write out your 
understanding of it. This will greatly aid you in thinking and 
searching out all the evidence supplied in the Word on every 



subject. As you thus study you will be surprised to find how 
beautifully the Scriptures will fall into harmony on the line of truth, 
and how lack of harmony will reveal and expose error. Some will 
think they cannot do this because they have not been used to so 
studying, but the sooner you get used to it the better. It is possible 
for all, and your ability will increase with practice. You will then 
have a certainty of knowledge beyond the painful shiftings of 
doubt— a full assurance of hope well worth your most careful effort. 
The Spirit also will help our infirmities and lead such into all truth. 
"He that seeketh findeth." 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R572 : page 2 

THE LESSON TAUGHT BY A SWISS GUIDE. 

Sarah Smiley, in her account of a tour in the Alps, recounts a 
touching incident and gives a beautiful illustration of Scripture- 
teaching concerning the generous help of our great burden-bearer. 
"In the summer of 1879," says the writer, "I descended the Rhigi 
with one of the most faithful of the old Swiss guides. Beyond the 
service of the day, he gave me, unconsciously, a lesson for life. His 
first care was to put my wraps and other burdens upon his shoulder. 
In doing this he called for all; but I chose to keep back a few for 
special care. I soon found them no little hindrance to the freedom of 
my movement, but still I would not give them up until my guide, 
returning to me where I sat resting for a moment, kindly but firmly 
demanded that I should give him everything but my alpenstock. 
Putting them with the utmost care upon his shoulders, with a look 
of intense satisfaction he led the way. And now, in my freedom, I 
found that I could make double speed with double safety. Then a 
voice spoke inwardly: 'O foolish, wilful heart, hast thou indeed 
given up thy last burden? Thou hast no need to carry them.' I saw it 
all in a flash; and then, as I leaped lightly from rock to rock down 
the steep mountain side, I said within myself: And even thus will I 
follow Jesus, my Guide, my burden-bearer. I will rest all my care 
upon Him, for He careth for me.'"— Selected. 



R572 : page 2 

GOD'S RICH SUPPLY 

Human nature is a mass of wants. The earliest cry of infancy 
means want of food, or sleep, or relief from pain. The silent appeal 
of old age in its arm-chair, is for a daily supply of daily necessaries. 
Columns of our daily journals are filled with the catalogue of 
"wants." The chief purpose of all trade, manufactures and 
commerce, is to supply the various needs of humanity; and God's 



grandest ministration of love is to supply the endless necessities of 
his dependent children. 

What a glorious promise that is which Paul records in his letter to 
the generous Phillippians. They had been kind to him, and he writes 
back to them, "My God will supply all your need according to his 
riches in glory, by Jesus Christ." That is a divine promise, made to 
be kept. I can put that away where I put my U.S. bonds, with a 
comfortable certainly of no defalcation. This passage is one of the 
"Government Securities" of heaven. It is my God who issued the 
promise; my own personal Father. He does not bind himself to give 
me all I may lust after; no, not even all I may pray for. Many of my 
wants are purely artificial, and born of selfishness. I may crave 
wealth, and he may see that my soul would be richer if I were poor. 
I may ask for some promotion, and he may know that my way to 
holiness lies through a valley of humiliation and disappointment. So 
he only agrees to give me what I need, which is a very different 
thing from what I may be craving.— T. L. Cuyler. 



R572 : page 2 

THE BLOOD FOR A TOKEN. 

God said to the children of Israel on that dark night down in 
Egypt, that the blood should be to them for a token, and when He 
should see the blood he would pass over. 

You will remember that the first-born in all the houses in Egypt 
were to be killed, but God was going to pass over every house 
where the blood was upon the door posts and lintels. What blood? 
The blood of the lamb. They were to be perfectly safe if the blood 
was there, for God had said it. (Read carefully the account in 
Exodus 12.) The lamb's blood pointed to Jesus' blood to be shed 
long years after, and just as the children of Israel were perfectly 
safe on the dark night sheltered by the blood of the lamb, so every 
one sheltered by the blood of God's lamb, Jesus, is just as safe as in 
the presence of God. As many as received Him, (Jesus) to them 
gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that 
believe on his name. —Selected. 



R573 : page 2 

STAND. 

When you can do no more, stand. "Having done all things, stand." 
But beware how and where you stand. "Stand fast in the faith." 
Stand on covenant ground. Stand with face to foe. Stand watching, 
waiting, victorious. "Stand still and see the salvation of God." Stand 
not in your own caprice, or by human order. Even though Red Sea 
barriers lie across your way it may be the will of God that you go 



forward without a halt. It is easier to march than to stand. It is easier 
to rush forward to the charge than to stand still and receive the fiery 
assault. The good soldier must be ready for both. They serve well 
who march and fight for their king. But "they also serve who only 
stand and wait." Patience and fortitude are precious in the sight of 
God, and "to obey is better than sacrifice." Where patience can have 
her perfect work, whether in the stress and strain of conflict, or in 
the trial of waiting, there it is good to be.— Selected. 



R573 : page 2 

"BEHOLD THE LAMB OF GOD." 

"Look at the time of Moses. Every morning, perhaps at 9 o'clock, 
a sermon was preached, (we may say an object-lesson was given), 
of which the text was The Lamb slain. And there might be twenty 
other offerings going on at the same time, and others continuing all 
day. In the evening the same sermon was preached from the same 
text. For we may regard the morning and evening sacrifice of the 
lamb as the same sermon daily repeated for 1500 years. I wonder 
what people would say if we gave the same sermon, the same 
heads, the same illustrations, year in and year out? We need not do 
exactly that, for there is abundant variety in the Bible; but the 
subject for our preaching is one that never changes— the Lamb of 
God that taketh away the sin of the world; the Lamb in the midst of 
the throne."- Dr. A. A. Bonar. 



page 2 

MR. SPURGEON once said to his people: "Many church 
members think that if they do nothing wrong and make no trouble 
they are all right. Not at all, sir, not at all. Here is a chariot, and we 
are all engaged to drag it. Some of you do not put out your hand to 
pull; well, then, the rest of us have to labor so much the more, and 
the worst of it is, we have to draw you also. While you do not add 
to the strength which draws, you increase the weight that is to be 
drawn. It is all very well for you to say, "I do not hinder you." You 
do hinder, and you cannot help hindering. If a man's leg does not 
help him in walking, it certainly hinders him. Oh, I cannot bear to 
think of it. That I should be a hindrance to my own soul's growth is 
bad indeed; but that I should stand in the way of the people of God 
and cool their courage and dampen their ardor— my Master, let it 
never be! Sooner let me sleep among the clods of the valley than be 
a hindrance to the meanest work that is done for thy name." 



R573 : page 3 



CHRIST OUR ALL 



A living Christ, of wondrous birth, 
Who trod the dreary paths of earth, 
Shedding abroad his holy light 
Through the deep gloom of sin's dark night. 

A dying Christ, whose precious blood 
Seals the poor sinner's peace with God; 
And fills the soul with fullest love, 
Like to the joy prepared above. 

A Christ ascended— all is done, 
A world redeemed, a victory won. 
With angel hosts, a glorious throng, 
We'll sing with joy salvation's song. 

A living Christ our spirits need, 
A loving Christ our souls to feed; 
A dying Christ, our ransom he, 
A risen Christ to set us free. 

This too our need— a Christ within, 
A life with God, afar from sin; 
A Christ whose love our hearts shall fill, 
And quite subdue our wayward will. 

-Selected. 



R573 : page 3 

HIMSELF TOOK OUR INFIRMITIES AND 
BARE OUR SICKNESSES. 

Matt. 8:17. 

Since it is repeatedly stated in Scripture that Jesus was free from 
sin, both personal and inherited, that "in him was no sin," (2 Cor. 
5:21,) that no cause of death was found in him (Luke 22:23), etc., 
some have wondered how these statements can be reasonably 
harmonized with others and with the facts of Jesus' life. 

We know well that death and all its accompaniments of pain and 
sorrow are the direct result of sin, and that if any man were actually 
free from sin, he would be free also from sin's penalty, death. We 
know that the same law which guarantees that the disobedient shall 
die, guarantees also that the obedient shall live. (Rom. 10:5; Gal. 
3:12.) The question, then, is not an unreasonable one: If Mary's 
child did no sin and did not receive the imperfect and condemned 
Adamic life through a human father, but a perfect, unimpaired and 
uncondemned life transferred from his pre-existent condition, 
should he be born an imperfect, blemished, pained and dying 



human being? We answer, no, he should not, and if Jesus was thus 
born we should assuredly claim that it was an evidence either that 
in him was sin, and over him death had power and dominion 
because of sin dwelling in him, or that God's law had been violated 
and the innocent compelled to suffer the penalty of guilt. But as 
either of these views would be opposed to the character and word of 
God, we reject both as erroneous. 

Jesus being free from all sin was equally free from all penalties or 
wages of sin. Were it otherwise he could not have given himself a 
ransom-an equivalent price-for the sin of the first Adam and its 
consequences. Had he come into the world under condemnation of 
death he would have had no life to lay down for ours, as our 
redemption price. To be an acceptable sacrifice he must have been 
(as shown in the types also) a "Lamb without blemish and without 
spot." (1 Pet. 1:19.) And "the Lamb of God which taketh away the 
sin of the world" (John 1:29) was without blemish, and was 
therefore an acceptable sacrifice. And let it not be forgotten that this 
sacrifice was not made in the change of nature from spiritual to 
human, but was made after he had become a man— "A body hast 
thou prepared me" for the suffering of death. (Heb. 10:5.) Hence it 
should be clear to all, that death in no sense had any claim upon 
him until he offered himself— a man for men (1 Cor. 15:21), and 
"became obedient unto death." (Phil. 2:8.) 

Doubtless the desire to sacrifice himself and thus redeem men, was 
in the mind of the youthful Jesus long before he reached manhood, 
and presented himself in consecration to death in the symbol of 
baptism. But he could not do so until then, for though he had been 
coming to manhood all those thirty years, he had not come until 
thirty years of age according to the Law. There, finding himself a 
man, "he became [by consecration] obedient unto death," and 
conducted himself in such a way also as to exhaust and use up his 
perfect life. 

If this reasoning be correct and scriptural, it proves that the man 
Jesus was a perfect being-a PERFECT MAN; hence he possessed 
not only vitality, but every other quality of body and mind, in a way 
not possessed by the Adamic race enslaved for centuries to sin and 
groaning under the bondage of corruption (death). In a word, Jesus 
at the time of his consecration must have had that perfection of 
form and feature, of mind and body, originally possessed by Adam 
before sin and death blighted and withered his crown of glory and 
honor. (Psa. 8:5; Heb. 2:7.) And the same glorious perfection must 
have been in the man Jesus which will be found in all the restored 
race when in the close of his glorious reign, their Redeemer shall 
have wiped away all traces and marks of sin and pain and death. 
(Rev. 21:4.) 

We know that Jesus received a special anointing of the Spirit at the 
time of his baptism, and it may not be possible for us to accurately 
determine how many of his miracles were the result of this 
anointing, and how many of his wonderful works were merely the 



exercise of powers belonging to all perfect men, undegraded and in 
full fellowship with God. We find to-day progidies among men, 
some representing to a greater degree than their fellow-men, one or 
another human quality; yet it must be apparent, that if one man 
could be imagined, who possessed the great qualities and powers of 
all great men, he could be no more than a perfect man, and 
doubtless then would be found very imperfect, if compared with 
either of the two perfect men, Adam and Jesus. 

Let us remember that the first man lost great dominion, glory and 
honor which belonged to human nature, when he sold himself to sin 
(Psa. 8:5; Rom. 7:14.) Let us remember, too, that Jesus possessed 
that same humanity, and all its crown of glory, honor and dominion, 
when he became a man. (Heb. 2:9.) 

Before considering further Jesus' power as a perfect man, let us 
examine a scripture usually supposed to teach that Jesus was one of 
the most disfigured and hideous of men, without a trace of beauty 
or anything to cause men to admire 

R574 : page 3 

him. This view is the very opposite of the one we are presenting. 
We claim that the face and form are the very index to the heart and 
life. So surely and to the extent that dissipation and sin have hold 
on a man's mind and body, so surely will his face declare it. And as 
surely as purity and grace reign within, the face will indicate it. If 
Jesus was a perfect man he must have been as far from physical 
deformity and imperfection as the east is from the west. Instead of 
horrible, we believe him to have been "altogether lovely." 

The scriptures in question are found in Isa. 52:14 and 53:2. Please 
refer and read. Concerning these statements we would say, that the 
translation of Isa. 52:14 in the common King James' version is not 
as clear as in others. The Douay translation of verse 14 reads: "So 
shall his visage be inglorious among men and his form among the 
sons of men." Young's translation has it: "So marred by man, his 
appearance and his form by sons of men." In all, the passage has 
evidently one of two meanings: It might refer to the marring of his 
beauty with the thorns, nails and sorrows. If he had no beauty he 
could not have it marred, and the more perfect his feature and form, 
the more it could be marred; hence if he was "altogether lovely" his 
beauty might be marred more than others because he had more to 
mar, and yet not be after all inferior to others in appearance. 

Or it may refer to his character, as suggested by the Douay 
translation. He was deficient in those qualities which the world 
esteems— inglorious and ignoble in their depraved sight. Depraved 
man has come to admire many things which in his perfection would 
have seemed horrible, and he has come to despise that which is 
good and truly grand. The Jewish people looked for the Saviour and 
deliverer promised, but looked from the depraved standpoint. Their 
conception was a mighty warrior who, by plunder and butchery, 
should accumulate a great army, and with carnal weapons should 



conquer the world, and thus save them from their enemies 
roundabout. They overlooked the fact that their Saviour must 
conquer death first, before subduing all things unto himself; in 
order that his might be an everlasting dominion. 

Hence when Jesus and a few humble disciples walked through 
Palestine declaring "the kingdom" at hand and Jesus the king, and 
all eyes were attracted to him, they DESPISED him. He was a 
young man and most of his followers the same. He had no army, 
and no wealth with which to collect one; neither had he any 
influence among the great. And when he said, "Love your enemies, 
do good to them that persecute you," "Lay not up for yourselves 
treasures upon earth," and, "If thine enemy hunger feed him," they 
concluded that such a one was the least likely to be the long- 
looked-for DELIVERER. 

Even the purity and love and gentleness, blended with firmness and 
manly fearlessness, which marked his face and bore witness of his 
sinlessness, were to their depraved taste marks of effeminacy. They 
would have much more admired the deep set marks of sin, ferocity, 
passion, with words of malice and hatred, coupled with boasts and 
threats against their enemies. So when they beheld him his "visage 
was inglorious among men, and his form among the sons of men." 

This last, is our view of the meaning of this text, and it seems to 
agree perfectly with the context succeeding, which we will now 
consider-we give the Douay translation (Isa. 53:2-12)-our 
comments in brackets. 

"And he shall grow up as a tender plant before him, and as a root 
out of a thirsty ground: [His appearance and surroundings seemed 
unfavorable; he was an unlikely king.] There is no beauty in him 
nor comeliness; and we have seen him and there was no sightliness 
that we should be desirous of him." [We found not in him those 
qualities generally found in earthly conquerors, and preferred to 
have a robber and murderer among us-Acts 3:14] v. 2. 

"Despised and most abject [shunned] of men, a man of sorrows and 
acquainted with infirmity: and his look was as it were hidden and 
despised, ["As one hiding the face from us" (as in weeping) — 
Young's translation,] whereupon we esteemed him not." [Jesus' 
weariness and sorrow and weeping, etc., were construed by men to 
result from weakness, instead of as it really was, from that 
perfection of organism which enabled him to sympathize with the 
sufferings about him and to alleviate it, at his own loss. The more 
perfect the organism, the more sympathetic, the finer its quality, the 
more easily is it pained, and more deeply wounded. You who have 
never suffered severe privation, but have things comfortable and 
clean about you, if you will go into some of the garrets and cellars 
of the large cities, will meet with such squalor, filth and 
wretchedness, that you would feel that death would be far 
preferable to life, under such conditions; yet there you will find 
men, women and children who are so accustomed to such 



conditions that they can laugh and sing and be merry, even there. 
The cause, is that their senses and tastes are coarser, more depraved 
than yours. 

Think, then, of how the world must have appeared to the perfect 
man Jesus, as he saw men grovelling in sin, misery, sickness and 
death. He had sorrows indeed, but they were ours which his 
sympathy laid hold of, and by which he was impressed more than 
others. In his sympathy and love he gave of his own vitality to 
many of those groaning, dying ones about him. It is a fact coming 
daily to be more recognized among scientific men, that some 
persons possess greater vitality than others, and possessing more 
can communicate it to others who have less; though such are liable 
to feel for a time the weakness which is cured in the weaker one. 
Jesus being perfect had an abundance of sympathy; consequently he 
continued to heal those who came unto him, though each time he 
was touched with a feeling of THEIR INFIRMITY while they were 
refreshed and revitalized by his strength. 

Few seemingly have noticed; that this is the teaching implied in the 
Scripture narrative of many of Jesus' miracles. We, therefore, quote 
some instances. A poor woman, who had been sick twelve years 
touched his garment and was healed, and "Jesus, immediately 
knowing in himself, that VIRTUE [power, vitality, strength] HAD 
GONE OUT OF HIM," said "Who touched me?" (Mark 5:30.) 
Luke (8:43-46, and 6:19) declares that "The whole multitude sought 
to touch him: for there went VIRTUE [strength, vitality, power] 
OUT OF HIM, and healed them all." Matthew 8:17 gives the same 
testimony: that when Jesus healed the sick it was in fulfillment of 
Isaiah's prophecy which we are now considering, "Himself took our 
infirmities and bare our sicknesses." 

What wonder, then, that such a man is said to have been a man of 
sorrows and acquainted with grief? But let us never forget that if 
sorrows and pain left its impress on that noble face and form, it was 
not because of his own weakness; it was not because pain and 
sickness and death had hold of him, but that it had hold of our race, 
and he, full of love and sympathy, was bearing the burdens of 
others. Oh, how far short of such perfect, boundless love do we find 
ourselves! It is only when we measure ourselves by such a perfect 
standard, that we can realize how great was the fall which our race 
experienced through Adam's disobedience. No wonder we long for 
the restoration of mankind to such a condition, where each will love 
his neighbor as himself, and be glad if necessary to share each 
others' woes; but it will not be necessary then; for when sin and its 
effects are all removed, its penalty, pain, sickness and death will be 
removed also. 

Our conclusion above, that the sorrow and infirmities which Jesus 
bore were those of our race, and not his own, is the testimony of the 
prophet, v. 4, "Surely he hath borne our infirmities and carried our 
sorrows; and we have thought him, as it were, A LEPER, and as 
one struck of God and afflicted." [Leprosy is in Scripture a type of 



sin. The implication here is, that men considered Jesus one 
contaminated with sin because he was bearing its penalties, not 
discerning that it was ours which he carried. They thought him 
smitten of God, righteously punished, and saw not that in him was 
no cause of punishment, and that he took the infirmities of his own 
free will.] 

"But he was wounded for our iniquities, he was bruised for our sins. 
The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his bruises we 
are healed." (verse 5.) 

"All we like sheep have gone astray, every one hath turned aside 
unto his own way, and the Lord hath laid on him [the willing 
burden-bearer] the iniquity of US ALL." ["Jehovah hath caused to 
meet on him, the punishment of US ALL. "-Young's translation.] 

"He was offered because it was His own will, and he opened not his 
mouth. He shall be led as a sheep to the slaughter, and shall be 
dumb as a lamb before his shearer, and he shall not open his 
mouth." [He shall be nonresisting] verse 7. 

"He was taken away from distress and from judgment 
[wickedness] : who shall declare [to] his generation, because [or 
why] he is cut off from the land of the living? For the wickedness 
of my people have I struck [smitten] him." [His death would be of 
so ignominious a nature, that few could realize that he was 
suffering the just for the unjust.] 

"And he shall give [himself among] the ungodly for his burial, and 
[be with] the rich for [in] his death; because [or although] he had 
done no iniquity, neither was there deceit in his mouth; and the 
Lord [Jehovah] was pleased [willing] to bruise him in infirmity: 
[For] if he shall lay down his life for sin, he shall see a long-lived 
seed, and the will of the Lord [Jehovah] shall be prosperous in his 
hand." [The object 

R575 : page 3 

of his sacrifice was two-fold. He desired to do the Father's will, and 
he desired to be the "everlasting Father," and to bring many sons to 
life in the re-generation; bringing them to freedom, liberty, 
perfection and honor.] "Because his soul hath labored, he shall see 
[the 

R575 : page 4 

good results of his sacrifice] and be filled" [or satisfied], verses 8- 
10. 

"By his knowledge shall my just servant justify many, and [or 
while] he shall hear their iniquities. Therefore [because of his 
faithfulness and sacrifice] will I distribute [or give] to him very 
many [inheritances; He becomes sole heir of the inheritance of each 
one whom he purchased with his own precious blood-very many- 
all men.] And he shall divide the spoils of the strong." [The strong 
prince of this world has obtained much spoil from mankind, leaving 



him destitute; but this great deliverer shall not only bind the strong 
man, but then shall he spoil his house (Matt. 12:29), and during his 
reign he shall divide or distribute the spoil to mankind, until at its 
close they shall be very rich in glory, honor, and dominion of earth, 
as at first. He shall be enabled to do all this] "BECAUSE he hath 
delivered his soul unto death, and was reputed [reckoned] with the 
wicked: and he hath borne the sins of many and prayed [interceded] 
for the transgressors." verses 11-12. 

We conclude, then, that this very prophecy which was supposed to 
teach that Jesus had an ungainly, disfigured, and hideous 
appearance-more than any other man, teaches the very reverse of 
this, that his perfection was ignoble in the sight of depraved men; 
and that whatever of care, or sorrow, or pain marked that perfect 
lovely face, was the self-imposed weight of our infirmities and sin. 

And, if we recall the various little incidents of his ministry 
mentioned by the Apostles, as it were by accident, they all bear 
witness to the fact that he was a perfect man, and far superior to 
those about him. In childhood's days he was a prodigy whose 
questions and answers astonished the Doctors of the Law. As a 
public teacher he has never had an equal among men. What other 
teacher ever had five thousand people leave their employment, and 
negligent of food, follow him three days in the wilderness, 
marveling at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth? 
(Matt. 14:13-21, and 15:29-39.) 

Call to mind the testimony of his enemies, when they came back to 
report— "Never man spake like this man." (John 7:46.) Mark the 
wisdom of his replies when they sought to entrap him in his words. 
(Matthew 22:20-22; and 21:24,25.) Recall their remark, "Whence 
hath this man this wisdom?" (Matt. 13:54.) Remember, too, the 
loftiness of his teaching: although there have been great teachers in 
other days, and among the heathen, men who taught morality of a 
high type, yet never before was heard such perfection of teaching as 
that of Jesus. The morality which teaches truthfulness and justice, 
keeping of covenants and obeying of laws, had been taught, and it 
had been taught, also, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine 
enemy;" but none had ever gone so far as to say, "Love your 
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, 
and pray for those who despitefully use you and persecute you." "If 
thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him drink. " Others 
had said, "Thou shalt not kill," but none before had taught that to 
hate a brother without cause was a degree of murder. And, with all 
his meekness and tenderness, he taught them as one having 
authority, and not as the scribes. 

And Jesus' physical form can have been no less perfect and 
beautiful than were his mental qualities. Crowned with the glory 
and honor of human nature, he was by reason of his perfection a 
king among men, whose very look, calm and benevolent, impressed 
those about him with reverential awe. 



Call to mind how the soldiers who came to take him in the Garden 
of Gethsemane, overpowered for a time by the majesty of his 
presence, were obliged to retreat before him, though he rebuked 
them neither in word nor act. (John 18:3-8.) It was much the same 
with another company sent to take him, who came away without 
him. (John 7:30,32,44-46.) When Pilate was beset with the Jewish 
rabble, headed and instigated by the priests, crying, "Crucify him," 
he tried various methods to restore order and spare the innocent: but 
as a last resort he brought Jesus himself before the people, and, as 
though confident that his glorious face and form would captivate 
the hearts of the multitude, he said, "BEHOLD THE MAN!" As 
though he would say, Is that the man you would crucify? If so, his 
blood be upon you. Nor can we suppose that anything short of the 
blinding of the god of this world— the prince of darkness —could 
hinder them from realizing that "he is altogether lovely," "the 
chiefest among ten thousand." 

And even then, had he chosen to give them a reproving look-to 
speak and to rebuke their sin-again the multitude would doubtless 
have said, "Never man spake like this man," and again they might 
have determined to "take him by force and make him a king." But 
he was there, not to clear himself and prove his innocence, but to 
suffer, to die, the just for the unjust, to bring us to God; hence he 
did nothing to interfere with his sacrifice of himself. "He answered 
him never a word." (Matt. 27:12-14.) He chose rather to give 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. 

Behold the perfect man, Jesus, and reflect that through his ransom 
mankind in general has been redeemed from the present lost 
condition of degradation and death, and may again reach perfection 
through "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world." 

If such be the glory of mankind-a little LOWER than the angels- 
what must be the glory of that high exaltation to which Jesus has 
attained as a reward for his obedience— the divine nature "so much 
BETTER than the angels." Then, while trying to grasp God's plan, 
remember that though we know not what he is and what we shall 
be, we do know that we shall see him and be like him as he now is— 
so much exalted above what he then was, grand as we have seen 
that to have been. Nor would we be understood to teach that all of 
Jesus' wonderful works were performed by the powers of manhood; 
many unquestionably were more than human powers— the direct 
result of his anointing with the Holy Spirit at baptism, the power of 
Jehovah in him. 

In concluding this subject, we desire to lay before you another 
translation of Isa. 53. It is by a Hebrew, and is the English 
translation accepted among that people. From such a source one 
would not unreasonably expect that every item would be turned as 
far from fitting the general application of it to Jesus as the language 
would permit: yet it is clear and strong, and it seems wonderful that 
in its clear delineation the poor Jew cannot read the life of Christ 
Jesus our Lord. We give a literal quotation: 



ISAIAH 53. 



"Who would have believed our report? And the arm of the Lord- 
over whom hath it been revealed? Yea, he grew up like a small 
shoot before him, and as a root out of a dry land: He had no form 
nor comeliness, so that we should look at him, and no countenance, 
so that we should desire him. He was despised and shunned by 
men; a man of pains and acquainted with disease; and as one who 
hid his face from us was he despised, and we esteemed him not." 

"But only OUR diseases did he bear himself, and OUR pains he 
carried; while we indeed esteemed him stricken, smitten of God and 
afflicted. Yet he was wounded for OUR transgressions, he was 
bruised for OUR iniquities: the chastisement of OUR peace was 
upon him; and through his bruising was healing granted to us." 

"We all like sheep went astray; every one to his own way did we 
turn; and the Lord let befall him the GUILT OF US ALL." 

"He was oppressed, and he was also taunted, yet he opened not his 
mouth; like the lamb which is led to the slaughter, and like a ewe 
before her shearers is dumb, and he opened not his mouth." 

"Through oppression and through judicial punishment was he taken 
away; but his generation— who could tell, that he was cut away out 
of the land of life, (that) for the transgressions of my people the 
plague was laid on him?" 

"And he let his grave be made with the wicked and with the 
(godless) rich at his death. Although he had done no violence and 
there was no deceit in his mouth, but the Lord was pleased to crush 
him through disease. When (now) his soul hath brought the 
trespass-offering, then shall he see (his) seed live many days, and 
the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand." 

"(Freed) from the trouble of his soul shall he see (the good) and be 
satisfied: through his knowledge shall my righteous servant bring 
many to righteousness, while he will bear their iniquities. Therefore 
will I divide him (a portion) with the many, and with the strong 
shall he divide the spoil; because he poured out his soul unto death, 
and with transgressors was he numbered, while he bore the sin of 
many; and FOR the transgressors he let (evil) befall him."— Isaac 
Leeser's translation. 



R576 : page 4 



PROPHETIC PEN PICTURES. 

(CONTINUED.) 



CONSIDER GOD'S WAYS. 

(Isa. 28:23-29.) 



"Give ye ear and hear my voice; hearken and hear my speech: 
Doth the ploughman plough all day [always] to sow? doth he open 
and break the clods of his ground? When he hath made plain 
[prepared] the face thereof doth he not cast abroad the fitches and 
scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat, and the 
appointed barley, and the rye in their place? For his God doth 
instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him." 

Because of their short-sightedness, men are apt to think of God's 
works as aimless, and lacking definite object and time; but the 
Prophet shows us that God's times and seasons and plans are 
definite and methodical. Here he presents the familiar scenes of 
farm life, saying that as God instructs the farmer to observe order in 
his work, so he also observes the same order in his plans and 
methods. He first prepares the soil of humanity and breaks it up and 
makes it ready for the seed of truth. Then follows the sowing of 
seed and the harvest of each in its season. 

This Gospel Age has been a sowing time. He that sowed the good 
seed is the Son of Man (Matt. 13:37), and his disciples have 
assisted under his direction. It will be followed by a "harvest," as it 
was preceded by an age of breaking up and preparing men by the 
plow and harrow of bitter experiences with sin and Law. So, too, 
there are as many harvests as there are kinds of seed (1 Cor. 15:38- 
44), but order governs all. 

But while all recognize that there is a proper time to sow, it is 
generally forgotten that a reaping time, a harvest, shall come. But 
for the same reason that God did not forever prepare the soil, he 
will not forever be sowing the seed, but in due time will give his 
attention to reaping and threshing. 

This is the point of the illustration: the time of trouble coming upon 
the Church should be recognized as the harvest, the threshing time, 
the time for separating the real grain from the chaff and tares. The 
harvest represents two general classes, with some variety in each. 
The fitches and cummin (verse 27) were small aromatic seeds used 
sometimes for food, but more commonly for medicinal purposes. 
These grew in little pods very easily crushed, and hence required 
gentle threshing with a rod or staff to separate them. These, we 
presume, represent a class of saints who, not being closely wedded 
to the world and its systems, can be quickly and easily separated 
from it. 

The other grains mentioned, of which much larger quantities are 
grown, all cling closely to the chaff, some more so than others; and 
hence it was necessary to use rougher means to thresh it free. Cart 
wheels were passed over them repeatedly until the separation was 
effected. So some of the Lord's children cling so closely to the 
world, its forms and institutions, etc., that they must be put through 



the severe ordeal; and every true grain shall be saved by some 
process (1 Cor. 3:15). 

This is more clearly shown in another translation: "For the fitches 
shall not be threshed with a threshing instrument [with saw-like 
teeth], neither is a cart wheel turned upon the cummin; but the 
fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod. But 
bread-grain [though it ultimately] shall be broken small [or 
ground] ; but [yet] the thresher shall not thresh it forever, neither 
shall the cart wheel hurt it, nor break it with its [thresher's] teeth. 
This also cometh forth from the Lord God of hosts to make his 
council wonderful and magnify justice." (Vs. 28,29.) 

This shows us that though the Lord will use severer and stronger 
measures to separate some of his children than is necessary with 
others, yet it is not his design that the time of trouble shall destroy 
them, but rather to bless them by thereby making them fit for his 
future service. 

To realize that such is God's orderly plan enables us to understand 
the present threshing and sifting among God's children, and thereby 
to be co-workers with him, rather than to be found fighting against 
his work, now due and in progress. To realize this, is also, to catch 
a glimpse of God's goodness and justice. 

WOE TO ARIEL. 

(Isa. 29:1.) 

Here, again, the coming distress upon the nominal church is 
illustrated, its necessity is shown, and also God's compassion 
afterward. 

"Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! Add ye year to 
year; let them kill sacrifices. " (Ver. 1 .) Jerusalem was the city of 
David; and as Jerusalem is sometimes used to represent the nominal 
church, so Ariel here and Zion in verse 8 refer to the same thing. 
The prophet here declares that woe, distress, trouble, is about to 
come on the nominal church. But though the nominal church, as a 
system, has become corrupt, the Lord still permits her to add year to 
year, to prolong her existence a few years, that his truly consecrated 
children may complete their sacrifice. One important part of their 
sacrifice is to separate from the nominal systems and to stand 
connected only with the true. 

"Yet," Jehovah declares, "will I distress Ariel, and there shall be 
heaviness and sorrow." (Verse 2.) Although the Lord will distress 
Ariel, the nominal church, yet he will remember that many within 
her are his own dear children; some of them weak, erring and 
negligent; and the very object of this distress is to awaken them and 
to liberate them from their bondage and worldly conformity. The 
fact that God will thus remember his own is clearly taught in 
various scriptures, and is suggested in the latter clause of this verse- 
-"and [although I will thus distress it] it shall be unto me as Ariel" 



(Jerusalem or Zion). His own children now held in the bondage of 
the doomed systems are still dear to him; and he will save them, 
though with the majority it will be- "so as by fire"-through "great 
tribulation." 

The Lord here describes the overthrow necessary to separate the 
true Ariel— Jerusalem, or Zion— from the multitude of the worldly 
and unregenerate which she has received as her children, and 
because of whose presence in her she is sometimes termed 
Babylon, or confusion. He says: "I will camp against thee round 
about [O Babbler- Young], and will lay siege against thee with a 
mount [camp] ; and I will raise forts against thee [bulwarks to hide 
myself from thee]. And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak 
out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and 
thy voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the 
ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust." 

Already the pride of the nominal church begins to be humbled. 
Once she loudly and boldly proclaimed her teachings of eternal 
torment, the damnation of non-elect infants, etc.; but now her voice 
is low, and she merely whispers these teachings in her writings, or 
cautiously from the pulpit. 

She has been puffed up by what she esteems her success— her 
wealth and members. Worldliness has filled her 

R576 : page 5 

heart, and the Spirit of Christ has been choked. Woe to Zion, for 
she shall find the Lord arrayed against her, and he shall bring down 
her pride to the earth, that she may be humbled and cry unto him 
from the dust. 

"Moreover, the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, 
and the multitude of the terrible ones [tyrants-Leeser's trans.] shall 
be as chaff that passeth away"; "and this shall be at unawares- 
suddenly" (verse 5 — Leeser's trans.). The principal cause of 
nominal Zion's distress is her multitude of strange children— the 
children of the world, unregenerated, who compose the greater part 
of her numbers. These she has come to consider her strength, her 
power. Their wealth, their influence and their standing in the world, 
she is trusting in; and by these she has been puffed up. 

"Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder, and with 
earthquake, and with great noise, with storm and tempest, and the 
flame of devouring fire" (verse 6). These are symbolic expressions 
of the great storm of trouble now gathering and soon to break with 
force on nominal Zion. The thunder and noise indicate controversy, 
and we find infidelity in its most subtle form springing up in the 
midst of the Church. Its most marked feature is the denial of the 
ransom given by Christ our Lord. This error, which strikes at the 
very foundation of God's truth, is boldly proclaimed by some of the 
most prominent of the nominal church, and many are following 
their leading. Under the general and widespread spirit of doubt and 



unbelief, it will soon be discovered that none are able to give a 
reason for their hope, and that much has been taught which is 
entirely without support. Dogmas hitherto unquestioned will be 
brought to the test of reason, which, unguided by the Scriptures, 
will surely lead to open infidelity, and the nominal church systems, 
with their clashing creeds, will become more and more lightly 
esteemed, as men throw off the yoke of superstition, and yet fail to 
consult the word of God, and to recognize the true Church. A 
fearful storm and tempest is thus gathering, and the condition of the 
mass of the nominal church, when it fully breaks upon it, is here 
fitly symbolized by an "earthquake." The "devouring fire" is an apt 
symbol of the certain destruction that in the end shall surely 
consume these false systems. 

Before this fearful storm the multitude of strangers— the worldly— 
who come into the Church for respectability, society, business 
interests, popularity, etc., shall, as verse 5 shows, be scattered 

R577 : page 5 

like the fine dust. "And the multitude of the terrible ones [tyrants— 
Leeser's trans. -the leaders, priests, rulers, or clergy] shall be as 
chaff that passeth away." Many have entered the ministry of the 
nominal church for popularity, ease, money and respectability; and 
these lord it over God's heritage, strengthen the bondage of fear, 
fetter thought and retard growth in grace and knowledge, while they 
exact and devour her revenues. But when these systems cease to be 
popular and financially successful, these too will soon be scattered 
like chaff. But while many of the clergy are of the stamp here 
described by the prophet, we rejoice to know that among these, as 
well as among the laity, some true wheat exists, yet few compared 
to the whole, and these are rapidly being separated. 

Those who are not of the Lord's true children shall be swept away 
in the coming storm, when the Lord's sharp threshing instruments 
shall have separated them as chaff from the grain in this day of 
harvest and separation. The chaff and dust will be speedily removed 
from the chastened of the Lord, who shall be brought to the lowly 
and humble condition from which they should never have departed. 

"And the multitude of all nations that fight against Ariel, even all 
that fight against her and her munition [bulwark], and that distress 
her shall be as a dream of a night vision. It shall even be as when a 
hungry man dreameth, and behold he eateth; but he waketh and his 
soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth and behold he 
drinketh, but he awaketh and behold he is faint and his soul hath 
appetite [thirst] : So shall the multitude of all the nations be that 
fight against mount Zion." (vs. 7,8.) 

In the Lord's controversy with Zion the infidel and worldly of all 
nations will be ready and willing instruments for her chastisement, 
and for the overthrow of her errors. But though like Satan (another 
of his agent, whose wrath is made to praise Jehovah), they shall for 
a time seem to succeed, yet it shall be only seemingly, for out of the 



nominal Zion arises the true, stronger and better for her visitation 
and purification. And those who fought against her munition or 
stronghold— the Bible— and who for a time will think that they have 
completely destroyed her stronghold, will find only the wood, hay 
and stubble of human tradition gone, and the original bulwark 
impregnable. Their victory will prove to be but the delusion of a 
dream, when they shall have accomplished a work in which they 
are used as the Lord's instruments. 

It is not surprising that in their blindness, the unfaithful children of 
God in nominal Zion mistake their most faithful friends, for 
enemies. Through some of his chosen ones "the Lord hath a 
controversy with his people." (Micah 6:2.); and these must obey his 
command —"Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, 
and show my people their transgressions." (Isa. 58:1.) These 
faithful reprovers are generally abused as enemies; and to oppose 
the false systems that blind and fetter the true Zion, is generally 
looked upon as infidelity. 

But the Prophet draws the line clearly and distinctly, showing who 
are the real enemies referred to. It is the multitude of the nations not 
even professing to be the children of God, but who boldly, not only 
fight against Zion (God's children, however strong or weak), but 
also against her munition, her bulwark, —the Bible. This is just what 
the hosts of infidelity are endeavoring to do; not only to overthrow 
the nominal church systems (in which work they are unwittingly the 
Lord's instruments), but they are also endeavoring to demolish the 
Bible— the blessed fortress of truth in which even the weakest child 
of God shall find a sure refuge. To these enemies of Zion and of 
God, it shall even be, as described in vs. 7 and 8. 

The valiant for the truth, have ever been considered enemies by the 
nominal mass. Thus to Elijah it was said, "Art thou he that troubleth 
Israel?" (1 Kings 18:17.) He was so considered because of his zeal 
for Jehovah and his opposition to the worship of the images of 
Baal. So Jesus was called by those termed "orthodox" of his day, a 
perverter of the people, Luke 23:2,14; and Paul was esteemed by 
the same class "a pestilent fellow and a mover of sedition" Acts 
24:5. Hence all who endeavor to withstand error in its popular 
forms must expect to bear the same reproach, and for a time be 
esteemed the troublers of Israel. 



R577 : page 5 

LIGHT IN DARKNESS 

"And it was a cloud and darkness" to the Egyptians, "but it gave 
light by night" to Israel. Exod. 14:20. 

How differently matters appear from different standpoints. That 
which rejoices us as being evidence of our Lord's presence— the 
separating of wheat and tares and the falling of some earth's 



gigantic systems, is to others a dark cloud. That which to us is a 
token of dawn of the Millennial Day-the unrest of nations-the 
raging of the tribulant waves of the sea, are to others dark clouds 
which put the time of blessing afar off. This is well illustrated in the 
following item clipped from a secular paper. The writer and the 
world in general look at the cloud from the standpoint of the 
Egyptians-it is very dark. Our readers we trust can see it from the 
standpoint of Israel. Since the storm is to scatter the powers of 
darkness and let in the healing rays of the sun of righteousness the 
sooner it comes the better. We quote as follows: 

EVIL OMENS. 

Europe at the present time is full of signs and premonitions of a 
coming crisis. Visibly she is drifting upon another of those cataracts 
of events which break the course of history; each one of them a 
series of rapids, down which the past has descended into the 
present, and the present will plunge into the near future. Far be it 
from us to dispel the comforting dream of that "Millennial" time 
when the nations shall rest in amity, cultivating the arts of war no 
more. Doubtless it will come, but the world is a long way from that 
happy goal. 

"Speaking of the thoughtful classes, it is no exaggeration to say, 
that all over Europe there is a sensation of disquietude, rising in 
some quarters into anxiety and serious apprehension. In national as 
well as individual life, a vague and blind presentiment of evil has at 
times portended a disastrous conclusion; but at present the 
presumption is not blind. There are visible grounds for this 
disquietude; yet no man can tell the exact shape which the present 
will assume: still less— and this is the worst part of the disquietude— 
what will be its magnitude, or where will it end. That danger is 
ahead-danger to the peace of Europe, or more-hardly any 
intelligent reader of the newspapers can doubt." 

"In these days, is not the thought too shocking to be entertained 
that, despite all our progress, and much vaunted civilization, the 
closing years of the century may yet witness as bloody and 
momentous a contest as that by which the century was ushered in? 
Is it not to be told that Europe is waiting for another Waterloo, ere 
it can hope to reattain a new epoch of equilibrium and peace? 

"How humiliating, too, is the thought that, after all, and when (as it 
may seem) we have all but perfected Law, Government, and 
Society, the dangerous classes, and 'dissolving forces' are becoming 
more formidable than ever, and that the 'social revolution'— 
Atheistic Communism and Nihilism— may yet shake to its 
foundations the entire system of civilization which modern Europe 
has been so slowly perfecting as the highest product of the Aryan 
Community of nations. 

"On the continent it is no exaggeration to say that there is not a 
Cabinet, nor even a Parliament, that does not sniff gunpowder in 
the air, or does not quake at the thought of secret plans and 



machinations of state-craft which are believed to be at work in the 
dark, slowly or swiftly working to an explosion —Governments are 
quietly but eagerly keeping watch upon each other, as if on ground 
which they suspect is undermined. 

"How different this some twenty years ago, when the great Great 
Exhibition of London was inaugurated. 

"It was the 'Palace of Peace'-the 'Palace of all Nations,' a 'World's 
Fair,' where all peoples and races came together in peace and 
prosperity, making rivalry. War was to be a thing of the past, and 
instead of the conquests of monarchies, and the fiery collision of 
armies, there was to be a brotherhood of nations, and the only 
rivalry, a series of Great Exhibitions all over the world. 

"Happy delusion! fond dreams of statesmen and philanthropists, 
how rudely have they been swept away! 

"Nor are the signs of trouble all external, or confined to the attack 
of State upon State, or of race upon race. Most pitiful of all is not 
Civilization itself upon its trial? The fabric of society, which under 
the guidance of Christianity Europe has been slowly building up 
since our continent emerged from the dark ages,— even it— our 
boasted and highest achievement-is not exempt from the coming 
perils-and though we may recoil from the thought, that our modern 
civilization may perish as utterly as Nineveh and Babylon, of the 
Pharaohs, and of mighty Rome herself; still he is an ignorant man 
who does not know that in the garden of the world, there are no 
plants of perennial growth,- and a blind one, if he does not mark 
how widely the red fires of destruction 

R578 : page 5 

already smoulder,— threatening to burst forth and consume our 
social civilization, the stately fabric of European society. 

"Is it possible to conceive a greater contrast than that between the 
Europe of 1851 and of 1883. Again we ask, What does it all mean? 

"Viewed in the most practical of fashions, what does it imply and 
forebode? An English philosopher has suggested, as a possibility, 
that a whole nation may become insane at times even as individuals 
do. And there is not a little in history that supports such a 
conjecture. Yet hardly a whole continent, or, even, as it now 
appears, a still larger mass of the varied population of the globe! 
But even assuming a well-nigh universal insanity among the human 
race, as the explanation of the present startling phenomena, at least 
be it remembered that it is an insanity of war, and one which is only 
too likely to lead to and end in, a stern, and an appalling reality."— 
Blackwood's Magazine. 



R578 : page 5 



GROANING CREATION. 

The Rev. Robert Laird Collier, formerly a prominent minister in 
Chicago, but now a resident of England, in a letter to a Chicago 
daily paper says, "England is panic-stricken. Dynamite, dynamite, 
dynamite everywhere. The queen dare not move from Windsor 
Castle, which is doubly guarded, and the public for the first time in 
years are debarred entrance upon these royal precincts. You have 
heard of the arrests in Birmingham and London of the men who 
have been manufacturing nitro-glycerine in such large quantities, 
and who have been caught just in time to save London from wide- 
spread and horrible disaster. But you have not heard across 4,000 
miles of land and water the echo of the feeling in England. The 
feeling is very complex. The public press suppresses this feeling, as 
it deems, in the interest of social order. All sober minded persons 
look upon this Fenian plot to carry on assassination wide-spread, 
with detestation and horror. The full power and penalty of the law 
must be used and enforced. All this goes without saying. But the 
dominant conviction is that we are just at the beginning of a 
European political and social revolution. The old regime is drawing 
to its close. It is given out, that never again will a crown be 
permitted to be placed upon a head in Europe. Men who are sober 
and prophetic as was Isaiah, solemn and as pathetic as was 
Jeremiah, call the world to order. "Halt!" All along the lines these 
men are shouting "Halt!" 

Education, steam, electricity have introduced man to man all over 
Europe. Man is in solemn conclave. In London —in its streets, its 
clubs, its galleries, among all sections of society, men are 
propounding questions in social statics that no philosophy can 
answer, except just one: Social revolution! 

The wrongs of Ireland are venerable and heinous. England has been 
strong and confident. The wrongs of Ireland have been recognized 
and redress promised. As far back as 1 842 a royal commission 
reported to parliament in favor of certain reforms in Ireland. Bill 
after bill has for these forty years been introduced looking to 
reformatory legislation, and they have either been defeated or 
dropped. 

Englishmen own Ireland. These few thousand land owners have, up 
to now, exacted every farthing of rent in good years and bad years, 
and have spent their money in England. Ireland has been 
villainously governed and socially ill-used. So to the end, would 
Ireland have been governed and ill-used had she not made her voice 
heard in the land. But really the Irish question, momentous as 
dynamite is causing it to be, is but a small factor in this general 
European revolution. 

Within gun's shot of Buckingham palace men and women are 
dying— not figuratively, but actually— of starvation. What redress 
have the people? How can they make themselves heard? Parliament 



is the legislature of the rich, and men who oppose these venerable 
wickednesses are counted as eccentric, as agitators, as dangerous. 

There is no newspaper of influence in London, if in England, that 
raises its power against these legislative wrongs. The tongues of the 
platform, and the 

R578 : page 6 

press, and the pulpit are bribed by social considerations. 

Dynamite is horrible. Assassination hideous. These are one way 
that men are making themselves heard. The press, the platform, the 
pulpit are closed to their cause." 



R578 : page 6 

THE MANNER OF THE SECOND ADVENT. 

To all who love and look for our Lord's appearing, it is of utmost 
importance to be acquainted with the Scripture teaching as to the 
manner of his coming, that we may know how to expect him, 
remembering that Israel after the flesh stumbled over his first 
advent, because they had false ideas of the manner of his coming. 
Briefly stated, we believe the Scriptures to teach that Christ will not 
again as at the first advent appear in the flesh; for says Paul, (2 Cor. 
5:16) "Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now 
henceforth know we him [so] no more." He is now the highly 
exalted spiritual being— a spiritual body (Phil. 2:9; 1 Cor. 15:44) the 
express image of the Father's person." (Heb. 1:3.) We must not 
expect him then to reappear in the body which he took for sacrifice, 
but in his glorious body. 

As a basis then for further investigation, we will inquire, what is a 
spiritual body— what powers are theirs, and by what laws are they 
governed? We are here met by the objections— We have no right to 
pry into the hidden things of God; and, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard; neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love him." To both of these 
propositions we assent, but believe we cannot find out by studying 
God's Word— and our investigation will be confined to it— what he 
has not revealed. The above quotation of scripture (1 Cor. 2:9) 
refers to the natural or carnal man, and by reading it, in connection 
with the three verses following, the objection vanishes; for, says the 
apostle, "God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit," which was 
given to us "that we might know the things that are freely given 
unto us of God;" and in the last clause of v. 13, he gives us the rule 
by which we may know, viz: "Comparing spiritual things with 
spiritual." We are very apt to change this rule and compare spiritual 
things with natural, and thus get darkness instead of light. Let us, 
then, use the Apostle's rule. 



There is a spiritual body as well as a natural body; a heavenly as 
well as an earthly body, a celestial as well as a terrestrial. They are 
distinct and separate. (1 Cor. 15:38-48.) We know what the fleshly- 
-natural body is, for we now have such; it is flesh, blood and bones. 
"That which is born of the flesh is flesh," and since there are two 
kinds of bodies, we know that the spiritual must be different, and 
Jesus said that a spiritual body is not composed of flesh, and bones. 
(Luke 24:39.) It is a spiritual body, and "that which is born of the 
spirit is spirit." But as to what a spiritual body is made of, we know 
not. "It doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we shall be like 
him," Christ. (1 John 3:2.) 

Angels are spiritual bodies. Christ was raised from the dead a 
spiritual body. This was his second birth. First, he was born of the 
flesh a fleshly body— for, "as the children are partakers of flesh and 
blood, He also himself likewise took part of the same." (Heb. 2:14.) 
He was "Put to death in the flesh but quickened [made alive] in the 
Spirit." He was raised a spiritual body. This resurrection was his 
second birth. He was the "firstborn from the dead," "the firstborn 
among many brethren. " The church are those brethren and will have 
a second birth of the same kind as his-to spiritual bodies by the 
resurrection, when we shall arise in his likeness-being made "Like 
unto Christ's glorious body." But, this second birth must be 
preceded by a begetting of the spirit— conversion— just as surely as a 
birth of the flesh is preceded by a begetting of the flesh. When 
begotten of the flesh we are born of the flesh in the likeness of the 
first Adam, the earthly; but when begotten of the spirit at 
conversion, and born of the spirit in the resurrection, we shall be in 
the likeness of the heavenly, the second Adam. "As we have borne 
the image of the earthy we shall also bear the image of the 
heavenly." (1 Cor. 15:49.) 

By examining facts recorded of angels, and of Christ after his 
resurrection we may gain some general information with regard to 
spiritual bodies: First we learn that angels can be, and frequently 
are present, yet invisible: "The angel of the Lord encampeth round 
about them that are his, and delivereth them;" and "Are they not all 
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs 
of salvation" (Heb. 1:14.) Baalam's ass saw the angel on the way. 
(Num. 22:23.) 

Second, angels can and have appeared as men. The Lord and two 
angels appeared as men to Abraham, who had supper prepared for 
them, of which they ate. (Gen. 18.) An angel appeared to Gideon as 
a man, but afterward made himself known. (Judges 6:12,22.) An 
angel appeared to Samson's mother and father; they thought him a 
man until he ascended up to 

R579 : page 6 

heaven in the flame of the altar. (Judges 13:20,21.) 

Third, spiritual bodies are really bright and glorious in their normal 
condition: The countenance of the angel who rolled away the stone 



from the sepulchre "was like lightning." (Matt. 28:3.) Daniel in a 
vision saw a spiritual body whose eyes were as lamps of fire, his 
countenance as the lightning, his arms and feet like in color to 
polished brass, his voice as the voice of a multitude; before him 
Daniel fell as a dead man. (Daniel 10:6.) Saul of Tarsus saw 
Christ's glorious body. It shone above the brightness of the sun at 
noonday. Saul lost his sight and fell to the ground. (Acts 26:13; 1 
Cor. 15:8.) 

Thus we find spiritual bodies truly glorious; yet without a miracle, 
either by the opening of our eyes to see them, or their appearing in 
the flesh as men, they are invisible. This conclusion is further 
confirmed when we examine the more minute details connected 
with these manifestations. The Lord was seen of Saul alone, "the 
men that journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but 
seeing no man." (Acts 9:7.) The men that were with Daniel did not 
see the glorious being he describes, but a great fear fell on them and 
they ran and hid themselves. (Dan. 10:7.) Again, this same glorious 
being declares: (Daniel 10:13) "The prince of Persia withstood me 
one and twenty days." "Daniel, the man greatly beloved" of the 
Lord, falls as dead before this one whom Persia's prince withstands 
one and twenty days! How is this? Surely he did not appear in glory 
to the prince. No, either he was invisibly present with him, or else 
he appeared as a man. 

Christ is a spiritual body since his resurrection. During the forty 
days of his presence before ascension, he appeared some seven or 
eight times to his disciples; where was he the remainder of the 
time? Present, but invisible. Notice, also, that in each instance he is 
said to have appeared, or he showed himself, language never used 
of him before his change from a natural to a spiritual body; now, as 
angels had done, he appeared. Not only so, but he appeared in 
different bodies; as the gardener to Mary; "after that, he appeared to 
the two disciples as they went into the country" (Mark 16:12.); 
afterwards he appeared in a body, either the same or like the one 
crucified, having the marks of the spear and the nails. "He came 
and stood in their midst, the doors being shut." On these various 
occasions he appeared and talked with them, then vanished out of 
their sight. He came and went, as invisibly as the wind; and they 
could not tell whence he came nor whither he went. "So is every 
one that is born of the Spirit." (John 3:8.) When we are born of the 
Spirit (at the resurrection) we can do so also. All spiritual beings 
exhibit this same power. But Jesus said: "handle me, for a spirit 
[pneuma] hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have," and he ate 
with them. True, I believe it. So did the angels [pneuma Heb. 1 :7] 
appear as men in flesh and bones, and they ate also; their spiritual 
bodies did not eat, nor were they flesh and bones, but the body in 
which they appeared was flesh and bones, and it ate. The disciples 
did not see Christ's glorious spiritual body, but they saw him as he 
appeared in a fleshly body. 



Paul teaches us distinctly that Christ was raised from the dead a 
life-giving spirit [pneuma, the same word used by our Lord.] (1 
Cor. 15:44,45.) But where did he get the various bodies in which he 
appeared? I cannot tell you; but I believe, and you do also, other 
things which we cannot understand. I cannot understand how that 
grain of wheat grows. Yet I know that it grows. I know not how 
Christ turned the water into wine, or raised the dead, yet I believe 
that he did these things. Can you tell me where he got the clothes he 
wore after his resurrection? "They parted his raiment among them, 
and for his vesture they cast lots"-the old were gone, and the linen 
clothes lay in the sepulchre. Is it more difficult for spiritual beings, 
with their powers, to create a covering of flesh than a covering of 
cloth? No; the same power can and did do both. 

Thus we have found Christ's spiritual body like those of angels, 
glorious, yet invisible to mortals, with power to manifest the glory, 
or appear as a man, or in any form he may choose. In the 
resurrection we shall be like the angels in this respect, and "like 
unto Christ's glorious body." Now bearing in mind that "though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him 
no more," after the flesh, with what we have learned of the powers 
of that spiritual body, we are now prepared to understand other 
statements relating to the manner of the second advent. 

To John, on Patmos, Jesus said, "Behold I come as a thief; blessed 
is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments" etc. (Rev. 16:15.) He 
comes secretly and unknown to the world, but those believers who 
are taking heed to the sure word of prophecy which shines as a light 
in a dark place (2 Pet. 1:19), shall, because of its light, not be in 
darkness that that day should overtake them as a thief. (1 Thes. 5:2- 
4.) 

He comes "as a thief" for the church -the waiting virgins; both 
them "that sleep in Jesus" and those "who are alive and remain." 
This gathering time at his appearing is the harvest time of the 
Gospel Age, and as in the harvest of the Jewish Age, the prepared 
ones were gathered out to become co-workers with the Lord in 
introducing the new dispensation of the Gospel Age, so those who 
are found ready and watching at his second appearing, shall 
likewise discern his presence and become co-workers with him in 
introducing the new dispensation of the Millennial Age. And not 
only are these to be co-workers in introducing the new 
dispensation, but as soon as they learn of the special work of the 
hour, they are engaged with him in completing the harvest work. 

But in all this change of dispensation the world will go on as usual. 
They will say, "Where is the promise of his coining (Greek— 
parousia-presence); for since the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the beginning." (2 Pet. 3:4.) 

The second advent, like the first, covers a period of time, and is not 
the event of a moment. The first lasted nearly thirty-four years. The 
second advent, as we have seen, lasts much longer. It includes the 



millennial reign, and as prophecy foretold the object, manner, etc., 
of the first advent, so it also covers all the prominent features of the 
second advent and reign. Christ comes to reign -must reign until he 
has put down all enemies; the last being death. (1 Cor. 15:25,26.) 

In the application of prophecy to the events of the first advent, we 
recognize order. Christ must be the "child- born and son given," 
before "the man of sorrows and acquainted with grief." He must die 
before he could rise from the dead, etc. So also in studying 
prophecy referring to the second advent we must recognize order, 
we must judge of the order somewhat by the character of the event. 
As the wife is the glory of the husband, so the Bride is the glory of 
Christ, for we are to be "partakers of the glory that shall be 
revealed, (1 Pet. 5:1,10); and as the "glory shall be revealed in us," 
(Rom. 8:18), we know that Christ could not come in the glory of his 
kingdom [church] until he has first gathered it from the world. And 
in harmony with this thought, we read —"When he shall appear, we 
also shall appear with him in glory." (Col. 3:4.) 

The Prophets foretold the sufferings of Christ [head and body] and 
the glory that should follow. If the sufferings were of the whole 
body, so is the glory; we suffer with him that we may be also 
"glorified together." (Rom. 8:17.) "Enoch prophesied, saying-The 
Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints." (Jude 14.) Again, we 
read— "The Lord my God shall come and all the saints with thee." 
(Zech. 14:5). Thus we learn that when he appears in glory we are 
with him, and of course, we must be gathered to meet him before 
that. 

We have further evidence to offer, proving that he comes unknown 
to the world; but attempt to answer the two supposed objections 
first, viz: "This same Jesus shall so come in like manner as ye have 
seen him go into heaven," (Acts 1:11), and "The Lord himself shall 
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel 
and the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise." (1 Thes. 
4:16.) These texts are supposed to teach that Christ will come in a 
manner visible to every eye, while the air is rent with the blast of 
the archangel's trumpet; at which, amid reeling tombstones and 
opening graves the dead will come forth. It certainly has that 
appearance on the surface, and doubtless was not intended to be 
rightly understood until due; but look at it again; would that be 
coming in like manner as they saw him go? He did not go with the 
sounding of a trumpet and outward demonstration. It does not say 
you shall see him coming, nor that any one would see, but— he shall 
so come. When he arrives it will be privately. He comes to gather 
and to set up his kingdom. He comes to be glorified in his saints in 
that day. (2 Thes. 1:10.) The world saw him not, after his 
resurrection; they did not see him ascend. And we remember that 
Jesus said, "Yet a little while and the world seeth me no more, but 
ye see me." (John 14:19.) 



What, then, does the trumpet mean, if there is to be no open 
demonstration? Let us see. The church is to be rewarded "at the 



resurrection"; it surely will not be rewarded or resurrected more 
than once; hence we conclude that the "Trump of God" (1 Thes. 
4:16) and the "Last Trump" (1 Cor. 15:52), are the same, differently 
expressed; the same events are mentioned as occurring at each, viz: 
the resurrection and reward of the saints. And for the same reason 
we believe the "Trump of God" and "Last Trump" to be the 
"Seventh Trump" of Rev. 11:15-18. Under it also the dead are 
judged 

R580 : page 6 

and the prophets and saints rewarded. Then the "Seventh Trump" is 
the "Trump of God," and the "Last Trump." 

There is a series of these trumpets evidently the same in kind, but 
what? "The seventh angel sounded. " A sound on the air? No, no 
more than the six which preceded it. They are each said to sound, 
and Sir Isaac Newton, Clark, and all commentators of note agree 
that five or six of these trumpets are in the past. They have been 
fulfilled in events upon the earth, each covering a period of time. 
They certainly must all sound before the resurrection, for that is 
under the seventh. 

If the seventh trump were to make a sound on the air, it would be 
out of harmony with the other six of the series. That it covers "the 
great day of his wrath," the time of judgments upon the kingdoms 
of the world and of the pouring out of the "seven vials" of God's 
wrath, and the "time of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation" seems more than probable, for we are told in the same 
sentence of the wrath of God coming on the nations. 

We see, then, that the sounding of the 

R580 : page 7 

trumpets, and so coming in like manner, do not conflict but rather 
add force to the fact that he comes "unawares," "as a thief" and 
steals away from the world his treasure, his jewels. Remember too 
that this is Christ, the spiritual body, that could not be seen without 
a miracle, that was present yet unseen during thirty-three days after 
his resurrection. 

The world will not see the saints when gathered or gathering. When 
changed (in the twinkling of an eye) to spiritual bodies, like unto 
Christ's glorious body, they will be as invisible as he and as angels. 
The world will not see the graves open and the tombstones thrown 
down, for a spiritual body is not of the earth, earthy. But do not 
forget that only the church is to be raised spiritual bodies. All others 
are to have a restitution, a restoration to the original human 
perfection. 

PRESENCE OF CHRIST BEFORE THE RAPTURE OF THE CHURCH. 

Christ's personal presence and ministry of three and a half years at 
the first advent, he called a harvest. It was the harvesting of the 



Jewish age. Christ was present as the chief reaper, and his disciples 
as under-reapers. Their work was the gathering of wheat into the 
higher or Gospel dispensation. That harvest was the end of that age. 
Jesus said to his disciples, "Lift up your eyes and look on the fields, 
for they are white already to harvest." "I sent you to reap that 
whereon ye bestowed no labor; other men have labored [the 
prophets] and ye are entered into their labors" (John 4:38). That 
work was not general, nor for the world. Jesus confined their labors 
to Judea, and the work to them did not entirely cease until the end 
of their harvest A.D. 70. But after his resurrection Jesus sent the 
disciples to "preach the Gospel to every nation." But this was no 
longer a harvesting but a seed sowing: Paul plants, Apollos waters, 
God gives increase, etc. But there is to be a harvest in the end of 
this age, as illustrated in the parable of the tares and wheat, and 
taught in the explanation of the same. Notice that both wheat and 
tares are in the kingdom of heaven-the church— and that this 
parable, as also the other six of the series, refers not to the non- 
professing world, but to two classes in the church. 

The Son of Man planted the church pure, good seed. During the 
days of the Apostles there were special "gifts of the Spirit" such as 
"discerning of spirits," etc., by which they were able to prevent 
tares getting in among the wheat —hypocrites getting into the 
church, (Instance 1 Cor. 5:3.— "Simon Magus" —"Ananias and 
Sapphira," etc.), but when the Apostles were dead, "while men 
slept" -the enemy began to sow tares among the wheat. Paul 
declares that the mystery of iniquity had begun to work even in his 
day. Now they grow side by side in all churches. Shall we separate 
them, Lord? No; we might make some mistakes and pull up wheat 
and leave tares. "Let both grow together until the Harvest." (Matt. 
13.) "The harvest is the end of the world." [aion, age]. "In the time 
of harvest I will say unto the reapers, 'gather together first the tares, 
and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into 
my barn." 

Notice, this harvest is the end of this age, yet, like the one ending, 
the Jewish age, it is a period of time,-"In the time of harvest." 
Secondly, there is order- "gather first the tares." There must come 
a time, then, in the end of this age, when the reapers will be doing 
some sort of a separating work in the church. That we are now in 
this harvest we have abundant proof, and yet, as in the harvest of 
the Jewish age, the mass of the church and the world are wholly 
unconscious of it. The separating work is accomplished in both 
cases by the sharp sickle of truth and the spirit of sacrifice. 

Some may have confounded these remarks concerning the presence 
of Christ as a spiritual being with the presence of the Spirit of 
Christ; but they are quite distinct. The latter never left the church: 
consequently in that sense he could not "come again." Of his 
presence by his spirit he said: "Lo, I am with you always, even unto 
the end of the world." We refer to the personal presence, which did 
go away, and will come again,-a spiritual body. (John 14:3.) 



The Greek word parousia frequently translated coming— invariably 
signifies personal presence, as having come, arrived, and never 
signifies to be on the way, as we use the word coming. This fact is 
recognized by many who are looking for the Lord, but the error 
under which the Church in general is laboring, is that of supposing 
that presence implies sight-manifestation-appearance. In the 
Greek, however, other words are used to express revelation, 
appearing, and manifestation, viz. : phaneroo— rendered shall appear 
in "when he shall appear"— and apokalupsis -rendered, shall be 
revealed. (2 Thes. 1:7.) "When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed." 
But we have Christ's own words to prove that he will be present in 
the world, and the world will know not of it. In Matt. 24:37, we 
read: "As the days of Noah were, so shall also the parousia 
(presence) of the Son of Man be. " The presence of Christ is not 
compared to the flood, but to the days of Noah, the days that were 
before the flood, as verse 38 shows; as then they ate, drank, 
married, etc., and knew not, so shall also the presence of the Son of 
Man be. The resemblance here mentioned is that of not knowing— 
they will not know of the presence of Christ. They may have been 
wicked then, doubtless were, and may be similarly wicked now, in 
his presence, but wickedness is not the point of comparison. As 
then they ate, drank, married— proper enough things to be doing, not 
sinful, so shall it be in Christ's presence, they will attend to the 
usual avocations of life unconscious of his presence, the harvest 
and change of dispensation. Now, look at Luke 17:26. "As it was in 
the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man." 
Verse 27 tells how it was in the days of Noah; they were eating, 
drinking, marrying, etc. "So shall it be in the days of the Son of 
Man." Surely the days of the Son of Man are not before his days 
any more than the days of Henry Clay could be days before he was 
born. No, the more we examine, the more we are convinced that the 
world will go on as usual, and know not, until "the harvest is past, 
the summer ended," and they are not in the ark, nor with the little 
flock "accounted worthy to escape the great tribulation." Watch 
therefore and take heed to the sure word of prophecy as unto a light 
in a dark place, that knowing of his presence and the changes then 
due, you may be found in harmony with the king, working wisely in 
his vineyard, that you and your labor may be approved of him. 

Forget not the Master's words: "Take heed to yourselves, lest at any 
time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, 
and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unaware. For 
as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the 
whole earth. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be 
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, 
and to stand before the Son of Man." (Luke 21:34-36.) 



R580 : page 7 



IS ALL REALLY HIS? 



Men and women sing, "My body, soul and spirit, Jesus, I give to 
thee," and yet we see them living to themselves; they sing, "Were 
the whole realm of nature mine, that were a present far too small," 
and yet the offering which they make to God is the merest fraction 
of their possessions. Reader, how much do you give to the Lord? 
Have you ever taken the position of being yourself the Lord's, and 
therefore all you have His property? Then how much is it consistent 
for you to appropriate to the Lord? Is your business the Lord's, do 
you conduct it for Him or for the making of a name and a position 
for yourself? Do you train your children for the Lord, and care that 
their education shall be such as shall most serve the purpose of your 
God? Are your household arrangements such that they are elastic 
when the work of God calls for a change of meal- times, etc.? Is 
God first in the house? Is He considered above all others? Is your 
position in society the Lord's to be used or neglected just as it 
serves God's purpose? Do you make a practice of being faithful to 
those in your own position in life, letting them clearly see that God 
is first with you, caring nothing for the contempt in which they hold 
you? Is your money the Lord's, so that you practice the strictest 
economy in board, lodging, clothing and traveling, that you may 
have all the rest for Jesus? If not, are you not keeping back "part of 
the price?"— Selected. 



R581 : page 7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Please explain Luke 12:4,5. 

Ans. These words are addressed to the "friends" of Jesus, to those 
who believe in a future existence secured through Jesus, the life- 
giver. The killing of the body represents the loss of the present 
measure of life, but casting into Gehenna (translated hell) 
represents utter destruction and extinction. Because of God's favor 
all are redeemed from the first or Adamic death, and those who 
believe and appreciate this will realize that the present spark of 
existence is as nothing compared to the future life made possible 
through our Lord and Redeemer. Therefore such should lightly 
esteem the present life and fear not to lose it in any righteous cause. 
Should such circumstances arise, as they do, where the favor of 
men and the welfare of this present life on the one side, stand 
opposed to the will of God on the other, we should seek God's favor 
at any cost, knowing that "in his favor is life" (Psa. 30:5), the future 
existence, and that in his hands is the power of utter extinction, the 
"second death" represented here by Gehenna. 

Ques. A brother writes saying, "I find so few who can or will 
receive the truth, or what seems such to me, that I am left to do my 
thinking and studying almost alone. Orthodoxy, so called, has 



leveled its guns at me, and in the church where I was honored and 
looked after my name has been cast out. But there is something of 
more importance to me than this. It is the question, Is my 
experience as an outcast in this present evil world fitting me for the 
Master's service? I can bear this, if sure that I will not be rejected 
also by the Master in the gathering of his jewels. Fears sometimes 
arise within me that I have caught at the shadow and missed the 
substance, and that would be loss indeed. Help me, if you can, to an 
answer to this question in harmony with Scripture. Another 
question, Think you that the world can see the beauties set forth in 
the Scriptures? 

Ans. Unquestionably the world will in the coming age see much 
beauty in Scripture; for much of it is devoted to natural or earthly 
things, and it abounds in glorious earthly promises; and even now 
some who are not consecrated see much beauty in God's grand and 
benevolent plans. So, then, the fact that you see in God's character 
and plan that which is grand and good is not a sufficient evidence 
that you will be among his jewels. Not all who believe in him and 
pray to him— "Not every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.) God's will for this Gospel age is 
to select such as believe his promises for the future so fully that 
they will give up the present in sacrifice to obtain it. 

The fact that you have already sacrificed one of your dearest 
treasures-"a good name"-for the sake of your love of the Lord and 
of his word marks you as having become a partaker of the Master's 
spirit; for no man will sacrifice for such things without assistance 
from on high. Peter said, "Beloved, think it not strange concerning 
the fiery trial which is to try you as though some strange thing 
happened unto you. But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of 
Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall be revealed ye may be 
glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name of 
Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon 
you.. ..But let none of you suffer as an evil doer, or as a busybody in 
other men's matters. Yet if any man suffer as a Christian [for his 
adherence to the doctrines of Christ] let him glorify God on this 
behalf." (1 Peter 4:12-16.) 

We hope that the Spirit of God may thus rest upon you to such an 
extent as to cause you to suffer the loss of many other things once 
counted precious, when you looked at the things that are seen. 
Remember when the Lord marked out Paul for special favor and 
special service how he said of him, "I will show him how great 
things he must suffer for my name's sake." (Acts 9:16.) May the 
Lord also show both you and I and all that are in Christ Jesus daily 
how much more it is our privilege to suffer for his sake! 

If, dear brother, you desire evidences of your acceptableness with 
God, they are found in what he permits you to suffer for his and for 
his truth's sake. Increase the sacrifice daily, and you increase the 
proof daily that you are his; and such as are his he gathers. 



If you are suffering with him, and like him for the truth's sake, you 
have many exceeding great and precious promises. Some of these 
read as follows: 

"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and 
shall say all manner of evil against you FALSELY FOR MY 
SAKE. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in 
heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before 
you." (Matt. 5:11,12.) 

"It is a faithful saying, For if we be dead with him, we shall also 
live with him. If we suffer we shall also reign with him. " (2 Tim. 
2:11,12.) "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the 
sons of God," and "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit 
that we are the children of God" [i.e., our willingness to suffer with 
Christ proves our harmony with the Spirit of God, thus proving that 
we are the children of God.] "And if children, then heirs— heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, 
that we may be also glorified together. For... the sufferings of this 
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which 
shall be revealed in us." (Rom. 8:14,16,17,18.) 

"And we know that all things work together for good to them that 
love God, to them who are called according to his purpose." (v. 28.) 
"Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or 
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? 
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him 
that loved us. For.. .neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor 
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to 
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, 
(vs. 35-39.) "The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his 
ears are open unto their prayers. And who is he that will harm you 
if ye be followers of that which is good? But if ye suffer for 
righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not afraid of their terror, 
neither be troubled. 1 Pet. 3:12-14. 

For all the tempted and tried ones- the faithful followers of our 
Lord-our Father's Word is full of cheering and helpful promises, 
which we should often call to mind for needed strengthening and 
encouragement. 

Ques. Cannot the real church of Christ be identified; that is, Can we 
not tell where to draw the lines? Again, Can a man be in the church 
of Christ and not be in Christ? 

Ans. The church of Christ in its widest sense includes all believers 
in the "redemption through his blood. " In a more restricted sense it 
is such of the above as have made a covenant to sacrifice earthly 
interests for heavenly interests. And in the most restricted sense it is 
such only of this last class, as fulfill their covenant and accomplish 
the sacrifice, who constitute THE CHURCH which is HIS BODY 
(Col. 1:24) otherwise termed "The Bride the Lamb's wife." (Rev. 
21:9.) 



Each of us may definitely decide 
R581 : page 8 

whether we have taken the first two of these steps, and whether we 
are now taking the third. We may know of each other's position 
regarding the first two steps, by profession, and fruit; but regarding 
the last step while we should know absolutely concerning self, we 
should use great care not to decide without positive proof, that any 
who have taken the two preceding steps, are not taking the last also: 
for there may be many circumstances of which we may be ignorant, 
to obscure from our sight the fruit and evidences of their sacrifice, 
known only to God and themselves. 

During this age those who belong to any of these classes are 
reckoned as in the church. The church nominal is composed not 
only of these genuine classes, but also of hypocrites. The harvest is 
the time for separating and gathering the grain, and then each class 
of the genuine will be separated. In the day when the Lord shall 
make up his jewels, he will gather such as have completed the 
covenant of sacrifice (Psa. 50:5), and these only will constitute 
"THE CHURCH which is his BODY." 

During the Millennial age, there will still be a church in the world— 
a church of BELIEVERS in "the redemption which is in Christ 
Jesus"; and under the blessed and enlightening influences of the 
reign of Christ, that church will spread and increase and bring the 
entire world under the influence of the truths then due. And the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. 

Ques. When in Rev. 22:9, the angel said to John who was about to 
worship him: "See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant and of 
thy brethren the prophets," does it not prove that the prophets who 
died became angels, and that this angel who talked with John was 
one of them? 

Ans. No, the book of Revelation is a symbolic book, and as shown 
in this journal sometime since, both John and the angel represent 
classes in the church now living. John represents the disciples 
living at the time that the scenes of the Millennial age begin to 
unfold at the second presence of Jesus, as was implied in Jesus' 
words concerning John, applicable not to John himself, but to the 
class whom he represents in Revelation —"If I will that he tarry 
TILL I COME." (Jno. 21:22.) 

While John represents the entire company of living saints; the angel 
(messenger) who showed the things to John, represented those of 
the John class who are used as God's instruments in drawing 
attention to the coming glory, and causing all of the John class to 
see them 

R582 : page 8 

with the eye of faith. As John fell down to worship the messenger 
so there is always a danger that human weakness in the John class 



might lead some of them to over-esteem, and almost worship those 
through whom God has been pleased to send them a knowledge of 
his plans. 

The action and words of the angel, show the way in which the true 
messengers of God will treat such honor. They will not be puffed 
up and receive the homage and praise, but will say, All wisdom 
comes from God, worship not us but Him. We are your brethren 
and fellow-servants, and fellow-servants with the prophets, and 
with all that keep the sayings of God— worship God. 



R582 : page 8 

BE TRUE TO GOD. 

"They loved the praise of men more than the praise of God." 

The want of moral honesty is the principal impediment to the 
progress of religious truth now, as in the days of the Nazarene. 
Many who heard him speak and beheld his prodigies, were 
convinced of the truth of his claims as a teacher "sent from God"; 
but his doctrines so conflicted with the popular customs they could 
not be accepted, only at the cost of social position. The integrity of 
his hearers was put to the test; and the honest among them made the 
requisite sacrifice, and publicly accepted his teaching; but those 
who loved the praise of men more than the approbation of God, 
suppressed their convictions, and hypocritically adhered to the 
popular multitude. It is just so now in regard to all attempts to 
reform the absurd and conflicting creedal systems of our age. A 
large majority of modern preachers, and of the intelligent lay 
members of the churches, are as fully convinced of the fallacy of 
modern theology, and the impotency of modern pulpits in 
reforming the world, as the writer; but their love of popularity and 
ease, and lack of trust in God, cause them to remain through life in 
a false and hypocritical position— their life a continuous lie. 

Christ said to his disciples, "Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the 
salt has lost its savor, it is fit for nothing but to be cast out and 
trodden under foot." Here we have the estimate Jesus placed upon 
those Christians who suppress their convictions for the sake of 
popularity —He compares them to a man who lights a candle and 
puts it under a cover to conceal its light. He says, "Woe unto you 
when all men speak well of you; so did the fathers of the false 
prophets." "Ye are they who justify yourselves before men; but God 
knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed among men 
is abomination in the sight of God." (Luke 16:15.) But to those who 
are ostracised for defending the truth he says, "Blessed are ye when 
men shall hate and revile you, separate you from their company, 
and cast out your name as evil for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice, 
for great is your reward in heaven." 



D. WINDER. 



R582 : page 8 



CHRIST'S GLORY IN HIS SAINTS. 

"He shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in 
all them that believe."- 2 Thess. 1:10. 

"It is necessary to remember the double meaning of that word 
"glorify." Christ glorifies us by making us glorious. He sheds 
radiance and lustre from himself upon us. We glorify Christ by the 
exhibition of that reflected and derived light. If we help any dim 
eye to apprehend his goodness and truth, his perfect fairness and 
infinite beauty, then we glorify God. In this latter sense the word is 
employed here where the apostle is speaking about the wonderful 
things that are to accompany that great event, the coming of Jesus 
Christ. Like the eastern sun rising above the horizon, and 
compassed with rose-tinted clouds that derive all their lustre and 
color from his brightness, he in the midst of thousands of them that 
love and serve him, shall pour out a flood of glory upon the waiting 
and wondering world. 

He shall come to be recognized as glorious, and to manifest forth 
his glory in his saints, and to be wondered at amongst all them that 
believe. Such shall be the illustrious beauty and strange perfectness 
of character with which Christ's servants shall be arrayed at his 
manifestation, that all the universe looking at them will receive a 
loftier impression of what Christ himself is. That is the thought of 
the passage put into more modern though far weaker words. The 
idea that runs all through the New Testament is this— that so 
absolutely and indissolubly one are Christ and Christian people as 
that his destiny is their destiny and his character their character. 
There is a time coming when all who are in Christ shall be 
manifested in glory before the universe as part of the manifestation 
of Jesus Christ. When the hidden Christ, that is now lost in the 
blaze— the privacy of that inaccessible light, is manifested forth, 
then will all that love him shine forth, too. The light that was 
hidden below the obscuration and limitations of flesh— the life that 
was almost smothered by this animal and natural life— the life that 
was only faint and dim while in the world— that life shall blaze out 
free from all the obscurity and limitations, and with him be 
manifested in glory. 

The present is like a dark lantern with the slide scarcely up at all, 
while that to which we are looking forward, is like the same lantern 
with the slide up. This is a wonderful metaphor in which the Master 
himself puts it— "Then shall the righteous blaze out like the sun in 
the kingdom of the Father." You have seen the thing our Lord refers 
to. Some cloudy and dark day, with no color in the grass and 
flowers, the birds all silent, everything cold and gloomy, all at once 
some gust of wind or some thinning of the air canopy comes, and 
out streams the glad light, and everything awakens, scents and 



sounds; music of the birds, the grass gleams green again, and the 
waves of the sea glance in the sun as it blazes out upon it. So says 
Christ— the hidden light we carry shall gleam out in its true 
properties. 

All that we are in the depths of our desires, and the imperfect but 
often infinite aspirations of our better selves— all that we are, shall 
blaze forth before all that are there to look. In the manifestation of 
the sons of God, the depths of their nature shall be brought visibly 
to all men, like the depths of some pure sea where you can behold 
the sun at the bottom sparkling upon every little bit of rock that 
may lie there."— Alexander McLaren. 



R583 : page 8 

DID NOT KNOW IT WAS THERE. 

A well-to-do deacon in Connecticut was one morning accosted by 
his pastor, who said: "Poor widow Green's wood is out. Can you 
not take her a cord?" "Well," answered the deacon, "I have the 
wood and I have the team, but who is to pay me for it?" The pastor, 
somewhat vexed, replied, "I will pay you for it, on the condition 
that you will read the first three verses of the forty-first Psalm 
before you go to bed to-night." The deacon consented, delivered the 
wood, and at night opened the Word of God and read the passage: 
"Blessed is he that considereth the poor; the Lord will deliver him 
in time of trouble. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, 
and he shall be blessed upon the earth; and thou wilt not deliver 
him unto the will of his enemies. The Lord will strengthen him 
upon the bed of languishing; thou wilt make all his bed in his 
sickness." 

A few days afterward the pastor met him again. "How much do I 
owe you, deacon, for that cord of wood?" "Oh!" said the now 
enlightened man, "do not speak of payment; I did not know those 
promises were in the Bible. I would not take money for supplying 
the old widow's wants." 



R582 : page 8 

POWER OF CHRIST'S LOVE. 

When St. Paul appeared so entranced and overmastered by the 
claims of the Gospel that some accused him of being beside 
himself, this, you remember, was the only explanation he offered 
for his spiritual intensity: "For the love of Christ constraineth us, 
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then all died." "If one 
died for all. " Oh, this is the fact in the history of Jesus Christ that 
touches the heart and draws it to God! The life of Christ inspires us; 
the example of Christ elevates us; the teachings of Christ convict 



us; but beyond all things else, it is the death of Christ that draws us. 
And yet here is a point where evangelical religion finds a sharp 
issue springing up between itself and other forms of belief. "Divine 
love we insist on as strongly as you do," says the objector, "as the 
only true motive -power for drawing souls to God; but in defining 
that love we take a wider sweep than you do. We find its presence 
and its inspiration in every flower, in every star, in every mountain 
and hill and valley, in the purple clouds and in the deep-voiced sea- 
-these are its articulate voices. And if you recall us from nature to 
the Bible, even there we take a broader range than you do. 

In the life and example of Christ, in his works of mercy and 
beneficence, and in the gracious words that proceeded out of his 
mouth, we find the highest exhibition of divine love. Isn't it 
somewhat narrow in Paul to shut himself up so closely to the cross 
for the source of his inspiration and enthusiasm? Isn't it somewhat 
narrow in you to insist on the death of Christ on Calvary as the 
great motive to love?" Narrow, I admit. But I remember, also, that 
sometimes narrow things are the most powerful. I recall a stream 
with which I am familiar, which at one point broadens out for miles 
into a wide and beautiful expanse of waters. Nothing could be more 
lovely than the tranquil flow and calm, majestic sweep of the waters 

R583 : page 8 

at this place. But a little farther down the stream gathers itself up 
and plunges through a narrow gorge between the hills. There is far 
less of beauty here. But here is the place of power; here is where 
the huge wheels of industry are placed; here is where the factories, 
with their ponderous machinery, have been reared. So we admit that 
nothing could be more majestic than the life of Jesus Christ; 
nothing could be more beautiful and inspiring than his lofty 
teachings; nothing could be more quickening to our love than the 
study of his works of mercy. But, after all, it is the cross where the 
love of Christ culminates and manifests its greatest power. There 
the current of divine love gathers itself up and pours its mighty tide 
through one act-the greatest and most powerful which the universe 
has witnessed. There is where great souls, like Paul, have placed 
themselves to get the fullest sway and sweep of the love God.-A. J. 
Gordon. 



page 8 

THE Post-office authorities now refuse all papers not properly 
addressed. This will account for some not getting their papers 
recently. When the name of your village or town is different from 
the name of the post-office be sure to send the latter. Write 
addresses very plainly and thereby save our time and your 
annoyance. 



R575 : page 8 



SEND the names of any to whom you think samples of the 
TOWER would be a blessing; or we will send you samples for your 
neighbors- Free. Do not part with your own papers, you will need 
them for reference. 



R583 : page 1 

VOL. V. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY, 1884. 
NO. 7. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 
101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 



we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



page 1 

THE recent floods delayed this issue about a week. 



WE are having many complaints about the delay and non-delivery 
of mail recently. Never let a month pass entirely without sending us 
a card if you fail to get your paper. 



REQUESTS for the Swedish paper continue to come in. We 
cannot publish it regularly until about 1 ,500 subscribers are 
pledged. We have plenty of sample copies however, so continue to 
send for them. 



R583 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Accounts of the widespread and destructive floods of this past 
month, with their accompanying distress, have ere this reached you 
through the daily press. Such like events as floods, fires, 
earthquakes, tornadoes, pestilences, cyclones, etc., have always 
elicited much comment both from press and pulpit regarding their 
cause. The most commonly attributed cause is, that God has sent 
the calamity as a special punishment for supposed greater 
wickedness of the people of the suffering districts, and as a warning 
to others. 

Another and growing view is that it just happened so from natural 
causes; and that, if there is a God, he either cannot help such things, 
or does not care to do so. 

For our part, we cannot endorse either of these views. We quote 
from the daily press notices of some of the sermons preached in this 
city. The editor's comments we consider good: 

"THE FLOOD IN THE PULPITS. 

"The flood, which lapped the doorsteps of a number of churches 
last week, overflowed into several of the pulpits yesterday. Quite a 
number of preachers found texts for their sermons in different 
phases of the disaster. The lessons they drew from it were various. 



Rev. Mr. Eaton rejoiced that the worst is past without involving us 
in total destruction; pictured man's impotence to combat the pitiless 
force of natural elements, and drew a parallel with the floods of 
temptation which threaten all of us and overwhelm many. Rev. Mr. 
Prugh dwelt upon it as a proclamation of God's personal presence 
and power. Rev. Mr. Sands, while giving due recognition to the 
potency of a heavy rain, combined with the sudden thawing of a 
deep snow, as flood-creating factors in their way, maintained that 
God was back of it all, with a purpose of his own in the calamity. 
The exact design of Providence he did not presume to fathom. Rev. 
Mr. McCrory took altogether a sterner view of it. He saw in it a 
visitation of Divine wrath for our multiplied sins, and called upon 
us to take comfort in the thought that we have not been given nearly 
the chastisement we deserve. 

"There is no question but this last will be the most popular view of 
it— in the hill wards. To those who dwelt upon the high ground, and 
so escaped the flood, it will be positive satisfaction to know that the 
deluge was a punishment sent upon the lowlanders on account of 
their desperately wicked hearts. The folks who have water in their 
cellars, however, will probably cling to a more materialistic view- 
that the high-water line was drawn in accordance with natural 
topography rather than comparative depravity." 

The reasons which lead people in general to suppose these 
calamities to be "special judgments" are founded, we believe, 
mainly on the dealings of God with Israel, upon whom he sent 
calamities, captivities, etc., as national punishments for national 
sins. But let us remember that Israel was a peculiar people, chosen 
of God for a special purpose, and, like the saints of the Gospel age, 
dealt with in a peculiar manner, different from the world. To them 
he said, "You only have I known of all the families of the earth." 
(Amos 3:2.) Israel was the only nation which Jehovah directly 
governed: therefore he chastised their sins, and made his promises 
to them, while other nations were left under the dominion of Satan, 
the prince of this world, until he whose right it is, shall have come 
and established the kingdom of God under the whole heavens. 

While remembering that God has used calamities, such as the 
Deluge and the destruction of Sodom, as punishments and examples 
of an overthrow of the ungodly, it should not be forgotten that those 
were examples of those who should afterward live ungodly. And 
these examples are not examples of God's dealings in the present 
time, but are examples of the punishment or destruction awaiting 
the finally incorrigible during or at the close of the Millennial 
judgment period, or day. That Peter so applies those calamities as 
examples of the future, see 2 Pet. 2:4-9. 

In Jesus' day some had the same impression, that great disasters 
indicated God's special displeasure; but Jesus corrected them, 
saying: "Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the 
Galileans because they suffered such things? Or those eighteen 
upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that 



they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, 
Nay; but except ye repent ye shall all likewise PERISH." 

These words of Jesus contain the key to what we believe is the 
correct view of this subject in the last word, perish. The fact is that 
the great calamity, DEATH, of which pestilences, earthquakes, 
floods, etc., are only incidentals, has passed upon ALL MEN, 
because all are sinners. (Rom. 5:12.) We have become so 
accustomed to death, the great calamity which is rapidly 
swallowing up the whole race, that it, the greatest of all losses, and 
the cause of all others, is looked upon as a proper and natural 
matter. If, however, things were properly considered, death as a 
whole would be seen as the great calamity, and the floods, etc., 
which only hasten it to a few, would be of comparatively little 
importance. 

As death, the great calamity and curse, was caused by sin, so all of 
these calamities spring from the same cause, and are under the 
control of him that has the power of death, that is the devil (Heb. 
2:14), whose dominion and power, thank God, is soon to be taken 
away and given to the Prince of Peace. As death is the result of sin, 
so are pestilences, tornadoes, etc. 

By one man's disobedience, death with its numerous channels of 
sickness and disaster passed upon all men, and those who meet it in 
one way avoid it in others; but all meet it in some form. 

This will be apparent when we remember that when Adam became 
a sinner, not only did the curse of death fall upon him, but the entire 
dominion of his kingdom— the earth— suffered, and is in a cursed 
condition. (Gen. 3:17.) For a time Satan is permitted to usurp the 
dominion of earth, and while seemingly working out his own plans, 
he at the same time acts as the agent of justice, to execute the 
penalty of sin. This being true, he is the one who by permission 
exercises the destructive power upon the earth; and Jehovah does 
not interfere because mankind has justly come under the curse of a 
violated law, death; and because man is gaining a valuable lesson 
under the present dominion of evil and death, which will benefit 
him when the curse is lifted not only legally, but actually, by the 
Redeemer who for this cause was manifested, "that he 

R584 : page 1 

might destroy DEATH [the great catastrophe in all its forms] and 
him that hath the power of death, [and who brings to pass the 
various calamities] that is, the devil." 

As soon as the new prince, Immanuel, takes possession of the 
kingdom a great change will begin, both in the world of nature and 
of mankind. The curse being cancelled will be removed, and the 
blessings purchased by the "precious blood of Christ" will be 
bestowed. So great will be the change under the new 
administration, that in symbol it is called a new heavens [new 
spiritual ruling power]. Behold he will make all things new: he will 



re-new or restore all things to harmony with God, and to a 
condition which from God's standpoint, is "very good." 

Hence we regard those disasters, not as special punishments, but as 
parts of the general curse, results of sin; but all working out in 
harmony with God's design an ultimate good to those rightly 
exercised thereby. We have heretofore seen that the prophet Job 
was made a type of mankind; that the disaster and trouble and 
losses which befell him illustrated the losses sustained by mankind, 
and that his restoration to favor and after-blessing, foreshadowed 
the "restitution of all things" to mankind. (Acts 3:19). And we call 
to mind that the source of his trouble was Satan (Job 1:12), whom 
God in wisdom permitted to have power over him. As then the 
whirlwind, etc., was the agent of Satan, so we claim it is to-day. So, 
too, it was in Jesus' day. Jesus did not go about opposing the 
Father's will. If the Father had caused the death of Lazarus, would 
Jesus have opposed him by undoing his work? If Jehovah had 
caused the storm on the Sea of Galilee, which nearly overwhelmed 
the Lord and his disciples, would Jesus have been justified in 
stilling that tempest? But if the sickness and death and storms 
which Jesus counteracted were the work of Satan, the present 
"prince of the world," then all is clear, and we and all creation 
groan and travail and wait for the glorious reign of the new prince, 
whose relief was foreshadowed by the acts of his earthly ministry, 
praying, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth." 

When the night of sin and suffering and weeping is over, and the 
Son of Righteousness arises with healing in his wings for the 
various troubles of man and of earth, the mists of ignorance will be 
dispelled, and it will be seen that not Jehovah, but man's sin and his 
present prince, Satan, has been the direct cause of earth's woe and 
sorrow. 



page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS. 

Palmyra, Ills., Feb. 13, 1884. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL— Dear Brother: The papers and pamphlets 
received all right; to say we thank you for your kindness in 
ministering to our necessities but feebly expresses our feelings, we 
know your reward is sure, but it is not now. We are free, pray that 
we may have strength to walk according to our light. Our appetites 
increase with the use of the strong meat we receive and we feel 
deeply the responsibility of walking according to his will. 

May you have all knowledge and boldness to do His will. 

Your sister in the Lord, 



Howell, Mich., Feb. 13, 1884. 



BRO. RUSSELL-Dear Friend: There is a great inquiry after 
"Food" and I have loaned and given away all I have and hope they 
are doing good. We find considerable opposition to some of the 
interpretations given to the Bible texts, but we find as a rule, that 
consecrated Christians, who are "hungering and thirsting" after 
righteousness, hail it as a blessing, and grow in the light that it 
gives. 

Can you send us more copies? 
Your Bro. in Christ, 

[We send some sample papers for new readers and only two of 
"Food;" we are sparing them for those whose interest is awakened 
by the tract papers. "Food" and "Tabernacle" are not so plentiful as 
they used to be, hence our carefulness, but the papers sent are even 
better adapted to new readers. The Lord give you grace and wisdom 
to preach the glad tidings both by the papers and your words and by 
your lives the living epistles known and read soonest by your 
friends and neighbors.- EDITOR.] 

New Hampton, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL :-I received the papers and 
pamphlets in due time and in good condition, but did not write until 
I should know something of the results of my labors for the Master. 

In spite of the opposition I have encountered, I am happy to state 
that my labors have not been in vain. Occasionally I have been 
encouraged by meeting a hungry soul, one willing and even anxious 
to partake of the bread of life. 

As to the "Tabernacle," it gives me great pleasure to state that God 
in his mercy has allowed me the privilege of accepting, 
understanding and fully enjoying its teachings. Studying the Word 
in connection with this pamphlet surpasses any pleasure I have yet 
known. Every part of the Word becomes pregnant with new 
significance. No human policy mars its splendor, but it becomes as 
a mirror, in which God 

R583 : page 2 

and his attributes are distinctly discerned by the "eye of faith." 
While, under this new influence, the sinner is startled into the 
consciousness that God is a pitying friend. 

Surely the luminary of truth is at last shedding its rays on the 
sleeping masses of mankind. But how shall men be enabled to 
comprehend it? And how, except by divine interpretation, can the 
scales of prejudice be taken from their eyes, in order that the pure 
light of the gospel may shine in? 

Truly it is an important time. The wonders of God's word are being 
revealed. The prophecies that have held the world in awe for 



centuries, are at last being fulfilled; but, alas! how few realize that it 
is the "fulness of time." Let us continue to proclaim the "glad 
tidings of great joy.. .unto all people, and trust the results with the 
common Master, the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Yours sincerely, 



R584 : page 2 



Hillsboro, Oregon. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL-Dear Sister: I have some precious names to 
place before you, to whom please send samples of the TOWER. 
Yes, I think truly God sent me here to break the chains of poor 
captives. About two weeks ago I heard of a lady in this place who 
was a great Bible student. I called, found a plain, quiet, middle- 
aged woman in the midst of her family. In the corner of the chief 
room was a stand with a large Bible and some histories, showing 
me instantly that mind and heart were at work. I cautiously 
introduced the burden, I should say joy, of my life— the better way— 
and found she was of the Christadelphian flock. I did not in any 
way condemn them, but after gaining her heart by my appreciation 
of her student life in the midst of cares I took up her Bible, well 
marked in the direction of a night of eternal darkness from a 
material standpoint, and I quickly found some dawning light and 
sunshine. I brought smiles to her face, and tears, not of sorrow, but 
of joy, to her eyes— Oh how gladly she drank in the goodness of 
God. Love is so much better a master than fear. 

Since then she comes to see me, and we feast from the deep 
unfailing fountain in the great storehouse. I have loaned and given 
away most of my WATCH TOWERS. This lady wants to study 
these things now, and she is a rapid student for she is so earnest. 
She wishes now to go to her brethren, some fifty miles away, and 
tell them what great things the Lord has done for her -God willing 
I will go with her. In my weakness my Master will show his power. 

Yesterday a farmer brought us some produce and took dinner with 
us. I found him quite scholarly, but without faith in the God of 
resurrection. Nature is his book. I improved the time in showing the 
goodness of the God whom we love and serve. He was surprised 
that I did not get angry or defend popular theology, and said he had 
not read the Bible for twenty years. I know he must be earnestly 
seeking truth, but how far he goes away from it. When he got his 
team ready, he came in and asked me if I could go out to his place 
and stay a few days and teach them in our way. He said he would 
bring his wife and the hack and take my boy Robbie and I out if my 
husband could not leave. Oh how earnestly I pray that my words 
may be blessed. Oh, to bring joy and gladness into the regions of 
darkness. 



It seemed almost like inviting persecution to introduce the subject 
of Restitution in the "Disciple" prayer-meeting. I earnestly prayed 
that if I was to speak there the Lord would open a door for me. 

Elder led, and read Matt. 1 1:20-30, and spoke 

somewhat on the subject referred to. Then he very nobly and 
earnestly invited all present to present their views. I waited until 
almost all present had done so. Nearly all reflected what the leader 
had said. Dare I let this rare opportunity go? I did not, and God 
gave me strength and clearness of expression. 

I find Jonah's prototype in preachers of to-day. How offended they 
get to think God is going to be so good to the great mass of 
mankind. The East wind is blowing. Thank God it comes from sun- 
rising and not sunset, and all shades (gourds) will wither and blow 
away, even though the sun beat on the intellect of these college 
owls who blink in the sunshine. 

I gave a copy of Z.W.T. to a missionary of Alaska and will get the 
address of some men in Portland, whose homes are in Abbysinia, 
Greece and Sandwich Islands. 

Dear lovely Texas (my former home) I pray the truth will find a 
voice there. I will write to a friend in Brownwood— She is an 
Episcopalean but not satisfied. Who knoweth if she be come into 
the kingdom for such a time as this. She is good, strong, and true 
with a joyful spirit but painful body. I am lovingly your sister in 
Christ. 

MRS. . 



R584 : page 2 

OUR NAME. 

New readers in all parts of the country are constantly inquiring: 
By what name do you call yourselves? Are you "Primitive 
Baptists"? Are you "Missionary Baptists"? Are you 
"Universalists"? Are you "Adventists"? Are you "Primitive 
Methodists"? etc., etc. We have several times tried to make clear 
our position, and now endeavor in a few words again to do so. 

We belong to NO earthly organization; hence, if you should name 
the entire list of sects, we should answer, No, to each and to all. We 
adhere only to that heavenly organization— "whose names are 
written in heaven." (Heb. 12:23; Luke 10:20.) All the saints now 
living, or that have lived during this age, belonged to OUR 
CHURCH ORGANIZATION; such are all ONE church, and there 
is NO OTHER recognized by the Lord. Hence any earthly 
organization which in the least interferes with this union of saints is 
contrary to the teachings of Scripture and opposed to the Lord's 
will-"that they may be ONE." (Jno. 17:11.) 



By what name may this Church be called? We answer, By the name 
of its founder and instituter-Christ. Hence it is the "Church of 
Christ" or "Church of God," for God founded it on the Rock Christ 
Jesus; or "Christians," as they were known in early times. (Acts. 
11:26; 26:28, and 1 Pet. 4:16.) But because Paul and the other 
disciples were not followers of Calvin's teachings, therefore they 
were not called Calvinists; because they were not followers of 
Luther's teachings and example, therefore they were not called 
Lutherans; but because they followed the ONE example and 
teachings of CHRIST only, therefore they gladly acknowledged it 
when they were called "Christians." 

What think you, do we not occupy the only ground of union? 
Suppose that all man-made creeds, and forms, and prayer-books, 
and liturgies, and names were laid aside, or that all Christians met 
in the one name of Christ, and in earnest simplicity studied HIS 
words under the direction of God's Spirit and the explanations 
furnished in the Apostle's writings, would there long be serious 
differences even of opinion in the Church? 

Was not that old saint, John Bunyan, who lay for years a prisoner in 
jail in Bedford, England, because he preached the doctrines of Jesus 
and the Apostles, in opposition to certain doctrines of the Episcopal 
Church, right when he said: "Since you would know by what name 
I would be distinguished from others, I tell you I would be, and 
hope I am, a Christian; and choose if God should count me worthy, 
to be called a Christian, a believer, or other such name which is 
approved by the Holy Ghost. And as for those faction (or sect) titles 
of Anabaptist, Presbyterian, Independent, or the like, I conclude 
that they 

R585 : page 2 

came neither from Antioch, nor from Jerusalem, but from Hell and 
Babylon, for they tend to divisions: you may know them by their 
fruits." 

But is it asked, Was not Bunyan a Baptist? We answer, yes, in the 
same manner that we are Baptist. He was a "Christian" and because 
in God's Word he was taught immersion, or baptism, and not 
sprinkling, and because he practiced with other humble saints his, 
faith, therefore by Episcopalians or the worldly such were, in 
derision, termed "Baptists," &c. So some now say that we are 
Baptists because we believe in the doctrine of baptism. Some 
incline to call us Calvinists because we believe what we find taught 
in Scripture, that the Church is elect according to the 
foreknowledge of God through sanctification of spirit and belief of 
the truth. (1 Pet. 1:2; 2 Thes. 2:13.) Some call us Adventists 
because we find taught in the Scriptures, and therefore believe, that 
the heavens received Jesus, only until the restitution of all things." 
And so, by whatsoever names men may call us, it matters not to us; 
we acknowledge none other name than "the only name given under 
heaven and among men"-Jesus Christ. We call ourselves simply 



CHRISTIANS and we raise no fence to separate from us any who 
believe in the foundation stone of our building mentioned by Paul: 
"That Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures"; and 
those for whom this is not broad enough have no right to the name 
Christian. 



R585 : page 2 

"BRETHREN, PRAY FOR US." 

In the midst of all the cares, vexations and trials of life, how 
blessed the assurance that some of the saints are bearing our names 
before a throne of heavenly grace! We should never forget that this 
is our judgement day, and that we have almost reached its final 
hour. Let each one ask himself, How do I appear before God? It is 
comforting to know that we are not being judged by the actual 
success of our efforts, but by the efforts themselves and the motives 
which inspire them; the actual fulfilling of the law being 
accomplished by our Redeemer and Substitute, in whom we trust. 

The searching eye of our Judge is now scanning us each, with a 
view to the final decision, soon to be pronounced— as worthy, or 
unworthy, of the glorious reward of the faithful. It is a close, just, 
scrutinizing gaze: who can stand before it? None need fear because 
their best efforts produce imperfect fruit; but they have abundant 
cause for fear who discover in themselves a relaxation of effort, or 
that motives of a worldly character begin to supplant the true. Not 
one of the saints who is still running for the prize of our high 
calling should expect to be exempt from the Refiner's testing now. 
As we each realize our own and each other's position, and the great 
possibilities that hinge on the present moment, how earnest and 
unceasing should be our prayers, both for ourselves and for our 
fellow-pilgrims. Let us watch thereunto with all perseverance, and 
supplication for all saints. 

But not only for our own personal welfare should we pray, but also 
for the work of spreading the Gospel in the face of the current of 
opposition brought to bear against it. How strengthening to those 
laboring in public ways, and thereby facing the full force of the 
current against the truth, to know that here and there and yonder are 
saints upon their knees praying for their success— that they be not 
overcome by the foe in open conflict; that they be not surprised and 
overcome by sudden and overwhelming forces; that they be not 
deceived and taken in a snare at some unfortified point. 

Do all the saints indeed realize the active conflict now waging with 
the powers of darkness, and the great issues at stake. If you do not, 
ask God to help you to realize it; to sleep or be idle at your post of 
duty is dangerous indeed. Our unseen foe is subtle and wily: 
therefore let us be sober and vigilant, ever watching unto prayer, 



but remembering that our prayers, as well as our faith would be 
vain if accompanied by indolence and inactivity. 

Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have 
free course and be glorified; praying also that God would open yet a 
wider door of utterance, to make known the mystery of Christ. 2 
Thes. 3:1; Col. 4:3. 

And this we pray: That your love may abound yet more and more in 
knowledge and in all judgement. That ye may approve things that 
are excellent; that ye may be sincere and without offence in this day 
of Christ; being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by 
Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. Phil. 1:9-11. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R585 : page 2 

WHAT GOD WOULD HAVE US BE. 

Be sound in the faith. Be established with grace. Be ye doers of the 
Word. Be not unfruitful. Be ready to every good work. Be filled 
with the Spirit. Be a vessel unto honor, sanctified. Be an example of 
the believers. Be holy and without blemish. Be not conformed to 
this world. Be dead indeed unto sin. Be it unto thee even as thou 
wilt. Be not overcome by evil. Be ye therefore sober. Be not high- 
minded, but fear. Be not entangled again. Be not as the hypocrites. 
Be without dissimulation. Be not wise in your own conceits. Be not 
deceived. Be led of the Spirit. Be instant in season and out of 
season. Be ye also patient. Be of good courage. Be strong in the 
Lord. Be not weary in well-doing. Be gentle unto all. Be discreet 
and faithful. Be diligent and sober. Be blameless. Be dead with 
Christ. Be found of him in peace. Be ye also ready. 



R585 : page 2 

PRAYING AND LIVING. 

"Now we know that God heareth not sinners; but if any man be a 
worshiper of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth.— John 9:31. 

"If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me."— Ps. 
66:18. 

Ever labor to live suitably to thy prayers. It is to no purpose to 
begin the day with God and then spend it with the devil; to be a 
saint in the morning in thy closet, and then a sinner all day in the 
world. 

Having prayed against sin, be sure you watch against it, avoiding 
the occasions and temptations thereto; for otherwise you will fall 
before it. Having prayed for holiness of life, labor to live holily. 



Having prayed for humility, labor to walk humbly. Having prayed 
for sobriety and temperance, labor to live soberly and temperately. 
Having prayed in the Spirit, labor to walk in the Spirit. Ever bear in 
mind that to pray for one thing and live for another is a 
contradiction and an impiety. The whole course of one's life should 
savor of one's prayers. He who hath all his religion in his prayers, 
hath no religion at all.— Selected. 



R585 : page 2 

ONE of the keenest replies ever given by a liberal religious 
newspaper to a bigoted advocate of future punishment was lately 
given by the Christian Register to the Examiner. Rev. Joseph Cook, 
in one of his lectures, declared that no living man knows anything 
about the theory of probation, and expressed an opinion that the 
charitable view of the question was, that probation after death 
would be granted those who failed to accept the gospel in this life. 
The Examiner denounced this liberal doctrine and declared there 
was no hope for those who failed in this life to accept the gospel. 
The Christian Register thereupon, in reply, suggested that the 
Examiner print its edition on black paper with a small margin of 
white, that its color might correspond with its theology and 
doctrine.— Sel. 



R585 : page 2 

"THOSE who are weary and are heavy laden in any sense, who 
are tired of the world, and of false teaching, and long for the truth; 
they who have consciences burdened by a sense of sin, and are 
ready to hear glad tidings, can hear them from Him. Only to such 
can the gospel be glad tidings, or good news. Only to such can it 
give rest. Rest is what such want, and he can give it to them and 
will." 



R586 : page 3 

WRATH. 

The wrath of God is love's severity 
In curing sin— the zeal of righteousness 
In overcoming wrong— the remedy 
Of justice for the world's redress. 

The wrath of God is punishment for sin, 
In measure unto all transgression due, 
Discriminating well and just between 
Presumptuous sins and sins of lighter hue. 



The wrath of God inflicts no needless pain, 
Merely vindictive or himself to please; 
But aims the ends of mercy to attain, 
Uproot the evil, and the good increase. 

The wrath of God is a consuming fire, 
That burns while there is evil to destroy 
Or good to purify; nor can expire 
Till all things are redeemed from sin's alloy. 

The wrath of God is love's parental rod, 

The disobedient to chastise, subdue 

And bend submissive to the will of God 

That love may reign when all things are made new. 

The wrath of God shall never strike in vain, 
Nor cease to strike till sin shall be no more, 
Till God his gracious purpose shall attain, 
And earth to righteousness and peace restore. 

--F. G. Wilson. 



R586 : page 3 

THE CURSE LIFTED. 

A curse signifies an opposition, an evil, a bitter punishment. Ever 
since the representative of our race was tried in Eden, and 
transgressed God's commandment, the curse of that broken law has 
rested upon him and upon all whom he in trial represented— all the 
Adamic race. That this is so, we need not stop to prove at length; 
we merely refer you to the many scriptures which declare it, and the 
many others which declare that it will be removed. 

But if the Scriptures were silent on the subject, our experience 
proves that a curse rests upon mankind. The anguish, sorrow, 
distress, and death which attend us from the cradle to the tomb, all 
tell us that a curse rests upon us. Surely we would be justified in 
reasoning, that if man were in full harmony with his Creator, 
something much better than he has, would be his portion. And 
looking into God's Word this thought is corroborated. We find that 
when man was sinless and in harmony with God, there was no 
curse, no sorrow, no weary laboring, no pain, nor dying, but joy, 
peace, life and communion with God. All this distress is included in 
the term death, because they all surely lead to it. And this curse— 
DEATH— passed upon all men in that all had sinned in the person of 
their representative Adam. 

It was God's law that cursed us. And since the law is the expression 
of God's mind, or decision, it was God's curse that was on us. Every 
law, to be of any force, must contain a penalty or curse for its 
violation. It is the penalty or curse of God's law that is causing so 



much misery and distress in the world, because all are subject to its 
curse through its violation by Adam. This curse is elsewhere termed 
by the Apostle an "ENMITY," which word has much the same 
meaning as curse. Enmity signifies an opposition to-a resentment. 

Let us look at the subject fairly and fully, for not only has God and 
his law a just and righteous opposition and enmity against sinners, 
but the sinners have since come to have an opposition or enmity 
toward God. Cast off from communion and fellowship with his 
Maker, man went headlong into evil, and the more evil he became, 
the more opposition and enmity he had toward that which is good 
and holy and right. "The darkness hateth the light," and the darker 
the hearts of men became, the more enmity they felt toward God. 

Now, if God and man ever again come into harmony, and are made 
at-one, he who makes the at-one-ment must remove entirely this 
enmity. The enmity of man toward God and his law can be 
removed by making known to men the real character of God and of 
his law. They will then see and admire the righteousness and justice 
of both. This work toward the world will be accomplished during 
the next-the Millennial age. The knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth, and all shall know him. And it is of that time that 
we read: "There shall be no more curse." (Rev. 22:3.) 

But what will bring about this abolishment of the curse of the law? 
What will compensate for man's violation of the Law which 
brought the curse? Some would have us believe that the only curse 
is that opposition which man has against God and his law, the only 
enmity, that which man feels in opposition to God and 
righteousness; but such surely see but one side of the subject. What 
about God's opposition to the sinner, which drove him from Eden 
into sorrow and death? Any theory which fails to recognize this, 
fails entirely; for there have been some of the race in all ages who 
felt no enmity toward God, but desired the blessings of his favor- 
Eden life and joy in his fellowship: yet such never were brought 
back to the original condition, and any with whom God designed at 
all to commune, were made to feel that His enmity, his opposition, 
his curse as a barrier still separated between them as sinners, and 
himself as holy. This was shown in various ways, but in none more 
emphatically than in the sacrifice for sin which each must offer 
before he could have any communion with God. 

In these sacrifices there was remembrance or acknowledgment of 
sins, and since they were repeated it proved that they never really 
took away sin (Heb. 10:3,4), never really removed the curse; but 
these were typical of a better sacrifice, which God himself provided 
in due time, which did once for all and forever, remove the sin, the 
curse, and the enmity on God's part (vs. 5-10.) 

The idea that the enmity is all on man's part, carried to its legitimate 
end, leads to the very absurd conclusion, that man got angry with 
God and went out of Eden full of enmity; that he would not 
commune with God, etc., etc.; God remonstrates and pleads with 



him to return and have his communion and fellowship; man refuses, 
and turns his back on his Maker. God sends prophets and teachers, 
but man spurns them. Finally God concluded to make a great 
sacrifice to men to appease THEIR wrath and to win their love. 
This theory would have God say: I have been too severe, if I had it 
to do again I would not be so strict; I would forgive instead of 
condemning you; I would bless instead of cursing; my love for you 
has conquered my justice. Come, now, see what an evidence of my 
repentance I am willing to give. My son shall die merely to show 
and assure you that your sins are pardoned, and that I am anxious to 
have your good will and esteem. What a God that would be! Both 
men and angels would have in contempt such laws and such a 
lawgiver. 

How different from this is the truth on this subject! Jehovah 
declares his JUSTICE as unalterable as his LOVE, and that infinite 
wisdom and power make possible the harmonious operation of 
both. He assures us that justice is the very foundation of his throne; 
that the empire of the universe, and the laws for the government of 
the same are upheld by justice. Righteousness and justice are the 
prop of thy throne. (Psa. 89:15. Leeser.) While Justice was reading 
to Adam the penalty of the broken law-THE CURSE-love was 
telling him that there would be a deliverance. Man might have 
supposed that God would relent, and not long enforce the penalty; 
they might have supposed that God's enmity or opposition to 
sinners expressed by the curse of the law would be forced aside by 
his love; but if they did thus imagine, the long years of death's reign 
must have shattered such hopes, and when finally God declared that 
he changes not, and will never clear the guilty (Mai. 3:6, and Exod. 
34:7), such false expectations might well be extinguished. If God's 
justice could never yield, how could his love help them? they might 
well have asked. 

Infinite WISDOM was equal to the emergency, and God removed 
the enmity of his own just law by providing a ransom, a 
representative or substitute to take man's place before the law, to 
suffer the just for the unjust; and thus while he did not destroy that 
law which was just and holy and good, Jesus destroyed its enmity 
or opposition to the Adamic race, by himself enduring its enmity 
and curse, as it is written: "He was made a curse [i.e., he was cursed 
or bore the penalty of the curse-death-destruction] for us." (Gal. 
3:10-13.) 

Because Jesus was our representative or substitute, [See Webster's 
definition] therefore the curse belonging to us fell on him, and the 
enmity or opposition against us, was reckoned against him. He was 
cast off to die out of communion, as an enemy, as a sinner, and we 
recall his dying words, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me"? Yes-"He is our peace who hath made both (Jew and Gentile) 
one and hath broken down the middle wall of partition, having 
abolished IN HIS FLESH the enmity."- "That he might reconcile 
BOTH unto God [Jew and Gentile needed to have a work done for 



them which would make them right before God; not to make God 
right in their eyes; not to atone for an injustice on God's part, but 
for unrighteousness on man's part] in one body by the cross-having 
slain the enmity [opposition of the law against both Jew and 
Gentile] thereby." "For through him we both have access, by one 
spirit 

R587 : page 3 

unto the Father." (Eph. 2:14-19.) 

There was no "access unto the Father" as long as the enmity 
(opposition) of his just law barred us out as sinners; but when Jesus 
became our substitute and suffered the condemnation or enmity for 
the unjust— absorbed it all-received its full measure on the cross, he 
thus abolished -destroyed-all claim and enmity of the law against 
us on account of Adam's disobedience. "Now therefore ye are no 
more strangers and foreigners, and outcasts from the Lord and his 
communion, but are "made nigh BY the blood of Christ." (vs. 
13,19.) 

Jesus offered himself as a sacrifice, not for God, unto men, to 
appease their enmity or opposition, but unto God, for men, to 
remove the righteous enmity and curse of God's law which was 
against men because of their sin. 

But note, the LAW has not been changed; right is still right and 
wrong is still wrong, and will ever so remain; but mankind has been 
purchased out from under the dominion and curse of the law. 
Mankind is reckoned as now belonging to him who bought them 
with his own precious blood. The claims of the law being all settled 
by him, the entire control of men is delivered to the Lord who 
bought them. Whatever now shall be done with them he shall do it. 
He may do what he will with his own- thenceforth "the Father 
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son"— 
"He is Lord of all." (John 5:22; Acts 10:36.) 

Having delivered mankind from the dominion and curse of the 
perfect law, and abolished the legal opposition-the curse of death 
which was against them- the next work of Messiah is to men, and 
not toward God; and for this work he takes to himself great power 
and will reign. The object of his reign will be to destroy man's 
enmity to God and his law, and to re-engrave that law upon their 
consciences. The work of reconciliation toward God for man's sins, 
was quickly accomplished, for the Lord waited to be gracious, but 
towards men it will require an age-the Millennium -to accomplish 
it. 

The reason of this is apparent: It will require all of the Millennial 
age to rewrite the law of God upon the hearts of men. When 
perfect, before the fall, the law of God was so thoroughly imprinted 
in man's nature that no written law upon tables of stone was needed. 
Man, a moral image of God, had a conscience so delicately adjusted 
that it would decide instantly what was right and what wrong. His 



difficulty, as we have already seen, was that he did not appreciate 
the evil or curse or enmity which was the penalty of wrong-doing. 

But cast off from the fellowship and communion of God by reason 
of sin, the law became more or less obliterated, and instead there 
sprung up an enmity or opposition to the law which they 
acknowledged as good, but found themselves less and less able to 
observe. Paul refers to this blotting out of the image and knowledge 
of God and his law, saying: "When they knew God they glorified 
him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their 
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened." "And even as 
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them 
over to a reprobate mind." (Rom. 2:21,28.) 

About two thousand years after the fall, and when the original law 
was well nigh erased, God selected a small nation —Israel— and 
made covenants with them based on their keeping his law, which 
became so erased from their hearts, was expressed to them in 
commandments on tables of stone. But, as God foreknew, the law 
in stone only condemned, for none could render full obedience 
except with it written in their hearts, as a part of their very being. 
They must be constitutionally right and just and loving, "else they 
would be constantly warring against themselves and unable to 
obey." (Rom. 7:20-25.) But that law served to give them an idea of 
their need of divine help— the need of having the penalty paid for 
them, and then having the law rewritten in their hearts. (Gal. 3:23- 
25 and Gal. 4:5-7.) 

Though Satan and sin have done a terribly degrading work in man, 
putting darkness and error for light and truth, yet we may still find 
traces of the original law in the most degraded of men, the world 
over. Even barbarian savages have some ideas concerning right and 
wrong, justice and injustice, however crude they may be. Paul 
testifies to this also, saying of the heathen: "These having not the 
[written] law are a law unto themselves, which show the work 
[some evidence] of the law written in their hearts, their conscience 
also bearing witness." (Rom. 2:14,15.) 

It is because this law has been so nearly blotted out of the once 
perfect human nature, that it will require so long to restore it to 
perfection. This law must gradually be again interwoven into 
human nature before it will again be an image of God, and at one 
with him. When so restored to God's image, all doubts as to what is 
right and what wrong, and all preference for the wrong, will be at 
an end. With his whole nature right, the law of God written all over 
him, as the law of his being, man will be prepared to do right, not 
from fear, nor from reward, not because some one would see or 
some one would not see, but because right is right-the very same 
motive of righteousness and justice which governs all of our 
Maker's actions. 

Then God and men will be entirely at one, in perfect harmony. 
Then it will be seen that God's laws are only blessings, and the only 



prevention of evil which is a source of misery. When thus 
harmonized, Christ the mediator who died to redeem, and reigned 
to restore men to God, will "deliver up the kingdom to God, even 
the Father." (1 Cor. 15:24.) All enmity and curse will have been 
destroyed. The enmity of God's law having been met and settled, 
and man's enmity to the law removed by a restitution to original 
perfection, the image of God.* 

In harmony with this is another Scriptural statement: "While we 
were enemies, we were reconciled to God [and the opposition and 
curse of his violated law was lifted] by the death of his Son, much 
more being reconciled we shall be SAVED [brought back into that 
condition of perfection and harmony with God and His law where 
we will be no longer condemned but approved] by his life. " (Rom. 
5:10.) This is another brief statement of the same glorious truth by 
the Apostle. When the work of Christ is fully accomplished, "Then 
there shall be no more curse;" "for the former things [the evil 
incurred through Adam's transgression] are passed away. " (Rev. 
22:3; 21:4.) put away legally by the "sacrifice of himself (Christ);" 
and put away in fact by his glorious reign. "Behold the Lamb of 
God that taketh away the sin of the world. " For "Christ hath 
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us." 



*We have here dealt with the great mass of the world and 
purposely omitted mention of two comparatively small classes— the 
church selected in the gospel age, and the finally impenitent of the 
Millennial age. Because previously mentioned, it is unnecessary to 
interrupt the statement of the general plan as relates to the great 
mass of mankind. 



R587 : page 4 

THAT THOU DOEST, DO QUICKLY. 

"Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? The 
watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night." We have 
been particularly interested in the first part of the watchman's 
answer; but is there not also in the second part a message for us? 

The night cometh. For about ten years we have heard the cry, "The 
night cometh." We see the signs increasing day by day, "On the 
earth distress of nations, in perplexity for the roaring of the sea 
(restless and unrestrainable humanity) and the billows (the active 
and impetuous leaders); men fainting for fear (witness the crowned 
heads of Europe to-day), and for expectation of the things which are 
coming on the inhabited earth: for the powers of the heavens 
(governments) shall be shaken." They are shaking everywhere. 
Why? They have ruled by oppression. In many cases they trample 
on human rights. Their subjects are their slaves. If they choose to 
make war, these slaves must either go out and kill their brothers, or 



languish in prison— fortunate if they escape with their lives. In 
peace they must pay to keep up a vain pomp, and a small army of 
courtiers and useless pensioners. The many must live without life's 
comforts, and frequently even without its necessities, that the few 
may live like hogs. Surely only the blind may fail to see that this 
cannot last long. Already the masses are waking up to their rights; 
and when fully awake, they will rise like a maddened giant, and 
woe to the puny arm that will oppose them then! 

When the conflict fairly opens, we may expect to see a repetition of 
the reign of terror which has characterized such outbreaks in the 
past. In fact, even if prophecy did not clearly portray the terrible 
scenes, we ought to see that outbreaks in the past would be tame 
compared with the grand final conflict. Not only will this one be 
universal, spreading itself over the civilized world, and possibly 
everywhere, so that there will be no place of refuge, but the 
destructive agents which will be used will make it seven-fold 
worse. Dynamite and nitroglycerine are now the favorite agents. To 
them conflagration, with all its horrors, is as nothing. It is like 
comparing the electric telegraph with the stagecoach, or the work of 
the thunder-bolt with the slow toil of the wood-chopper. The recent 
attempts in Great Britain are only samples of what we may expect, 
on a grand and successful scale, when the ball opens. 

R588 : page 4 

Pittsburghers remember the results of two days of destruction in 
July, 1877. Scores of locomotives and hundreds of cars were 
pillaged and burned; travel was suspended and business was 
demoralized. Imagine this condition in all the great centres- 
railroad, telegraph and mail communications all cut off. No letters 
from either friend or foe. No papers —not even ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, then. No provisions, except as the Lord may provide for 
his own. All chaos, tumult and terror. 

What opportunity will we then have either to study together or to 
spread the light already received? Probably nothing to compare 
with the present. If papers or books could be published, how could 
they be sent? What we do, we must do quickly. Now we have every 
facility. Let every one feel the responsibility of the position. 

The cause needs help. There are but few who have the light. Let 
every one earnestly pray, "Lord, what wilt thou have me do?" Keep 
praying, and keep doing; but see that you are directed of the Lord. 
Let neither time, talents nor money be uselessly employed. The 
truth and the time demand sacrifice. The Lord requires a sacrifice. 
The way to the cross-the only way-means a sacrifice. Are you 
sacrificing? Is all on the altar? If you have laid it there, have you let 
go of it, and turned your back upon it? Do you count it no more 
yours, but the Lord's? 

The time to rest is not at the beginning of the work, but at the other 
end. If these bodies get used up, we have better ones waiting. The 



present life has duties that cannot and should not be avoided; but let 
the earthly be subordinate to the spiritual. 

Remember, we are now living in the day of the Lord. It has come as 
a thief in the night. Soon, as Peter describes, "The heavens 
(governments) will pass away with a great noise (moral as well as 
physical dynamite), and the elements (component parts and 
principles of the governments) shall be dissolved with fervent heat 
(Jer. 23:29; Mai. 3:2; 1 Cor. 3:13-15), and the earth (organized 
society) and the works that are therein (oppression, fraud, deceit, 
pride, etc., and probably includes also social institutions and 
business,) shall be burned up. Seeing that these things are thus to be 
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in holy living and 
godliness?" 

"That thou doest, do quickly." "The night cometh, when no man can 
work." 

W. I. M. 



R588 : page 4 

WHAT IS YOUR JUDGMENT? 

"For the love of Christ constraineth us, because we thus judge: 
That if one died for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, 
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but 
unto him which died for them, and rose again."— 2 Cor. 5:14,15. 

Paul here offers a reason for his zeal for God. Some thought his 
mind unbalanced because he endured so much for the sake of 
preaching Christ and him crucified, but he assures us that from his 
point of view he did none too much. His reasoning and his ideas of 
right and justice demanded all that he was doing, and more, if he 
were able. Then he tells us the process of reasoning from which he 
judges thus: "Christ died for all"; if so, then all must have been 
dead, either actually dead and buried, or else under sure sentence of 
death, which would ultimately be executed. If Christ died to 
purchase for all the right to return from death, then, argues Paul, it 
is evident that the purchased life belongs to the purchaser; and I 
"thus judge" that all such should not henceforth live unto 
themselves, but should render that life in service to their Redeemer. 

Do we agree with Paul? was his reasoning or judgment good? If so, 
let it be our excuse also for earnestness and sacrifice in the service 
of our Redeemer. Paul regarded it as a matter of simple justice, and 
not a favor on his part to render service; he judged it right to do 
thus. 

This scripture shows clearly the doctrine of Christ Jesus being a 
substitute or representative for all in death. [We might remark that 
neither substitute nor representative are words which occur in the 
English translation of the Bible, but let us remember that the Bible 



was not written in English, and that in translating there is a certain 
liberty accorded the translator, which permits him to select such 
English words as he may choose, to express the meaning of the 
original text. The meaning of substitute and representative is found 
abundantly in Scripture, though translators have not happened to 
use these words in translating. The thought is generally conveyed 
by the words ransom, redeem, bought, etc., and, by this word 
"FOR"; one of the meanings of which and the principal one is, 
instead of, as a substitute or representative stands FOR or instead of 
those whom he represents.] 

When the reading of the two oldest Manuscripts (Sinaitic and 
Vatican) is observed, the force of this word for is clearly manifest. 
Those MSS. read it thus: "Because we thus judge, that one died 
FOR all, consequently all were dead." 

Nor should we fail to apply the lesson of verse 15, that since Christ 
died for all, they which live by his purchase should render life- 
service to him? It is not enough that we call ourselves by his name 
and say we are his servants, but His servants we are TO WHOM we 
render service. 

Let us remember that faithfulness and obedience are qualities 
absolutely necessary to a good servant. While we may or should be 
ambitious to render important service to our Lord, let us ever 
remember to heartily say, Thy will be done, O Lord. If the Master 
has placed you in such position that you cannot render great 
service, do not neglect what he has given you, to do that which he 
has not given you to do. Remember that his method is, to test us in 
small things before committing to us greater, on the principle that 
he that is faithful in that which is least, will be faithful also in that 
which is greater. To him who improves the talents and 
opportunities given, comes a blessing and increase of opportunity, 
and finally the "well done, good and faithful servant thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things." 



R588 : page 4 

PROPHETIC PEN PICTURES CONTINUED. 

THE SEALED BOOK-ISA. 29:9-14. 

"Stay but still and wonder; turn your eyes away, and be blinded: 
they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with 
strong drink." (V. 9, Leeser's trans.) With a touch of irony the Lord 
here addresses nominal Zion. The unfoldings of his truth at the time 
here referred to (the time in which we are living) are so marked, 
forcible and clear to faithful students of the Word, and observers of 
its fulfillment, that only those could be blinded, who deliberately 
turn their eyes away from the truth, and determine to sit still, 
enveloped in the darkness of human tradition. And in their darkness 



they wonder at what they think the strange course of the Lord's 
dealings. 



Their staggering is the staggering of indistinct vision and weakness, 
the halting and vacillating of bewilderment and confusion. They are 
not drunken with wine. The wine here referred to is that which 
symbolizes their consecration— that of which Jesus said, "Drink ye 
all of it," and "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?" 
(Matt. 26:27; and 20:22.) While this wine of sacrifice exhausts the 
human nature, it invigorates and makes strong the spiritual nature. 
It is not because of this wine or strong drink of sacrifice, then, that 
nominal Zion staggers, but because, as shown in the preceding 
chapter (verses 3-7), they have partaken of the intoxicating spirit 
and pleasures of this world. 

"For the Lord hath poured out over you the spirit of deep sleep, and 
hath closed your eyes: (over) the prophets, and your chiefs, the 
seers, hath he cast a vail." (V. 10, Leeser.) 

Since they have turned their eyes away from the truth, God permits 
them to sit in darkness and to be overcome with sleep. Who cannot 
see the spirit of lethargy and drowsiness regarding spiritual things 
which pervades nominal Zion. They are not asleep on temporal 
subjects; they are awake to all worldly ambitions— to the rivalry of 
numbers, of pulpit oratory, church music, imposing edifices, etc.— 
but to the teachings of God's Word they are asleep. Over the 
teachings of the Prophets, and of Jesus and the Apostles, a vail is 
cast. "And the vision of everything [the revelation of God's truth 
through these] is become unto you [nominal Zion] as the words of a 
book that is SEALED." (V. 11, Leeser.) This they themselves 
admit, and therefore seldom attempt to expound the Scriptures, but 
merely take an isolated passage, and from it draw some moral 
lesson. Nominal Zion has discarded the teachings of the true 
Prophets and Seers of the church, and has taken instead the decrees 
of human councils and synods, while the decrees of the real Head 
and teachers of the church are neglected. Hence they know not what 
to think of the present, and are still more confused if they think of 
the future. 

R589 : page 4 

"Which [book— the Bible] men deliver to one that is learned, 
saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he saith, I cannot, for it is sealed. 
And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read 
this, I pray thee; and he saith, I am not learned." (Verses 11,12.) 

The prophecies of the Old and New Testaments are sealed against 
their learning, for they have studied only at the feet of science and 
sectarianism, and have neglected the school of Christ and the study 
of its text-book, the Bible; hence their learned ones lack the true 
wisdom, and the true spirit, which alone will enable any to 
appreciate the deep things of God. (Compare 1 Cor. 2:5-14.) The 
unlearned, accustomed to look to earthly learning for instruction in 



heavenly things, and not to the testimony of Prophets and Apostles, 
will not even attempt to understand. 

"Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near to 
me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have 
removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught 
by the precept of men: therefore, behold I will proceed to do a 
marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a 
wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the 
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." (Verses 13,14.) 

Formality of worship and service has taken the place of heart 
service. When the service was from the heart, the Lord's plans were 
searched for, as for hid treasure. His Word was studied that the 
mystery of God might be appreciated as fast as his ripening and 
unfolding plans would permit. It was a longing such as Daniel 
experienced when he searched and fasted and prayed for weeks, 
that he might know whatever of God's plan he was pleased to 
reveal. It was the longing desire to comprehend with all saints the 
length and breadth and depth and height, and to know the love of 
Christ, and be filled with all the fullness of God. (Eph. 3:18,19.) 

But the worldly spirit soon cast out this thirst for truth and 
knowledge, as the heart became interested in worldly aims and 
plans. Though the forms of godliness have continued and increased, 
the real worship and submission to God has ceased, and interest is 
bent to man-made plans. While they draw nigh to God with their 
lips, saying, "Thy kingdom come," and "Thy will be done," they are 
endeavoring to have their own wills done, and to establish then- 
own sectarian dominions in the world. Their fear of God and their 
unrest in view of his supposed decrees, is not the result of the study 
of his Word, but is taught by the precept of men. Alas, how pitiable 
this condition! Yet they are ignorant of it, and say, We are rich and 
increased in goods and have need of nothing, and know not that 
they are poor and blind and miserable and naked. (Rev. 3:17.) 

Seeing it is thus, what shall the Lord do with them? Will he utterly 
cast them off? Will he leave them in their blindness? No. He says, 
"Therefore, behold I will proceed to do a marvelous work among 
this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder; for the wisdom 
of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of then- 
prudent men shall be hid." (V. 14.) 

As this already becomes evident to many, what a marvelous thing it 
seems to those accustomed to look to the professed leaders and 
teachers of the nominal Church. As the light of truth begins to dawn 
upon many minds from other sources, how often we hear the 
remark, "How strange that we do not hear these things from our 
ministers!" But the Prophet makes answer: "The wisdom of then- 
wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men 
shall be hid." The heavenly wisdom is hidden from those who are 
wise and prudent after the world's fashion, and revealed unto those 
who are babes in simplicity and meekness. (Matt. 11:25.) 



God will not leave his erring children; he will attract their attention 
back to his plans, causing all their plans to wonderfully miscarry 
and fail. Thus they shall see the folly of attempting to lay plans for 
God; and when their plans fail, they will look up, and lo! the Lord's 
plans, which in their "haste" (Isa. 28:16) they discarded, will, like 
the century plant, suddenly burst forth in glory and beauty and 
perfection. 

Meantime, while the "marvelous work" (v. 14) of overthrowing the 
present great systems of men (which, like the tower of Babel, is an 
attempt on the part of men to work their plans regardless of the 
Lord's) is in progress, the Lord's warning is, "Woe to them that seek 
deep to hide their counsel [schemes, plans,] from the Lord, and 
their works 

R588 : page 5 

are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us, and who knoweth us?" 
(V. 15.) 

It is possible to deceive fellow-men, and to convince them that 
certain plans are not different from, but in harmony with, the Lord's 
plans. Yea, a man may also deceive even himself thus (2 Tim. 
3:13); but he cannot deceive God. He knows that the controlling 
principles of sectarianism are earthly and selfish. He knows of the 
dark works and secret conspiracies in wrong, not only of the 
Jesuits, but also, in a less degree, of Protestants, who to accomplish 
their plans are willing to, and do resort, to many schemes and 
devices to raise money and to have their systems seem to flourish, 
which they would not care to have generally known among men, 
and which they seem to think God seeth not. How often reports are 
doctored to make a good impression. How often subscription lists 
are headed with prominent names and large sums of money only for 
effect, and never expected to be paid. (This not infrequent custom 
was illustrated recently by the course of the officials of a prominent 
Brooklyn church, freely criticised by the public press.) All this is 
ostensibly to forward the Lord's work, but really to accomplish their 
own plans. 

"Who seeth it? Who knoweth it?" The Lord seeth in secret; in vain 
do they hide it, and tell him that they are laboring for him. Woe 
unto these, for their counsel shall come to naught; their cherished 
plans shall fail, and their pride will be humbled in the dust. The 
woe, distress and trouble coming upon the nominal Church will be 
in reality a blessing in disguise to the individuals that compose it; 
but it will be considered as calamity and trouble, until they are 
brought to understand and to come into harmony with God's plans. 

But all this scheming will not succeed; for the Lord says, "Surely 
your turning of things upside down [perverting of the Lord's plans 
and doctrines] shall be esteemed as the [effort of the] potter's clay 
[to oppose the potter]. For shall the work say of him that made it, 
He made me not? Or shall the thing framed say of him that framed 
it, He hath no understanding?" Surely the Church is God's creation; 



it is "his workmanship" (Eph. 2:10), but the spirit of the nominal 
Church is to look to other framers. Some look to Peter, some to 
Luther, some to Calvin, Knox and Wesley. And indeed, as they at 
present stand, this is true, for while THE CHURCH is God's 
workmanship, the division of that Church into fragments is the 
work of men, and may say to God, Thou hast not made me. And the 
fact that men to-day argue that the division (sectarianism) of the 
Church is an advantage, and to the advancement of the truth, is the 
equivalent of the thing framed saying to God, "Thou hast no 
understanding"; we know better how to frame and organize; you 
said that we all should be one, and that there should be no division 
among us (John 17:11,22; 1 Cor. 12:25); but we have learned better 
--that divisions are a great blessing and advantage. 

Verily the great Potter shall have the schemes of the clay in 
derision, and shall break in pieces their workmanship [the systems 
or organizations, not the people] as vessels of wrath fitted for 
destruction, and shall show forth in glory of kingdom power his 
vessels of more and of less honor. What if God, willing to show his 
wrath and to make his power known, endured with much 
longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction; and that he 
might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy 
which he had afore prepared unto glory? Surely the present 
overturning of the Lord's arrangements shall be brought to naught. 

"Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a 
fruitful field; and the fruitful field shall be esteemed a forest." 
(Verse 17.) Mount Lebanon, with its tall and stately cedar trees, 
will here represent the majesty and dignity of the nominal Church, 
and the reverential esteem with which its ministry is regarded. The 
fruitful field might well represent the humble and lowly saints. In 
"a very little while" things shall be reversed; that which is now 
proud and majestic shall be cut down and plowed, and become 
humble and fruitful, while that which is now humble will be exalted 
as Lebanon to heavenly conditions, majesty and power. 

This change, and this overthrow of the present systems, is at the 
time of the exaltation of the saints to spiritual glory and power, at 
the introduction of the Millennium. In harmony with this we read: 
"In that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes 
of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness. " What a 
blessed prospect is this for those who at present are so stumbled by 
Babylon's confusing traditions! Not only will it bring blessing to 
those whose vision is obscured, but also to those totally blind and 
deaf and utterly ignorant of the precious information of God's 
Word. "The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the 
poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel; for the 
terrible one [Satan] is brought to naught, and the scorner is 
consumed, and all that watch 



R590 : page 5 



for iniquity are cut off: that make a man an offender for a word 
[spoken contrary to them], and lay a snare for him that reproveth in 
the gate [publicly], and turn aside the just [the righteous] for [or, as] 
a thing of naught." (V. 21.) 

This is in that same "DAY" that fleshly Israel shall be restored to 
favor under the direction of glorified spiritual Israel, their holy one. 
"Therefore, thus saith the Lord who redeemed Abraham, 
concerning the house of Jacob: Jacob shall not now [at that time] be 
ashamed, neither shall his face wax pale. But when he seeth his 
children, the work of my hands [the Christ, the spiritual seed] in the 
midst of him, they [fleshly Israel] shall sanctify my name 
[Jehovah], and sanctify the holy one of Jacob [Christ], and shall 
fear the God of Israel." (Verses 22,23.) 

"They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they 
that murmured shall learn doctrine." (V. 24.) 



R590 : page 5 

GUIDANCE. 

Should not God's own word satisfy every inquiring mind touching 
divine guidance all the way through life? 

Has He not said, "Acknowledge Him in all thy ways, and He shall 
direct thy paths."— Prov. 3:6. 

"The Lord will guide thee continually." —Isaiah 11:58. 

"He will be our guide, even unto death."— Psalm 48:14. 

"Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel." —Psalm 73:24. 

"The meek will He guide in judgment." —Psalm 25:9. 

This guidance in judgment will be God's guidance for the knowing 
of His will. As we honor him by perfect obedience and submission 
of spirit, he takes into his own hand the direction of our way, and 
calls on us only to follow the leader, who will make plain paths for 
our feet through all the journey. 

How shall I know the voice as God's voice? 

As well ask, how know the voice of a most intimate friend or 
companion? Has not intimacy with that friend in familiar converse, 
as you have walked in companionship together, made the voice to 
be as well known as your own? Cultivate, then, like intimacy with 
God; walk with him and talk with him hour by hour, and in the 
freedom you have with a personal friend. Cultivate such a sense of 
His living presence that you will learn to speak to Him, as well as 
of Him, most freely and without embarrassment. Living thus in 
companionship with God, for companionship implies converse, you 
will learn to know God's voice when he speaks; and as you bring all 
your thoughts into captivity to the obedience of Christ, habituating 
yourself to speak to him of all that you do, holding nothing back, 



you will find it most easy to lay down the task in which you may be 
engaged, at any moment, to hold intercourse with Jesus as your 
loving friend. Living thus, you will not fail to know God's voice 
when he speaks to you. 

Then, again, with your soul baptized in love— in the love of the Lord 
Jesus— you will live in such an assurance of God's love to you, that 
there will be no questioning in your mind as to his responding to 
the longing desire of your heart to know his will. Thus, thus, you 
will be at rest, assured He will no more fail in this than in giving 
you your daily bread. As well may you question your receiving 
salvation as divine guidance, and that up to the full measure of your 
faith in His own words of promise, for they are as full and 
complete. 

Again. How recognize the voice as God's voice amid the confusion 
that comes from another spirit than the good Spirit of God. John 
bids us "try the spirits, whether they are of God," and in referring 
us, in the trying, to the Word itself, we are told that the Spirit's 
confession of Christ— exaltation of Christ— in the exhibitions of His 
love, unerringly declare it to be of God's good Spirit, so moving the 
heart that the voice will be known as God's voice. God speaks, then, 
not only by His Spirit, but by His Word, and with the eye single and 
the heart fixed on knowing His will, it will be revealed as His voice 
through the light the blessed Spirit sheds upon the Word. 

If, then, there be in the heart a desire for guidance in any of the 
relative duties of life, divine light will be shed upon every step of 
the way through the Word, under the illuminating power of the 
Spirit. God's words are made living words, and will be spoken 
afresh as His voice expressing His will, as certainly as we ask, 
expecting to know it. In singleness of eye for God's glory the Holy 
Spirit purifies the vision; the scales fall; we see clearly; we know 
God's will, for the voice is His to us, and in the consciousness our 
steps are ordered of the Lord we testify that "He leadeth us." 

The result, then, of carrying "everything to God in prayer," 
everything pertaining to this life, that you may know His will, 
desiring obediently to do it, will beget such a susceptibility to hear 
the slightest whisper that you will learn to know it as clearly as the 
father of our race knew God's voice, spoken to him in the cool of 
the evening, as he walked in the garden of Eden. 

And then, in the depth of your consciousness, you will find yourself 
learning to catch the reverberation of His voice in every sound of 
nature, in the intervals of thought, as they come in the occupations 
of life. If you have the first lessons to learn in divine guidance, read 
the eighth and tenth verses of the 143d Psalm, and with those on 
your lips take the matter on which you would have light to God. 
Ask Him to guide you; and with no will of your own, no choice as 
to the pathway, trusting everything to God, while silently waiting to 
hear his voice, as God is true it will be given you to know His will. 
You will hear it saying, "This is the way; walk ye in it." As you 



enter upon the doing of it, opposing obstacles will disappear, for the 
voice of God's providence is in unison with that of the Spirit and 
the Word.- Selected. 



R590 : page 5 

FLIGHT IN WINTER. 

MATT. 24:20. 

From inquiries which we now and then hear made regarding duty, 
we are made aware that to "line upon line," another line should be 
added. 

It is dreary work to take a journey— on foot— in winter; but under 
some circumstances, it becomes necessary; nevertheless, it is 
desirable to avoid it if possible. 

If we know we have a journey to perform, it is much better to 
attend to it when circumstances are most propitious. 

Jesus, when speaking to the disciples concerning the destruction of 
Jerusalem, says, "Pray ye that your flight be not in the winter." The 
careful and unprejudiced Bible student sees that the destruction of 
ancient Jerusalem is a type of the dissolution of the nominal 
Christian Church; that the latter is due at the end of this age, 
according to prophecy, even as the destruction of Jerusalem was 
due at the close of the Jewish age: that what was an historical fact 
regarding the former, is a spiritual fact, further on, concerning the 
latter; that the latter is the counterpart of the former, and so treated 
by Jesus in the 24th of Matthew; so much so that many have found 
it difficult to tell where his predictions concerning the one ended 
and the other began. 

How many, recognizing that the summer of "the Church's" 
prosperity is ended, and the "harvest past," are getting uneasy as the 
winter approaches and the love of many waxes cold; and their 
unrest is increased in proportion as they come to realize the 
shortness of the bed, and the narrowness of the covering. 

Then again the contraction of these necessary comforts of a cold 
winter's night become the more apparent as they come to 
"understand doctrine." (See Isa. 28:19,20. margin.) However 
strange and unreasonable this dissolution of the nominal Church 
system may seem to some, the Lord will "bring to pass his act, his 
strange act. Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be 
made strong." (Isa. 28:21,22.) 

There has come to be so much "vain worship," because "teaching 
for doctrine the commandments of men," (Matt. 15:9), that the 
removal of the "candle-stick out of his place," has become a 
necessity. (Rev. 2:5.) "The light of a candle shall shine no more at 
all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be 
heard no more at all in thee." (Rev. 18:23.) 



Who are they that get uneasy in the churches? Are they those who 
do not study their Bibles much? Mind, we say study; not look over 
the S.S. lesson and prepare one's self to answer the geographical 
and historical questions, but who wish to know what is "between 
the lines," and "under the letter." Are not the uneasy "troublers of 
Israel" the ones who "inquire and search diligently"? "Searching 
what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them 
(the prophets) did signify, when it testified beforehand the 
sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow"? 

Is it not plain enough to all of us, that anyone who, in the Church, 
shall persistently 

R591 : page 5 

make such inquiries will be reproved for "prying into things which 
are not for us to know"? Now it is not for us to tell individuals what 
is their personal duty. It is our place to speak of principles in their 
general application and each must judge about the particular 
application to himself. Jesus spoke very plainly about the condition 
of the Jewish Church in that time, and of a certain class, but seldom 
or never of any one individual in it. His condemnation was of 
corrupt principles and corrupt classes, and was in public. 

He says concerning his teaching, "In secret have I said nothing." 
(John 18:20.) But why should Jesus, or we, condemn the Church, 
either Jewish or Christian? Did not God institute the Jewish 
Church? Yes, and for a purpose. That purpose was to shadow forth, 
through the law, which was committed unto them, "good things to 
come"; for they "could never with those sacrifices which they 
offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect: 
for then would they not have ceased to be offered ...for it is not 
possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins." 
(Heb. 10:1,2,4.) "The way into the holiest of all was not yet made 
manifest while as the first tabernacle was yet standing: which was a 
figure for the time then present, in which were offered both gifts 
and sacrifices that could not make him that did the service perfect 
as pertaining to the conscience." Heb. 9:8. 

But there came a time when the Jewish Church should have known 
that its mission in that particular phase was ended; but, owing to its 
pride, love of self, having an imposing ceremonial service and love 
of the "applause of men," it overlooked God's purposes, and "knew 
not the time" of its "visitation," and Jesus, in sorrow, said, "If thou 
hadst known, even THOU (mark well the words, "even THOU") at 
LEAST in this THY DAY, the things that belong unto thy peace, 
but now they are hid from thine eyes." Luke 19:42,44. 

The nominal Christian Church, instituted by Jesus, is in a similar 
condition of unconsciousness regarding the time of her visitation, 
and for similar reasons. 

She has purposes of her own, and thinks, or supposes they are 
God's purposes, 



R591 : page 6 



but so intent is she upon self-aggrandizement, that she cares not to 
review the lessons of the great teacher, lest she should be under the 
necessity of modifying her views, and that would wound her pride. 
SHE modify her views ! ! Is she not infallible? "As is the mother, so 
are the daughters." 

Undutiful children, they speak lightly to the gay world of the 
egotistic assumptions of their aged mother, while their assumptions 
are in some respects greater and fully as absurd. 

They are not slow to speak of a certain aged woman as a "mother of 
harlots," while everybody knows that that same old lady is their 
mother. The same record that tells us of the disreputable character 
of the aged matron, gives us no intimation that she had any 
daughters of a different character. And while they are thus 
traducing the character of their mother and expatiating upon their 
own purity, the gay world turns its face aside to avoid the corrupt 
breath, and takes a furtive glance at the scanty garments that scarce 
hide the shame of their nakedness. (See Rev. 3:18.) 

Some may say as they read these lines, "O what bitterness and hate 
of the Church," to which we answer: not at all: far from it. We are 
saying, in the same way, in the same spirit, and for the same 
purpose, that which the Spirit said through John "unto the 
churches." In fact, we believe the same Spirit prompts us to repeat 
the same things, and though plain and straight, they are in love. 
Rev. 3:19,20,21,22. 

The same "head of the corner" is present and being "rejected" by 
the builders now, that was rejected by the builders before. To be 
sure, they did not know that they were rejecting Him, (Luke 23:34) 
but they did not want to know. They "desired none of his ways." If 
anyone who is still in fellowship with any of the "daughters" 
referred to, and are becoming aware of "the presence" of him in 
whom their "soul delighteth," think we are in error about the 
churches rejecting him, just let them announce that he is present, "at 
the door"; let them offer to "open the door," and their uncertainty 
will soon vanish. They will soon discover not only what is duty, but 
what is necessity, for they would have to hold their peace or change 
their relation, that is, if the fact is an example for the future. 

The question, "What is my duty?" resolves itself into this: Do I love 
more the one who stands at the door knocking, or the Church who 
is refusing him admission, and who is saying, "My Lord delayeth 
his coming, and shall begin to beat the men-servants and maidens, 
and to eat and drink and to be drunken?" "The lord of that servant 
will come (HEKO, BE HERE) [will have come. Rotherham's 
trans.] in a day when he looketh not for him, and at an hour when 
he is not AWARE." (Luke 12:45,46.) 

The drunkenness referred to is of the spirit and mind, and its effects 
are described in Isaiah 29:9-16. 



However "the Church" may question "the presence" of Christ, if 
you who are inquiring as to duty have studied the Old and New 
Testament prophecies carefully, you have a strong conviction of 
what is truth. 

You understand that the word come in Matt. 23:36; 24:14; 24:50; 
Luke 12:46; Heb. 10:37; Rev. 3:3, and some others, is in the Greek 
heko, and signifies "to have come, be here," not future tense, but 
present. And in Matt. 24:3, "Parousia, a being alongside, presence. 

What shall be the sign of thy coming (presence.) "WHERE is the 
promise of his coming?" (presence.) This very inquiry, 
prophetically given by Peter (2 Peter 3:4), is most literally fulfilled; 
almost the exact words being used by those who sneer at his 
presence. 

They see no evidence of his presence; "all things continue as they 
were." They profess to be spiritually-minded, but reason according 
to the fleshly mind. Professing spiritual sight, they reason (?) about 
seeing Jesus with their physical sight. 

"If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them." Do not 
imagine that the winter is over, because we have had some cold 
weather (do not forget that we are speaking of spiritual things); for 
be ye assured it is just coming on; and though you may have put off 
"your flight," yet the longer you defer it, the harder it will be for 
you. 

One of the greatest trials will be the desire, augmented by the 
exhortation, to look after spiritual children (proselytes to "the 
Church"); but Jesus said, "Woe unto them that are with child, and to 
them that give suck in those days. A failure to observe God's 
orderly method brings disaster, even if it is a desire to make a nice 
sacrifice to him. See Sam. 15:15-17,22, "To obey is better than 
sacrifice." 

Our choice was, that as he could not come in, we would "go out to 
meet him," for we loved him best. It cost us a hard struggle, but it 
was a struggle once for all, and we have not seen an hour in which 
we would undo it if we could. How much we see now in connection 
with him, which we never could have seen but for nearness to him. 
We had no ill-will for any individual in "the Church," and that 
made it all the harder. But "the Church" was "making the Word of 
God of no effect" through their tradition, and we knew it. Should 
we stay, and by staying say to the world that we endorsed its 
teaching? 

In conclusion we would say to any who are inquiring, "What is my 
duty?" that if you believe "the Church" is teaching "present truth," 
and is approved of the Lord, we would advise you to remain in it; 
for under such circumstances you would be as well in it as out of it, 
and temporally, probably better. If you belong to the Church in 
spirit, there is no reason for leaving it. It all depends upon which 
life you are most desirous to save. If you desire, above all things, to 



save your present social and ecclesiastical life, including reputation, 
then by all means stay where you are, for that is the way to do it 
(Matt. 16:25), but should you count these as Paul did, "but loss for 
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus," you must expect 
to have your name cast out as evil, but with this will be connected a 
blessing. (Matt. 16:22.) Then you can fulfill, as we do, the 
following verse, 23d. 

In connection with this subject let us study carefully the 18th 
chapter of Revelations, with parallel Scriptures, and see that we get 
an understanding of them. "After these things." (1st verse.) What 
things? After all the things related up to that point had been 
accomplished. Now, study the whole chapter, and be sure to get the 
"mind of the Spirit." But should some one say to you, "There is no 
use studying Revelation, no one understands that; there is no use 
reading it," then read to them the third verse of the first chapter of 
the book, and tell them that by the grace of God you will at least 
TRY to get an understanding of it, for you are after that blessing. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R591 : page 6 

SPARE NOT. 

The Christian Church as a witness for God in the world has failed, 
like the Jewish nation, and became apostate. There is a little flock, 
there is a true Church, but its members are scattered abroad and 
almost invisible in the great Babylon; they are the seven thousand 
who have not bowed the knee to Baal; they are called, and chosen 
and faithful, who follow the Lamb; they are those who have turned 
to God, from idols, to serve the living and true God, and to wait for 
His Son from heaven; they are those who have not the form only, 
but the power of godliness; those who keep themselves unspotted 
from the world, and overcome through faith. They are found in 
every section of the professing church, and the Lord knoweth those 
that are His— "They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in the day 
when I make up my jewels." 

But for the rest— for the vast professing body which bears the name 
of Christ, it has not continued in the goodness of God; it has turned 
his grace into licentiousness; its sentence is gone forth, it must be 
"cut off." The longsuffering of God has been abundantly 
manifested; it is right that his holy severity should be again 
revealed. The professing church has long been unworthy of the 
sacred name it bears, and of the high and holy responsibility of 
becoming God's witness on earth, which belongs to it. It is time it 
should cease to hold the position it has so fearfully forfeited. 
Instead of being the instrument of spreading the truth of the Gospel 
among men, it is the worst hindrance to their attaining that 
knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent, in which 



life eternal lies. Like the Pharisees of old, it stands as the great 
obstruction, neither itself entering the kingdom, nor suffering those 
who would to enter in. The name of God is blasphemed among the 
nations, by reason of the corruption of the professing church; the 
light that should have been in it is become darkness, and great is 
that darkness ! The Church is confounded with the world, and the 
true saints are strangers in its society. It is no longer the pillar and 
ground of the truth— it is the hot-bed of heresy, false doctrine, and 
corruption of every kind. What contrast can be more complete than 
that between the Church as Christ intended it to be, and the Church 
as it now exists in the world! An end must come to all this! Not 
only does the Word of God predict it, not only does our own sense 
of righteousness demand it, but the solemn analogies of history 
distinctly intimate it. Let the undeniable fact that past apostasies 
brought down the judgment they deserved, forewarn men what 
must be the end of existing apostasy of the professing people of 
God. Babylon must fall! Great Babylon must come in remembrance 
before God, who will give unto her the cup of the wine of the 
fierceness of his wrath, for her sins have reached unto heaven and 
God hath remembered her iniquities.-H. G. GUINNESS. 



R592 : page 6 



THE DAY OF THE LORD.* 

DISCOURSE NO. 5. 

"The great day of His wrath is come; who shall be able to stand?" 
(Rev. 6:17.) 

The "Day of the Lord" is a term which, strictly speaking, refers to 
the whole period during which Christ will be present, or the entire 
Millennial Age. But it is generally applied in the Scriptures to the 
coming or beginning of that day; to the period of time during which 
the Gospel and Millennial Ages lap, the one ending and the other 
commencing. 

Concerning it we read, "The day of the Lord is darkness, and not 
light." (Amos 5:18.) It is "the great day of his wrath." This dark day 
is at once the closing scene of the night of weeping and the dawn of 
the morning of joy. And we would invite your attention, not merely 
to the scriptural evidence that there will be such a day, but 
especially to the events that will transpire during that day, and their 
chronological order. 

This time of trouble comes first upon the Church, and afterward 
upon the world; but in our examination we will consider first the 
trouble of the nations during the day of the Lord. This trouble will 
be the natural consequence of the transfer of rulership from the 
Devil, who is the prince of this world, (John 14:30) to "him whose 
right it is"— Christ. (Ezek. 21:27.) And referring to that time, it is 



said, "And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come." (Rev. 
11:18.) 



Unquestionably the kingdoms of this world are loyal to their prince. 
They are mainly controlled by selfish, and frequently by corrupt 
men, who, though unconsciously, have become the representatives 
of the prince of darkness, working his will. But when the rightful 
King takes control, he declares, "I will overthrow the throne of 
kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdom of the 
nations." (Hag. 2:22.) And thus "the kingdoms of this world shall 
become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ." (Rev. 11:15.) 
First they must be brought to submission by chastisement, and then 
we read that all people, nations and languages shall serve him. 
(Daniel 7:14,27.) 

The trouble is graphically described by the Prophet: "That day is a 
day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and 
desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess. ...I will bring distress 
upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have 
sinned against the Lord.... Neither their silver nor their gold shall be 
able to deliver them in the day of the Lord's wrath." (Zeph. 1:15- 
18.) "Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I 
rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, 
that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine 
indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be 
devoured with the fire of my jealousy. For then will I turn to the 
people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the 
Lord, to serve Him with one consent." (Zeph. 3:8,9.) So extreme is 
the trouble here described that the world is figuratively said to be 
burned up by the Lord's anger. Yet the effect is good, for after this 
indignation against and destruction of kingdoms, the people remain, 
and are so affected by the trouble that "they serve the Lord with one 
consent." 

We expect that this distress and trouble will all come about in a 
very natural way. Very many Scriptures seem to teach that the 
kingdoms of the earth will be overthrown by an uprising of the 
people, goaded to desperation from a sense of injustice, and seeking 
relief from oppression. Such an uprising and overturning, 
Socialists, Nihilists and Communists of to-day would gladly bring 
about if they could. Though the Scriptures recognize wrong and 
oppression as existing in the governments of the nations, and 
foretell this to be the means of their overthrow, yet they do not 
authorize God's children to oppose them. They show us that some 
agencies not in themselves good, will be made use of in destroying 
present evil governments, thus accomplishing the Lord's purpose, 
though they will not be aware that they are being so used. "Surely 
the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shalt 
thou restrain." (Psalm 76:10.) 

In harmony with this are the words of the Apostle James (5:1-4, 
Diaglott)- "Come now, ye rich, weep and howl for your miseries 
that are approaching. Your riches have decayed, and your garments 



have become moth-eaten. Your gold and silver have become rusted, 
and the rust of them will be for a testimony against you, and will 
eat your bodies as fire. [The rich will share in the trouble of the 
nations because so closely identified with them]. You have laid up 
treasures for the Last Days. Behold! that hire which you 
fraudulently withheld from those laborers who harvested your 
fields, cries out; and the loud cries of the reapers have entered into 
the ears of the Lord of Armies." 

Rev. 6:15-17 describes the distress of that time, saying, "The kings 
of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief 
captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and every free 
man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; 
and said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from 
the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the 
Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able 
to stand?" The powers of earth will seek to make alliances with one 
another for self-protection, and to hide themselves from the sure- 
coming storm. And individuals will seek to be covered and 
protected by the great mountains (kingdoms) of earth, and to be hid 
in the great ROCKS (protective secret societies). But they shall not 
be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord's anger; for all the 
kingdoms of the world shall be thrown down, and instead of these 
the kingdom of the Lord becomes a great kingdom, and fills the 
whole earth. (Dan. 2:35-45.) 

Malachi (4:1) describes the coming day of trouble, and sees the 
anger of the Lord there displayed-the fire of God's jealousy: 
"Behold the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the 
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be 



*The article in last issue entitled THE MANNER OF THE 
SECOND ADVENT, should have been headed, DISCOURSE NO. 
4. 

R592 : page 7 

stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up." Here the 
wicked are symbolized by stubble, God's wrath by fire, and the 
righteous by calves of the stall (verse 2). 

R593 : page 7 

Peter describes this day of the Lord (2 Peter 3:10), and under the 
symbol of heavens refers to the governments- the higher or ruling 
powers. "But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; 
in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise 
[overthrow of governments, with great confusion] and the elements 
shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are 
therein shall be burned up." The elements of the (heavens) 
governments, as well as of (earth) society in general, will be 
dissolved in the great trouble (fire) of that day. 



The Scriptures also teach that while other nations fall during the 
day of the Lord, the long cast off nation of Israel will gradually 
come into prominence and be established in the land promised to 
their forefathers. They will doubtless go to Palestine, not through 
respect to promises of God of national restoration, but with true 
Jewish perception they will realize before others the danger to 
which property, &c, will be exposed, and choose to be far away 
from the strongholds of communism. Persecution and various other 
circumstances will also serve to drive them thither. 

Yet even there they will not long remain secure, for the Lord shows 
us through the Prophet Ezekiel (chap. 38) that when gathered out of 
all nations and dwelling safely, having silver and gold and cattle 
and goods, many nations shall come up against them to take a spoil 
and a prey; but the Lord shall deliver them with a marked 
deliverance, as in the day of battle in former times. And in this 
deliverance they shall recognize his hand and the Messiah, their 
deliverer. 

Zech. 14:1-4 describes the battle then fought. "Behold the day of 
the Lord cometh, and thy spoils shall be divided in the midst of 
thee. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and 
the city shall be taken and the houses rifled, and half of the city 
shall go forth into captivity." Here God interposes and defends 
them, and here they come to recognize Jesus as the Messiah. "Then 
shall the Lord go forth and fight against those nations as when he 
fought in the day of battle"— as he fought for them in olden times. 
They will recognize the Lord in their miraculous deliverance from 
their enemies. He shall be revealed in flaming fire taking 
vengeance. (2 Thes. 1:8.) 

In Zech. 12:3, God declares that he will deliver them, though all the 
people of the earth be gathered against them. Verse 10 describes 
their recognition of Him whom they have pierced, and their sorrow 
when, in that day, God "pours upon them the spirit of grace and 
supplication." 

THE DA Y OF THE LORD TO THE CHURCH. 

The Church's trial or judgment, which has been going on during 
this age, ends in this day of the Lord. Paul points to this day as the 
time for the consummation of the Church's hope, saying: "He which 
hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus 
Christ." (Phil. 1:6.) He expected to rejoice in the day of Jesus Christ 
that he had not run in vain, neither labored in vain; and he urged the 
Church also to so labor and so run, that they might share in the 
same rejoicing in that day. (Phil. 2:14-18.) And when about to die 
he pointed forward to the day of the Lord as the time when he 
might expect his reward, saying: "I have fought a good fight, I have 
finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up 
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous 
Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all 
them also that love his appearing." 



Again this is called the Day of Redemption, and the saints are said 
to be sealed unto the day of redemption. (Eph. 4:30.) And the Holy 
Spirit of promise which we received after that we believed, is the 
earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased 
possession unto the praise of his glory. (Eph. 1:13,14.) 

What is the purchased possession? It is all that Christ bought with 
his blood; it includes the world of nature- "I will give thee the 
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession." (Psa. 2:8.) 

It includes the world of humanity, who are brought back by the 
Second Adam to all they lost in the first; for "Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man." 

But evidently the purchased possession here referred to is the Bride 
of Christ- "Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he 
might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing." (Eph. 5:27.) This is the special 
possession, which he purchased, which still awaits redemption-for 
"we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to 
wit: the redemption of our body"-the body of which Christ is the 
head. (Rom. 8:23.) 

The end of this dispensation to the Church is a harvest which 
chronologically precedes the world's troubles. This harvest is in the 
day of the Lord-after Christ has come personally a second time. 

The parable of the wheat and tares (Matt. 13) gives us a sketch of 
the Church's history from beginning to end. Jesus and the Apostles 
planted the good seed (truth), which sprang up and brought forth 
wheat. But while men slept the enemy brought in tares, until now 
the Church nominal abounds with tares, and a great separation 
becomes necessary, that the true wheat may be separated from the 
false. And this separating and gathering time is termed a harvest. 

The Lord foresaw and intended that wheat and tares should grow 
together, for he said, "Let both grow together until the harvest." In 
the time of harvest the separating work is to be accomplished. 
When the division is accomplished, the wheat alone will represent 
the kingdom or Church of Christ, while the Church nominal will 
fall and be broken. 

We are led to believe from various Scriptures that this fall of the 
great mass of the Church nominal, will be caused by the spread of 
infidelity, which seems to be described, in Psalm 91, as a great 
pestilence. There will be but one class that will be exempt from its 
evil influence, and that will be those Christians who have made the 
Most High their habitation, and who are acquainted with the Word 
of God. A thousand shall fall at their side, and ten thousand at their 
right hand; but the pestilence shall not come nigh them, because 
they have taken HIS TRUTH, and not human tradition, as their 
shield and buckler. 

This answers the question of our text -"Who shall be able to 
stand?" This is the company, but it is only a little flock, as our Lord 



foretold it would be. These shall be accounted worthy to escape all 
those things coming on the world, and shall STAND in the presence 
of the Son of Man. (Luke 21:36.) "And they shall be mine, saith the 
Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will 
spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. " (Mai. 
3:17.) 

But there is a class mentioned, and I fear they are not few, who, 
while servants, are not faithful servants, waiting for the Lord, but 
who are engaged in revelry, eating and drinking with the world. 
"The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not 
for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him 
asunder and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall 
be weeping and gnashing of the teeth." (Matt. 24:51.) 

These are not hypocrites, but unfaithful servants, who thereby lose 
the reward to which the faithful attain; but through the Lord's mercy 
they may come up out of great tribulation by washing their robes 
(Rev. 7:14); and though not privileged to be the bride of Christ, to 
which high office they were called, they are invited to the marriage 
supper of the Lamb. (Rev. 19:9.) Alas! it would seem that there are 
many such virgins, but not wise— wheat, but not ripe wheat, not 
ready to be garnered. They are living far below their privilege, and 
will suffer great loss. 

Unlike these will be the "little flock" who obey the Master's 
injunction to "watch," and who follow his example of self-sacrifice. 
He did not tell us just when the dawn of the day would come, for he 
wanted to keep us continually on the watch. But when the time 
should come, he shows that such watching ones would know it. 
Referring to the signs of his coming and the end of the age, he said, 
"When ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at the 
doors." Matt. 24:33. 

Paul says, in 1 Thes. 5:1,2, "Of the times and seasons, brethren, ye 
have no need that I write unto you, for yourselves know perfectly 
that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night" —to the 
world, as the next verse shows. The world will know nothing of 
what is coming, and will be taken unawares; and many of the Lord's 
servants having fallen asleep, are not watching as commanded. 
Some are overcharged with the cares of this life, and some are 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world; only a few are watching. 
Will these know? Yes, "Ye brethren are not in darkness, that that 
day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are the children of light, and 
the children of the day; we are not of the night nor of darkness. 
Therefore, let us not sleep as do others; but let us watch and be 
sober." (1 Thes. 5:4-6.) 

We have a steady lamp to guide our feet, a sure word of prophecy 
unto which we do well to take heed as unto a light shining in a dark 
place until the day dawn. Let us keep our lamp trimmed and 
burning, and ourselves awake and watching. Our lamp shows that 
the great day of the Lord has already come, that the harvest work is 



progressing under the direction of the Lord of the harvest, now 
present. The faithful bride is even now making herself ready, and 
soon will enter into the joys of her Lord. 



R594 : page 7 

DECLINE OF FAITH. 

The invisible, the supernatural, the divine, seem to be unloosing 
themselves from our grasp, dissolving into unrealities and 
uncertainties, which we are fain to call mysteries in order to 
persuade ourselves that we have not quite lost all, or at least that we 
have got something in their place! Invisible personalities lose all 
reality, and Him who is infinitely personal, the King eternal, 
immortal, and invisible, we often find the most difficult of all to 
realize. 

Faith thus ceases to be faith, even when retaining the name; for 
faith is the recognition of truth as certainty, not as probability. It is 
no longer the substance of things hoped for, or the evidence of 
things not seen. At the best it is but a struggle to believe, a struggle 
against some adverse power that is unconsciously drawing us 
backward. With many it seems rather a desire not to believe, a 
secret preference for doubt, as nobler and more independent than 
faith. We grope, and pray, and strive, and weep, but the reality 
comes not; nay it seems to recede farther from us every day. 

The age tosses, like a fevered man upon his sick-bed, seeking rest 
but finding none. It tries variety, as men in quest of health try 
change of air. It rejects finality or completeness, as associated with 
mental weakness, boasts are into the region of uncertainty, not of 
certainty; into the domain of hypothesis, not of induction and 
demonstration. They vanish successively in vapor, and leave only 
pestilence behind them. The guesses at truth, numerous as they are, 
often plausible, sometimes beautiful, are the results more of 
fermentation than of life or growth. 

Along with the believing heart the desire for its return has gone out 
with many, and the materials for faith are silently disappearing. 
Faith itself is regarded rather as a prison-house than a palace— a 
restraint upon thought, not an instrument for its development- 
linked with bondage, not with liberty. We see, and hear, and touch, 
and taste, but do we believe. We deal in make-believes, and fill up 
the hollowness thus created with pleasant dreams, for thorough 
believing would be limitation and finality, unworthy of intelligent 
humanity— subjection to a superhuman will and a mind outside of 
our own. The recognition of anything as true beyond the circle of 
our senses would land us in the supernatural; and the supernatural is 
fast becoming to multitudes but a wondrous day-dream— a fable of 
the mystic ages, like Homer's Olympus, or Virgil's Elysium. 



The believing faculty of the age seems to be undergoing a change, 
or as our modern thinkers would say, "undergoing repairs." Its 
sphere is considered to have been too wide on some sides, and too 
narrow on others. Is it safe to credit what lies beyond the sweep of 
scientific vision? is the question that has broken in upon us with 
much earnestness. To deliver oppressed humanity from the 
trammels with which the faith of centuries has fettered it, is 
reckoned the chief mission of modern culture. This deliverance is to 
be achieved by first landing us in doubt, that out of that or unbelief 
a truer, nobler faith may grow. The Christendom of the past has 
been, it is supposed the Christendom of credulity; the Christendom 
of faith is now dawning. The credulity of the middle ages accepted 
miracles in thousands without evidence. Will the new faith of the 
nineteenth or twentieth century signalize itself by rejecting 
miracles, though certified by all the proof that the most trusted 
history has to rest upon? The founder of the new Christianity, the 
introducers of the Christ that is to be, think the supernatural a defect 
or blot upon the Bible. The defenders of the old Christianity, the 
believers in the Christ that is, cannot conceive of a Bible without 
the supernatural, and would deem the absence of the supernatural 
from any professed revelation a sufficient proof that it could not 
have come from God.— H. Bonar. 



R594 : page 7 

INFIDELS NOT MARTYRS. 

Modern infidelity waxes eloquent over the Romish and sectarian 
persecutions. We have no objections to this when the transactions 
are properly located, and duly credited where they belong. But there 
is a wholesale way of throwing all the iniquity in one direction, and 
quietly appropriating all the honors of martyrdom, which is not 
only unjust, but absolutely untruthful. 

How quietly, for instance, the French revolution with its 
unparalleled horrors is slipped over by infidel orators and writers. 
The evident reason for this is that it was solely the work of 
infidelity. The infidel legislature of France declared, "There is no 
God but reason. " They wrote upon the church-yard gates, "Death is 
an eternal sleep," and proclaimed liberty of conscience to all; but, 
inside of forty-eight hours, with genuine infidel consistency, they 
began to lead to the rack or the guillotine every man or woman who 
dared to assert that liberty. 

"Infidelity is liberty;" yes, liberty to destroy, liberty to defame, 
liberty to crush all true religion; and when it holds the reins of 
power here as it held them in France, the purest blood of the nation 
will run through our streets as it ran through the streets of Paris in 
1792 and 1794. History declares that 2,730 murders were 
committed in the name and for the sake of infidelity, during the 
space of sixteen months. 



Nero was an infidel, and we commend the history of his reign to the 
attention of every man and woman. Tacitus tells us that Nero 
inflicted the most exquisite torture upon the Christians. He says 
they "died in torments, and their torments were imbittered by insult. 
Some were nailed upon crosses, others were sewed up in the skins 
of wild animals and exposed to the fury of dogs, others again were 
smeared over with combustible material and used as torches to 
illuminate the darkness of night." Says Gibbon, "The most skeptical 
criticism is obliged to respect the truth of this most extraordinary 
fact, and the integrity of this celebrated passage from Tacitus." 

Domitian and Caligula were infidels, and every historian is aware 
of the fact that panoramic views of their reigns are 

R594 : page 8 

horrible companion pieces to the reign of Nero. Says Prof. Tyndall, 
"The sufferings of the early Christians and the extraordinary 
exaltation of mind which enabled them to triumph over the 
diabolical tortures to which they were subjected, must have left 
traces not easily effaced." 

And yet a prominent skeptic declares in the face of an intelligent 
public, "You have burned us at the stake, roasted us upon slow 
fires, torn our flesh with irons; you have covered us with chains, 
you have filled the world with fear, you have taken our wives and 
children from our arms," etc. 

We ask in the name of simple truth and common justice. Who is it 
that have suffered these things? The answer comes from every page 
of history, that it is the followers of Christ who have clung to him 
through the fires of persecution and floods of misfortune. They 
were believers in the Bible who went to the stake, else why were 
Bibles burned with them in the flames? Men do not go to the rack, 
the stake, or the guillotine rather than renounce their faith when 
they have no faith to renounce. Men and women do not choose to 
be placed in red hot iron chains, rather than to deny a Lord on 
whom they have never believed. Men do not submit to have their 
tongues cut out, to be thrown to wild beasts, or to perish in slow 
fires, in preference to recanting from a position which they have 
never assumed. 

Celsus was not crucified. Porphyry was not banished. Julian did not 
suffer, save at the hands of his own conscience. Voltaire was not 
thrown into a caldron of boiling oil. Paine was not burned at the 
stake, and modern skeptics are not placed in stocks or whipped in 
the streets. 

It was men, women, yes, and children, who clung to the written 
word, when fire and flame and irons and lash were the reward for 
their fidelity. They have been driven to mountains and caverns, to 
wander in sheep skins and goat skins, they of whom the world is 
not worthy. 



The same hands burned Christians that burned Bibles. They sought 
to crush the book and its believers by the same means. But the old 
book lives on unmindful of the waves that beat against the unfailing 
foundations. 

It is still the "pillar of cloud" by day, and the "pillar of fire" in the 
nighttime of persecution, and thus it will ever be until the weary 
feet of God's little ones find rest upon the evergreen shores of 
eternal life. -Mrs. H. V. Reed. 



R594 : page 8 

BISMARCK has taken many a long step toward practical 
socialism; France has tried more than one fearful experience to save 
herself from the dangers of communism; American cities are 
trembling in the presence of a growling imperative proletaire. We 
may now close our eyes and ears against the claim of the laboring 
man, but we cannot do so long. Laborers may be unreasonable, may 
"strike" and fail as signally as the telegraphers did a few weeks ago, 
nevertheless they will yet force capital or State to hear them and to 
hear very thoughtfully, too. The property of the country is passing 
increasingly into the hands of the few; the voting power is in 
control of the many. The time will probably yet come when either 
the State or the parties themselves will determine that labor shall 
have a larger share of business profits than it now receives, or the 
laborers will take it by force! 

This is one of the initial problems of the present; it will be the 
dangerous problem of the future, unless we begin to study it and to 
solve it at once. The pledge given in the Republican platform to 
labor that "the American workingmen shall have a fair day's wages 
for a fair day's work" is as essential as any other in that platform, 
and it will be as faithfully kept. It is a point of honor and of safety 
on which there will soon be but a single voice and purpose among 
the American people. We are now in the period of discussion, we 
shall soon be in the midst of experiment and of action.— Sel. 



R595 : page 8 

MY PRAYER. 

Being perplexed, I say, 
Lord, make it right! 
Night is as day to Thee, 
Darkness is light. 

I am afraid to touch 

Things that involve so much. 

My trembling hand may shake, 



My unskilled hand may break; 
Thine can make no mistake. 



Being in doubt, I say, 
Lord, make it plain! 
Which is the true, safe way, 
Which would be vain? 

I am not wise to know, 
Nor sure of foot to go; 
My blind eyes cannot see 
What is so clear to Thee— 
Lord, make it clear to me. 

—Selected. 



R595 : page 8 

THE UNION OF PROTESTANTS AND 
CATHOLICS. 

In the February number of the Century magazine, just published, 
there is a suggestive article in the editorial department discussing 
the possibilities and probabilities "of a reunion in the future 
between the Roman Catholic and Protestant bodies." 

The discussion of that subject in such a place is peculiarly 
significant, because the Century, though a secular periodical, has 
always been conducted with special reference to meeting the tastes 
and steering clear of the prejudices of the average Protestant public. 
Its original editor, Dr. Holland, was a strict Calvinist, and its chief 
owner and manager, Mr. Roswell Smith, is a prominent and 
pronounced Presbyterian. 

The Century takes for its text the celebration of the four hundredth 
anniversary of Luther's birth, which, it says, brought to view the 
fact that "the religious reformation of the last four centuries has not 
been confined to the churches of the Reformers. A constant 
reformation in discipline, if not in doctrine," it thinks, "has been 
going on in the Church assailed by Luther." 

So premising, this Protestant exponent shows that bonds of 
sympathy are now joining Catholics and Protestants to a degree 
which twenty-five years ago could not have been anticipated. It 
sees especially the growth of a feeling that these two great bodies of 
Christians need to be united to resist the onset of modern infidelity. 

"As the conflict with Materialism and Agnosticism has been 
waxing hotter and hotter," to use the words of the Century, "it must 
have become evident to intelligent Protestants that they have in the 
Roman Catholic theologians a strong body of allies, with whom 
they ought to maintain friendly relations. It is not the Papacy, nor 
Calvinism, nor Trinitarianism, nor any other secondary Christian 



dogma, that is now on its trial," it says further, "but whether there is 
any such thing as religion-whether there is a conscious God and a 
life beyond the grave, and a free will, and a moral law." 

The Century also renders just tribute to the exalted ethical standards 
of the Roman Church, and also to its courage and consistency in 
maintaining them against all efforts at compromise. It 
acknowledges, for instance, that "the Roman Catholic doctrine and 
practice regarding divorce are much closer to the law of the New 
Testament than those of the Protestant Churches have been." It 
speaks also of the "earnest effort at the present time to bring the 
practice of the Protestant Churches a little nearer to the Roman 
Catholic standard." 

All this is in line with what we have repeatedly said. It becomes 
more and more evident every day that the civilized world is 
dividing into two classes, the believers and the unbelievers, the 
Christians and the Agnostics. The separation between them is not 
like that between Catholics and Protestants, which is caused by 
difference of dogma and ecclesiastical practice, while both agree on 
fundamental points of theology. It is total; for modern unbelief does 
not attack portions of the faith only, but rejects the whole, 
abandoning faith altogether. In its view, Christianity has no more 
supernatural basis than the mythologies which it has succeeded. 

The ultimate union of all the forces of faith and theology to meet 
such an enemy, steadily increasing in numbers and audacity, seems 
therefore to be inevitable. Protestantism needs an alliance with 
Roman Catholicism to enable it to stand up against the current of 
modern skeptical thought. It requires the aid of the more steadfast 
and uncompromising body the more because many of its leading 
exponents and some of its chiefs who have hitherto been most 
trusted, are opening the gates of the fortress of faith to the hosts of 
infidelity. Even if they are not doing that, they are parleying with 
them, when there can only be war to the knife between the two. 

There is no possible compromise between theology and modern 
infidelity. The Church must understand that, at the beginning. One 
or the other must triumph, and its victory will mean the utter 
destruction of the conquered. While the great contest is going on, 
intestine divisions must weaken the arm of faith, and we are not 
surprised that intelligent Protestants desire to heal them.-N.Y. Sun. 



The above we clip from The Catholic, of this city. It goes to 
substantiate the teachings of the TOWER that the difference 
between the various daughters and the "mother" is more in forms, 
ceremonies and interests rather than in real differences of faith. The 
daughters have adhered so closely to the general plans, precepts and 
methods of the "mother" in their housekeeping that you can readily 
recognize her "marks" throughout. (Rev. 13:16.) 



As for reform, while there has been some moral reform and 
advancement in the nominal Church, as well as in the world, yet so 
far as doctrinal reform goes, there has been practically none. The 
creeds of the daughters, as well as of the mother, are cast-iron— they 
cannot bend: they must break, or else those held by them continue 
in bondage to the views of the sixteenth century. Under such 
circumstances a doctrinal reformation is impossible, both to 
Protestants and Roman Catholics. That which is absolutely true and 
perfect cannot be reformed; and is not every creed of every sect 
held up as being the truth in full? If not, why make it a test of 
fellowship at all? Why subscribe to and bind yourself to believe and 
sustain that which does not claim to be the truth? 

It is for this reason that we (and God's Word also) are opposed to 
formulated creeds. They fetter and bind the children of God, 
preventing growth "in grace and knowledge," and thereby hinder 
the reformation of doctrine, which should continue until we all 
come to a full appreciation of the revelation of God to man. Thus 
alone can we walk in the path of "the just," which "shineth more 
and more unto the PERFECT DAY." 

On the contrary, as heretofore shown, the doctrines taught by 
Luther on many subjects were far in advance of those held by the 
body of Christians calling themselves by his name. Unknown to the 
majority of Lutherans, several points of Luther's original PROTEST 
nailed to the church door of Wittemburg are intentionally omitted 
by the "authorities" in that sect from the articles now handed them 
as the original teachings of the HEAD of their Church. 

Doctrinally and practically, Protestantism has been drawing closer 
and closer every year to the parent system. They have made "an 
image" (Rev. 13:14) which so closely resembles the original that 
few points of difference are discernable, either by themselves or by 
the world. But what a wide difference exists between both these 
systems and the doctrines and practices of the Apostles' day! 



R595 : page 8 

MINISTERIAL AUTHORITY OF TO-DAY. 

We doubt whether any change in the training of clergymen will 
enable them to take that position of authority among men which 
would have been accorded to them unsought fifty years ago. People 
have learned in the meantime to prove all things and all men; to 
look through all fictitious claims; to go below costumes and office 
and rank, to the human soul underneath. They will not learn the 
lesson. The man in the pulpit will be to them always, as now, a 
fellow-sinner with the man in the pew. Presumably the clergyman 
is struggling to find the right road upward. If he has found it he is 
accepted as a guide. If he has solved any problem of the day his 
words will be listened to with respect and gratitude. But it will be 



because he has solved the problem, not because he stands in the 
pulpit. Authority has largely left the office, but it has descended 
with double force upon the man.-Exchange. 



R601 : page 8 

CLARKE says in his comment on 1 Cor. 15: "One remark I 
cannot help making; the doctrine of the resurrection appears to have 
been thought of much more consequence among the primitive 
Christians than it is now!" How is this? The apostles were 
continually insisting on it, and exciting the followers of God to 
diligence, obedience, and cheerfulness through it. And their 
successors in the present day seldom mention it! So the apostles 
preached, and so primitive Christians believed; so we preach, and 
so our hearers believe. There is not a doctrine in the gospel on 
which more stress is laid; and there is not a doctrine in the present 
system of preaching which is treated with more neglect.-Sel. 



page 8 

SEND the names of any to whom you think samples of the 
TOWER would be a blessing; or we will send you samples for your 
neighbors- Free. Do not part with your own papers, you will need 
them for reference. 



R596 : page 1 

VOL. V. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1884. 
NO. 8. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 
101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 



we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



R596 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The "lenten season" as observed especially by the Roman Catholic 
and the Episcopal Churches, is upon us, and despite the extravagant 
excesses practiced by these ceremonious friends, the season calls 
before the memory of all thoughtful saints, pictures of the last days 
of Jesus. One thing is certain, the remembrance of that time and of 
our Lord's sufferings and death are not calculated to overthrow faith 
in the ransom, nor to lead men to deny that the Lord bought them. 

It was the custom of the early Church to celebrate the Lord's Supper 
and death on the anniversary of the same, every year, and the 
observance yet of "Good Friday," by some, is what yet lingers of 
the original custom of the Church. 

We can but recognize the appropriateness of celebrating any event 
on its anniversary, and for several years past we have enjoyed the 
privilege of thus commemorating the antitypical Passover Sacrifice- 
-the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world. 

The appropriateness of the time has always heightened the interest 
and rendered it more impressively, solemn and real. As we partake 
of the emblems of his shed blood and broken body, it impresses 
upon us the words and scenes of the first Supper, and of the 
sacrifice for sins which it illustrated, and gives us to realize more 
fully the value of the "precious blood" that cleanseth from all sin. 

The Lord's Supper is a reminder of his death, as the Passover was a 
type of it. Jesus fulfilled the latter and instituted the former in the 
same night in which he was betrayed, and told his disciples that 
hence forth they should DO THIS in remembrance of him— not now 
in remembrance of the typical Lamb's death and its results, but in 
remembrance of ME— the true Lamb of God whose sacrifice 
procures still a greater passover and deliverence for the Church of 
the first-born. 

We purpose commemorating the Lord's Supper on its anniversary 
this year also; and suggest to the saints everywhere observance of 
the Master's words— "THIS DO in remembrance of me" (Luke 
22: 12). We can assure you it will be a blessed season of 
communion to all the household of faith, and especially to those 



who are of the "first born" class. Around that hour the memories of 
the year will cluster while the heart sings: 

"Sweet the moments rich in blessing 
Which before the cross I spend, 
Life and health and peace possessing 
From the sinners dying Friend." 

The Jewish "Feast of Passover" commenced on the fifteenth day of 
their month Nisan (answering this year to our April 9th) and lasted 
seven days. This we do not commemorate, but the acts of a day 
preceding it— the killing of the lamb on the 14th of Nisan, which 
beginning at six o'clock Tuesday evening April 8th, will end with 
six o'clock Wednesday evening April 9th, 1884. 

The church at Pittsburgh will meet at 7:30 P.M. Tuesday evening in 
the upper room of No. 101 Federal Street, Allegheny City, and 
break the bread and drink the fruit of the vine in remembrance of 
our Lord and Redeemer, and go forth remembering Gethsemane, 
and Pilate's court, and Herod's soldiers and Calvary, where the 
sacrifice was "FINISHED" at three o'clock P.M. following (April 
9th) over eighteen hundred years ago. 

For a more detailed account of our view of this matter we refer you 
to the TOWER of April last year. We trust to hear of the enjoyment 
of this season by the ones and twos and tens scattered everywhere, 
for "even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us" (1 Cor. 5:7). 



R596 : page 1 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Pittsburgh, Texas, March 3, 1884. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am always thirsting for the literature of 
the TOWER before it comes to me every month. Having been 
excluded from the nominal Church about eight months ago for 
endorsing the doctrines as advocated by you, my comfort is in 
reading the Bible with the helps published by yourself. 

As a young minister of the Baptist Church, my preaching was very 
acceptable until I saw the glorious doctrine of restoration, and 
preached it, when I was excluded from the Church which I was 
serving. I pray earnestly, "Thy kingdom come." May God bless you 
(as part of the new mouth-piece, the old being spewed out) in your 
effort to spread the glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all 
people. I get a very clear view of the glorious teachings of the 
shadowy service, believing its glories. "The Tabernacle" tract is 
unsurpassed as an explanation of the Bible on that subject. Still I 
have doubts of my being among the priesthood— the way is so 
exceedingly narrow. Yet I often rejoice when my doubts 
temporarily remove with joy inexpressible and full of glory. I think 



I love my Bible better since the light of the "due time" begins to 
shine on its sacred pages, than ever before. 

My humble prayer and burning desire is that I may be among that 
immortal band. I praise the name of God for the possibility of such. 

Yours in brotherly love, . 

Chicago, Ills. 

DEAR FRIENDS:— Having picked up one of your little books on 
the street, called "Food for Thinking Christians," and "Why Evil 
was Permitted," I became deeply interested in it. It seems very good 
for thinking sinners as well as Christians. I am a reformed man 
now, having been down in the gutter many a time through 
intoxicating drink, though I have not tasted any now for over a year, 
may God help me to keep from it. Having just read the little book, I 
see that you will send others, and by so doing you will oblige me. I 
would like to lead a better life, and become a Christian. I cannot see 
fully into the reality of religion, but may the Lord open my heart 
and eyes to the great love he has for them that fear him. I will try to 
make good use of anything you send. 

Brooklyn, N.Y. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I thank you for sending me the 
TOWER. It has given me much light and comfort. I presume my 
time for reading will soon close, as I have entered my eighty-fifth 
year; but if you will be kind enough still to send it, I shall be much 
pleased, and will pray for God's blessing to attend you in your 
labors of love. 

I would gladly circulate tracts or leaflets that you may have on hand 
if sent, as I have not much to do at present, and would like to work 
a little in the Lord's vineyard while here, by circulating that light 
which is so freely offered. If you have any tracts on hand, I should 
like much to get a few. I have lent and given away all that I had to 
parties that will make good use of them, and there are others that I 
should like to have read them. I always use caution "not to cast 
pearls before swine" to trample on or destroy. 

I am, dear sir, yours truly, in the bonds of Christian love, 
page 1 

Duncans ville, Pa. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I feel very thankful to God for the light of the 
truth I received from the TOWER and FOOD you sent me. I bless 
God I can rejoice in the truth, but we had a struggle to go through. I 
had been a Methodist for forty years, and my wife and daughter 



members of the Baptist Church. We have withdrawn our names 
from them, and are now forming a little true church in our own 
family. The Baptist minister came to see us, and denounced it as all 
wrong. I gave him my "Food" to look at. He said he wanted to get 
some points out of it. Some of my Methodist friends will not speak 
to me since I withdrew. I do thank God for the comfort I feel. I 
have been for many years trying to live wholly to glorify God, but I 
can now feel an assurance I never knew before. My companion is 
happy in the truth. I shall from henceforth work to bring other 
bound ones out into the large pastures. Pray for us, and may God 
bless you, and make you the means of setting many free. 

London, England. 

DEAR SIR:-I am rather late in ordering the TOWER for another 
year. The reason is, we have had sickness and death in the house, 
and I have been almost dead myself. You may reckon that I am 
dead, when you cease to hear from me once a year. But I hope some 
of my friends would let you know in that case for I should wish to 
thank you at the last minute for all the light and joy and comfort I 
have received through you, and those who have helped you. 

If I gave up the "Tower" views I should also let you know that and 
the reason why, but I am still so interested in it that I always pray 
for its safe arrival, and not one has missed in two years, and each 
one has brought some fresh light. Since I prayed at all, I have 
always prayed that I might understand the Scriptures, and now the 
windows of heaven are opened and there is such a blessing being 
poured out that I have not room to receive it. He said "prove me 
now herewith," and I say it is actually a fact. 

I am able to report a little progress for the last twelve months. 

Our meeting is the most liberal that I know of; brethren who are 
expelled other meetings for change of belief find refuge amongst 
us. 

I have gained the attention of two young men, who live near me, 
and they visit me two or three evenings a week, to enquire "what is 
truth?" One comes oftener than the other and makes more progress. 
He goes and spreads the good news as a steward of the manifold 
grace of God. These two enclose subscriptions with me for the 
TOWER. 

Some time ago I heard read in my presence in a most solemn 
manner 2d Pet. 2:1, in condemnation of "Food for thinking 
Christians." If I had not seen the TOWER explanation of the 
"image of the beast" I should have been frightened out of my wits. 

Your publications have removed more difficulties from my mind 
than any thing else has done. I never could understand why some 
Christians had no appetite for spiritual things, and didn't want to 
know any more truth than that Jesus died for sinners, and why to 



deny themselves for the truth sake, or love a Christian because he 
was a Christian, seemed to be out of the question. I thought if we all 
fare alike in the end, we are "fools for Christ's sake" indeed, and got 
nothing for it. But now it is as clear as daylight. 

Your brother in Christ, . 



Cuba, Kansas. 



DEAR FRIENDS :~I hope to find in some of the papers that you 
send, when our Passover anniversary will occur this year. I expect 
to keep it all by myself. The wine I can buy, and I can make 
unleavened bread myself. 

I am very lonesome sometimes when I cannot find any one to 
converse with me about the glorious news proclaimed in the Bible 
and made plain in ZION'S WATCH TOWER through the Holy 
Spirit. Pray for me, that I may be ready when the Lord gathers his 
jewels. Sometimes a fear fills my heart lest I might be left, but I 
love the Lord, and he will not forget me. 

Franklin, Ind. 

MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-We have taken the WATCH 
TOWER during the past year, and I am glad to tell you that it has 
been to us meat in due season. I value it more, very much more, 
than all the preaching and reading I get from any other source. No 
paper or book is read by me so carefully and repeatedly as it is. 
Nothing I read seems to satisfy like it and the "Diaglott." I am 
compelled to believe its teachings in the main, although I cannot 
grasp fully all it contains. How often do we (myself and wife) wish 
we could hear such things from the pulpit! I often read from the 
TOWER or DAY DAWN, and hunt up the references, instead of 
going to church, and I am sure we are blessed in so doing. 

How easy it is, to see the true condition 

page 2 

of the Church with the light as it now shines ! I am trying to 
understand what it is to be a truly consecrated Christian. I earnestly 
desire to belong to the body of my blessed Lord. I am watching and 
hoping; but, oh! the promises are so great! the reward so glorious! I 
fear I can never reach it, so unworthy and so unfaithful have I been 
all these years. The battles of life have been hard to fight, many of 
them. But if my beloved Master will give me the very lowest place 
in his kingdom, the reward will be exceedingly great and glorious. I 
pray to be kept humbly watching and waiting for the time when he 
shall call me. 

I often see the answers to questions I would ask, having been asked 
by others. Please make me a subscriber for another year. I would 
not be without the paper for ten times its cost. Enclosed please find 
$5 to help to spread the glad tidings. 

Yours in Christ, watching and waiting, 

Mt. Lookout, Va. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have been reading the WATCH 
TOWER about one year. I believed some of its doctrines before I 



read, and I have adopted some since; but it advocates some that I 
am not fully prepared to accept. 

I am a Baptist preacher, and live in a Baptist community. I have 
been circulating specimen copies of the TOWER and "Food" 
among thinking Christians, with a request to take the Bible for the 
standard of truth. Many have done so— two are Baptist preachers— 
and they are all astonished at the new revelations of the Bible. With 
this class I have no trouble; they are sincere Bible students. But 
there is another class among us who are so certain that they are 
right, and that these teachings are wrong, that they will not examine 
the Bible. This class is in the majority here, and is troublesome. I 
am alone, or have been almost alone, for one or two years past, but 
the Lord has helped me very recently by opening the understanding 
of a few of my brethren. I was once blinded with denominational 
prejudices, but I think I am clear of that now. I am determined to 
seek for the truth, and follow it whithersoever it leads me. 

Will you please continue to send the WATCH TOWER to me, or 
anything else that you may think proper? May the Lord bless you 
and guide you in your work. 

Fraternally yours, . 



R596 : page 2 

"THE UNION OF PROTESTANTS AND 
CATHOLICS." 

We quote from The Catholic of this city, its reply to the editorial 
under the above caption in the Century Magazine which we noticed 
in our columns last month. Truly the gathering storm is bringing to 
the Nominal Church fearful apprehensions of danger and utter 
wreck. The loud boastings of both these hoary headed and decaying 
systems of error, are only the efforts of each to conceal their unrest 
and to guard against what the fearful forbodings of some term "a 
religious panic." 



"The Catholic" says: 

"Protestantism,— which was and is, a revolt against the divinely 
established authority of the Catholic Church, is seriously alarmed 
by the revolt of one of its own very legitimate children — 
Materialism, Agnosticism, Infidelity, or whatever else the thing 
may be known by— against itself. Having sown the wind it is at last 
reaping the whirlwind. Thoughtful minds are beginning to see and 
recognize the dimensions of the coming storm, and are anxious to 
save themselves from its strength and fury, by an alliance offensive 
and defensive, with the Catholic Church. In the February number of 
the Century Magazine, there is a very suggestive article in the 
editorial department, discussing the possibilities and probabilities of 



"a reunion in the future between the Roman Catholic and Protestant 
bodies. There is a peculiar significance in the discussion of such a 
subject in a periodical, which though secular in tone, yet has for its 
original editor, Dr. Holland, a strict Calvinist; and its present chief 
owner and manager, Mr. Roswell Smith, we understand, is a 
prominent and pronounced Presbyterian. 

We can forgive the "Century" writer, because of his earnestness and 
honesty 

R597 : page 2 

of purpose, which can be traced from the beginning to the end of 
the article, the many serious errors into which his ignorance of 
Catholic teaching and practice, has doubtless led him. 

The four hundredth anniversary of Luther's birth, and the 
discussions that its celebration called forth, supply the writer with a 
text. He says that the Lutheran celebration brought to view the fact 
that "the religious reformation of the last four centuries has not 
been confined to the Church of the reformers. A constant 
reformation in discipline, if not in doctrine," he thinks, "has been 
going on in the Church assailed by the German ex-monk." We need 
hardly remind our readers of the two very grave errors in this 
passage. There can be no reform of doctrine in the Catholic Church. 
Catholic faith is unchangeable, whilst a disciplinary reform is 
always in order, not only during the last four centuries, but 
constantly, from the very beginning. 

But we are more interested, if possible, in the admissions which the 
writer makes, and the present tendencies of Protestantism that he 
notes, than in dealing with the well-meaning mistakes he falls into 
on the Catholic side of the question. This Protestant exponent 
shows that the bonds of sympathy are now joining Catholics and 
Protestants to a degree, which twenty-five years ago, could not have 
been anticipated. He sees the growth of a feeling that these two 
bodies of Christians need to be united to resist the encroachments 
of modern infidelity. Protestantism, twenty-five years ago, was 
boastful and disdainful of the Catholic Church, to-day it is 
powerless and helpless, when its own children— modern infidels- 
are using against itself the very weapons which itself has been 
using for the last four centuries against the Catholic Church. This 
makes all the difference in the world, and our Protestant friends are 
desirous, quite naturally so, of calling to their assistance the aid, 
sorely needed, of their Catholic neighbors. Hear the language of the 
"Century" editor: "As the conflict with Materialism and 
Agnosticism has been waxing hotter and hotter, it must have 
become evident to intelligent Protestants that they have in the 
Roman Catholic theologians a strong body of theologians with 
whom they ought to maintain friendly relations. It is not 
Protestantism, nor the Papacy, nor Calvinism, nor Trinitarianism, 
nor any other secondary Christian dogma, that is now on trial," 
proclaims the writer further on, but "whether there is such thing as 



religion— whether there is a conscious God and a life beyond the 
grave, and a free will, and a moral law." For the last four centuries, 
Catholic theologians and writers have been in vain telling 
Protestants that their principles would land them exactly here. The 
early so-called reformers denied free will, and by their doctrine of 
justification by faith alone, practically discarded a moral law. 

The "Century" readily acknowledges and pays a just tribute to the 
exalted ethical standards of the Catholic Church, and to its courage 
and consistency in maintaining them against all efforts of 
compromise.— For instance, it openly lays down that "the Roman 
Catholic doctrine and practice respecting divorce are much closer to 
the law of the New Testament than those of the Protestant Churches 
have been." It also speaks of an "earnest effort, at the present time 
to bring the practice of the Protestant Churches a little nearer to the 
Catholic standard." Luther and Henry of England made short work 
of the New Testament law regulating the marriage contract. And 
whilst leading Protestant ministers openly countenance and 
recognize the looseness, not to say, shamelessness, of modern 
divorce law and practice, there is little reason to hope that the 
Protestant Churches will be brought any nearer to the Catholic 
standard. 

Whilst we fully recognize the kind disposition and earnestness of 
the writer, who is, doubtless, alarmed by what he, in common with 
many others, is daily witnessing in Protestantism and its tendencies, 
it is simply folly to think of any feasible plan of union between 
Catholics and Protestants, such as this well-meaning writer would 
propose. The only union that can be effected, is for our Protestant 
friends who are desirous to escape from being submerged by the 
deluge of modern infidelity, to seek safety in the divinely fashioned 
ark— the Catholic Church. Against this stately, wonderfully, 
supernaturally constructed vessel, the winds and the waves, and the 
fierce storms of nineteen eventful centuries have beaten in vain, 
because of the abiding presence of Him therein, "whom the winds 
and the sea obey." 



R597 : page 2 

ASSEMBLING TOGETHER. 

Paul says, "Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and 
to good works: not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, 
as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much 
the more, as ye see the day approaching." Heb. 10:24,25. 

The necessity for assembling together for mutual edification, 
encouragement and strengthening, has been very generally 
acknowledged among Christians, yet we doubt if this most 
desirable end is very frequently attained, because we think, in most 
cases, God is not permitted to speak among them, or if so, he is 



limited. The assemblings together most frequently take the form of 
prayer and experience meetings, unless there is one of the number 
who is able to preach, and then the tendency is to depend upon that 
one to a greater extent than is profitable. We think that in meetings 
of Christians, much time should be given to the study of the 
Scriptures. 

The writer attended one of these experience meetings among those 
professing the higher life, where God was almost shut out, and 
poor, weak humanity, ignorant of its weakness as it always is, had 
abundant opportunity to boast itself. At the beginning of the 
meeting, one text of Scripture was read, the context of which all 
were ignorant of, and consequently its true application could not be 
understood. The dear old book was closed and reverently laid aside, 
and a prayer was offered, after which, one after another told how he 
or she felt and acted. One told how before rising in the morning she 
received her morsel of food (a single text of Scripture) on which 
she fed all day. How many do so-taking a text that happens to be 
stored in memory, often interpreting it out of all harmony with the 
context, because they fail to examine it closely, taking a little 
crumb of comfort when the Lord has spread his bountiful table and 
invited them to feast at it. 

Over an hour passed, and the human spirit had magnified itself 
greatly, while the Holy Spirit (Godlike mind) of the "new creatures" 
(for such we believe they were), was almost quenched. A brother 
seemed to perceive that something was wrong, and said, "What 
these meetings want is more prayer," and then proceeded to pray 
for everything he could think of, ignorant of the fact that he asked 
for many things in direct opposition to God's expressed will. And 
so the meeting closed without attaining the object for which they 
met, because God was shut out. 

Again it is the aim of some in their undue desire for harmony, to 
avoid the investigation of any subject which might provoke 
controversy. This, we think, is manifestly wrong. Shall we sell the 
truth to purchase harmony? and are we so puffed up as to be 
offended if God's word should overthrow our former convictions? 
Or shall we limit God to five or ten minutes, and take the remainder 
of two hours to listen to each others experiences, which in nine 
cases out of ten would be better untold? Why not open the doors 
wide, and let the blessed Master come in and lead our meetings? 

It matters not whether there is any one learned or talented among 
you. Let each one bring his own Bible, paper and pencil, and avail 
yourselves of as many helps in the way of a Concordance, Em. 
Diaglott, old and new versions of the New Testament, etc., as 
possible. Choose your subject; ask for the Spirit's guidance in the 
understanding of it; then read, think, compare scripture with 
scripture, and you will assuredly be guided into truth. "And the 
truth shall make you free"— free from error, superstition, and the 
corruption of our perverse nature, and the Holy Spirit (mind of God 



and Christ) if entertained will liberate you from formality as well as 
from self-exaltation. 

Our prayers need not be long or vain repetitions of the same thing, 
since we are not heard for our much speaking. In few and simple 
words we can make known our wants as far as we can estimate 
them; but God has so much more to tell us than we have to tell him. 
Let him speak much and long and often through his Word. 
"Sanctify them through thy truth," thy word is truth, was Jesus' 
prayer; and his admonition, "Search the Scriptures, for these are 
they that testify of me." (John 17:17, and 5:39.) So will we learn to 
delight ourselves in God's Law; it will be our meditation by night 
and by day. (Ps. 1 19:97.) So, also, will he work in us to will and to 
do of his good pleasure. (Phil. 2:13.) 

R. W. 



R598 : page 3 

THE DAY IS AT HAND. 

Poor, fainting spirit, still hold on thy way— 
The dawn is near! 

True, thou art weary; but yon brighter ray 

Becomes more clear. 

Bear up a little longer; wait for rest: 

Yield not to slumber, though with toil oppressed. 

The night of life is mournful, but look on— 
The dawn is near! 

Soon will earth's shadowy scenes and forms be gone; 
Yield not to fear! 

The mountain's summit will, ere long, be gained, 
And the bright world of joy and peace attained. 

Joyful through hope," thy motto still must be— 
The dawn is near! 

What glories will that dawn unfold to thee! 
Be of good cheer! 

Gird up thy loins; bind sandals on thy feet: 
The way is dark and long; the end is sweet. 



-Selected. 



R598 : page 3 



WHEN WILL CHRIST COME? 

(DISCOURSE NO. VI.) 

In our last two discourses we think #e prove scripturally that our 
Lords second coming will be of such a character that at first it will 
not be recognized by the world. They will eat, drink, build, marry, 
etc., as usual, and will not know that the day of the Lord has come. 
Since his presence is that of a spiritual body invisible to human 
eyes he cannot be discovered by the sight of the eye And to guard 
against the deceptions of antichrist, Jesus warned the Church not to 
expect him in any such way, saying, "Wherefore, if they shall say 
unto you, Behold he is in the desert; go not forth: behold he is in the 
secret chamber, believe it not," because he does not so come. How 
important to bear in mind the manner of his coming, as we 
considered it last Lord's day. 

At the first advent he did meet with them in the secret chamber and 
in the wilderness; he was then the word made flesh; he was then in 
the form of a servant for the suffering of deathe But at th second 
advent he comes in the glory of his Father (a spiritual body) which 
no ma hath seen, nor can see. (1 Tim. 6:16). 

Jesus said, "As the lightning, so shall the Son of Man be in his 
day." (Matt. 24:2 ; Luke 17:24). Man can see by the destruction it 
leaves, where the lightning has been: so, in the day of the Lord, 
men will come to recognize by the national trouble and overturning 
that the great day of his wrath is come. 

But while the world moves on in ignorance of the fact that the Lord 
is again present, should we expect the Church of Christ to be in the 
same darkness with reference to a fact of such interest to them? 
Certainly not. We should expect, however, that the great mass of 
those claiming to be of the Church, yet unfaithful t God, would be 
under the same veil of ignorance that covers the world. Those who 
are faithfully watching unto the "sure word of prophecy" will know 
of his presence. "Ye brethren are not in darkness that that day 
should come upon you as a tMef." ( Thes. 5:1-5). 

We have already answered objections against inquiring into the 
time of Christ's coming; and merely remark now that whereas 
neither Christ's disciples, nor angels, "neither the Son," knew of the 
time of his coming when Christ spoke those words, yet, when "he 
comes, with all his holy angels," those angels will know, Christ 
himself will know, and all of the Church who are not in darkness, 
shall know. But, "ifilho shalt not watch, uho shalt not know." The 
Christian who does not watch will be overtaken of that day just as 
the world is overtaken. 

The prophets foretold things which they did not themselves 
understand; for instance, Daniel, having seen a vision reaching 
away into the future, upon making inquiry as to the time, was told: 



"Go thy way, Daniel, for the words are closed up and sealed till the 
time of the end;" then knowledge shall be increased, and the wise 
shall understand, but none of the wicked shall understand." (Dan. 
12:9; 4:10); neither shall the unwatching servant and the unwise 
Virgins, adds our Lord. (Matt. 25). Peter speaks of this, and said 
that the prophets inquired and searched diligently as to what time, 
or what manner of time the Spirit did signify [i.e., whether the time 
given them was literal or symbolic time], unto whom it was 
revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us [the Gospel Church] 
they did minister. (1 Pet. 1:10,12). They were used as God's mouth- 
pieces simply, and laid up treasures of wisdom and knowledge 
which are developed and made manifest during the Gospel age, a 
little at a time, as "meat in due season", by the Holy Spirit sent 
down from heaven, whose office is to guide the faithful Church into 
all truth." 

Our God is a God of order. Everything that God does is in 
accordance with a definitely pre-arranged plan, and the times and 
seasons are no insignificant part of that plan. Notice that Christ was 
born on time— "In the fulness of time" God sent his only-begotten 
Son. (Gal. 4:4). Not before, nor after, but just when the time was 
full. Christ's first sermon was on time. He came preaching and 
saying, the time is fulfilled ...repent and believe the Gospel." (Mark 
1:15). "In due time, Christ died." (Rom. 5:6). He rose again the 
third day, according to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:4). During his 
ministry they frequently sought to take him, but could not "because 
his hour was not yet come. " And just as sure as there is a due time 
for the Second Advent, and if now be the due time, the Spirit will 
guide God's faithful children into the truth on this subject. First, 
however, as we shall go largely to the Old Testament Scriptures, we 
stop for a moment to inquire: Have we anything to do with these 
Scriptures, or are we to derive all our instruction from the New 
Testament? I am almost ashamed to raise such a question, and 
would not, but that I am satisfied that many Christian people hold 
this opinion. One of the pastors of this city, a few days since, 
reproved a member of the flock for quoting as of any force a 
statement of the prophets. For shame! O, for shame!! To what did 
Jesus refer, when he said, "Search the Scriptures." Surely to the Old 
Testament, since not one word of the New was then written. What 
Scriptures did the Bereans search daily? The Old Testament. What 
Scripture did Christ explain to the disciples going to Emmaus when 
their hearts burned within them while he opened unto them the 
Scriptures? The Old Testament. In which was "Apollos mighty," 
and of which did Paul say to Timothy, "From a child thou hast 
known the Holy Scriptures." And again, "All Scripture, given by 
inspiration of God, is profitable; that the man of God may be 
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good work." And one reason 
why some men of God are so imperfectly furnished is that they lay 
aside more than two-thirds of God's word, the Old Testament, 
which Paul says would be profitable to them. So highly did Peter 
esteem the prophecy of the Old Testament, that he considered it 



better evidence than his own sight; and after telling of Christ's 
transfiguration "on the holy mount," and that it was given him as an 
evidence of the coming kingdom of Christ, he says, (2 Pet. 1:19) 
"We have a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that 
ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the 
day dawn." 

Peter corroborates Paul's statement that it is profitable; and informs 
us that it will continue to be useful "until the day dawn." The Old 
Testament is a great treasure-house in which God has locked up and 
sealed items of great interest and value to his children, and the New 
Testament is the key by which we gain access to them. Let us now 
examine what the sure word of prophecy says on the time of 
Christ's coming. There are several prophetic claims to which I 
desire to call your attention- one shows the length of the Gospel 
dispensation; but not directly; it does not read right out, the Gospel 
dispensation will close in A.D.— . No, that would not have been 
"sealed up" at all, and not only wise and watching, but all could 
understand that without difficulty. 

No, it is not told so, but while just as plain as that, yet it is under 
cover, and you will see that it could not be understood without the 
New Testament key. 

God has linked together the history of the Jewish and Gospel 
Churches by the peculiar tie of type and anti-type; and this typical 
character of the Jewish dispensation was frequently referred to by 
the Apostles under the direction of the Holy Spirit. 

From them we learn that it was typical in all its features— its laws 
(Heb. 10:1), its ceremonies (Heb. 9:9), its sacrifices (Heb. 10:11), 
its sacred days, its times and seasons (Col. 2:16,17), and also the 
exact length of its duration, as we shall see. 

R599 : page 3 

If God has thus, in the Jewish dispensation, given us an exact 
pattern of the Gospel dispensation, that pattern is itself a prophecy. 
And what a clear revelation of truth should it be to us, who stand 
amid the closing scenes of the Gospel age, when nearly all of that 
prophecy has passed into history! With the keys furnished in the 
New Testament, the faithful student may now clearly read the times 
and seasons indicated. 

Paul shows that the blind, cast-off condition of Israel is to continue 
until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in (Rom. 11:25). Their 
casting off from God's favor, and consequent blindness, began at 
the end of the Jewish age, and will terminate at the end of the 
Gospel age. So if we find the time of returning favor to fleshly 
Israel clearly indicated, we may know that the fulness of the 
Gentiles has been gathered in. [Into what or where will be a 
question for future consideration.] In other words, the end of the 
Gospel age will have been reached. 



We have already seen the teaching of the word of God to be that in 
the next, commonly called the Millennial age, Israel is to be 
restored, Jerusalem rebuilt and reinhabited, and that the Jewish 
nation is to become the chief nation, and "Jerusalem a praise in the 
whole earth." When will this be? Do the prophets tell? Yes. The 
prophets teach that Israel, once God's specially favored people, who 
had "much advantage every way, to whom were committed the 
oracles [O.T.] of God," would reject Christ, and, in consequence, 
would become outcasts from God's favor as a chastisement for their 
national sin, and for the same length of time that they had had his 
special favor; after which time they should again return to God's 
favor and forgiveness. Now let us briefly glance at their history and 
then I will refer you to the prophecy which so predicts. 

The nation began its existence at the death of Jacob, in Egypt. 
While he lived they were not counted a nation, but a family, and in 
his dying blessing for the first time they are called tribes. The 
promise of national blessing and favor was given through Judah. 
"The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver from 
between his feet, until Shiloh [Christ] come." This God fulfilled, 
and though He often chastised them, and allowed them to go into 
captivity for their sins; yet he always showed them favor, brought 
them back, and preserved their national existence through Judah, as 
he had promised, and did not utterly cast them off from him until 
they had rejected and crucified the Lord of glory, a period of 1,845 
years. Since that time, as they themselves say bitterly, God has 
shown them no favor; they have been outcasts "a reproach and a 
hissing among all people." (Jer. 29:18). Since their chastisement 
was to be of the same length, as the favor previously shown, it will 
be 1,845 years. It began with the crucifixion of Christ, A.D. 33, and 
the 1,845 years of their punishment, consequently ended in 1878. 
But we must not expect too much in a day. As they were 37 years in 
falling nationally-from A.D. 33, to A.D. 70, when their national 
existence terminated: so their rising again to favor and national 
prominence will require the same length of time, and will therefore 
not be complete until 37 years after 1878, or until the close of 1914. 
We also find another and distinctly separate line of prophecy 
(which we will give at another time), teaching that they will not 
obtain full control, of Palestine until A.D. 1914, which gives a 
period of 37 years for their rising, or a parallel to the time of their 
falling. Where is the Scripture which proves that their chastisement 
is equal to the favor that they once enjoyed? you ask. Turn with me 
to Jer. 16:13-18 and read: "Therefore [because of sins before 
mentioned], will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know 
not, neither ye nor your fathers; and there ye shall serve other gods 
[rulers] day and night; where I will not show you favor." This was 
not the Babylonian captivity, for Abraham came from Ur of the 
Chaldees. Neither could the Syrian captivity be thus referred to, for 
Jacob was a Syrian (Deut. 26:5), and this was to be "a land that ye 
know not, neither do ye nor your fathers. " This was to be their 
punishment: They were to receive no favor from God, but were to 



be driven out of their own land, and, as the next verse shows, were 
to become exiles in every land, just as we now find them. 

They have always looked back to their deliverance from Egypt as a 
great and marvelous sign of God's favor to them; but their 
deliverance, now soon to be consummated, will be so much greater, 
that it will quite eclipse the former one. Let us read— "Therefore, 
behold the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, 
The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel out of the land 
of Egypt; but the Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel 
from the land of the North [Russia, where the greatest number of 
them are found], and from all the lands whither He had driven 
them: and I will bring them again into their land, that I gave unto 
their fathers; and first (before I so bring them back) I will 
recompense their iniquity and their sin DOUBLE"— verse 18. 

The word here translated double is the Hebrew word mishneh and 
signifies, a repetition. The repetition can refer to nothing else than 
the time. It was not a repetition of the same method of dealing with 
them; for he just states that he will deal differently-he will cast 
them off and show them NO favor, etc. And it is now a fact of 
history that the time of their cast-off condition has been an exact 
repetition in length of their time of favor, that is 1,845 years ending 
in 1878. They had 1,845 years favor and 37 years fall. They have 
had 1,845 years without favor, and will have 37 years of rising. But, 
some may think we base a great deal upon that one prophetic 
statement, and inquire, Are there other evidences? Yes, there are; 
but I dare to trust to one statement, of one prophet; for he is a 
mouthpiece of God, who cannot lie. 

Let us hear Zechariah (9:9), he will tell us the very day they were 
cast off. Just five days before his crucifixion, Jesus rode into 
Jerusalem on an ass in fulfillment of this prophecy. "Rejoice 
greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: 
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee: He is just, and having 
salvation; lowly and riding upon an ass and upon a colt the foal of 
an ass." Nationally, they did not receive Him with shouts of 
rejoicing; but the multitude shouted, Hosannah! for "if these should 
hold their peace, the very stones would cry out. " The prophecy 
demanded shouting and must be fulfilled. "Turn you to your 
stronghold, ye prisoners of hope:" Christ was their stronghold, had 
they but received Him; but they rejected Him, and therefore comes 
the denunciation. "Even to-day do I declare that I will render 
double unto thee." [Literal- The other half.] This agrees with 
Jeremiah, and tells us the very day the favor toward them ended. 
Yes, says Paul, "because of unbelief they were blinded." Jesus wept 
over them, and said "If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this 
thy day, the things which belong to thy peace, but now they are hid 
from thine eyes." This was their blindness. Then he begins to 
foretell the trouble coming. (Luke 19:41-44). But another prophet 
has a message on this subject— Isaiah 40:1. Here are the three 
principal prophets, all explaining to us about Israel, but they take 



different standpoints of observation. Jeremiah says, looking down 
future, "I will cast you out, etc." Zachariah's standpoint of prophecy 
was beside Jesus on the colt, and he says, "Even to-day." Isaiah 

R599 : page 4 

takes his stand away down here, where you and I live, after they 
have had their equal time of punishment. Hear him: "Comfort ye, 
comfort ye my people saith your God; speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her appointed time [margin], is 
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of 
the Lord's hand double for all her sins." 

"Believest thou the prophets?" I do. And when Jeremiah foretells 
that because of sin and iniquity they would have double, and Isaiah 
that that double having been ended the sin and iniquity is pardoned, 
I cannot help believing it. But let us inquire whether 1878 brought 
any outward sign of God's returning favor? I answer yes. The fig 
tree, which was withered up from the roots (Israel), is beginning to 
"put forth leaves." The year 1878 witnessed an end of Turkish 
oppression in Palestine, and by the treaty of Berlin a Hebrew, as 
Prime Minister of one of the greatest of nations, assumes its 
protection and guarantees its peace. And recently the statement is 
published that the Rothchilds, Sir Montefiore, and other wealthy 
Hebrews, have arranged for the purchase and colonization of 
Palestine. And Russian persecutions are now driving many thither. 
Truly, favor seems to be returning. 

But where is the measure of the Gospel dispensation? Paul 
furnishes us the key for this in the text before mentioned (Rom. 
11:25): "I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this 
mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness 
in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be 
come in"— that is, Israel will remain blinded until the full company 
of the Gospel Church-the Bride, being taken out from the Gentiles 
for His name— have been selected, or have come into covenant 
relation with him, and thereby separated from the world. To express 
the same thought differently: while the Jews were cast off as a 
people for 1845 years, from A.D. 33 to A.D. 1878, was the time 
appointed for the selecting of all who will be part of the Bride of 
Christ. 

But as favor continued to individual Israelites, after that house as a 
whole was rejected, so after the rejection of the Gospel house (the 
nominal Church) as a whole, special favor to individual saints is 
still continued. The Apostles and early disciples, the "remnant" of 
Israel (Rom. 9:27) received the increase of knowledge and high 
privileges then due to the Gospel age, while all the rest of Israel 
were blind to them. So here, the 

R600 : page 4 

same class, the meek and faithful of the Gospel house, receive the 
increase of knowledge due in the dawn of the Millennial Age, and 



by means of this clear apprehension of the truth are being 
completed and perfected for their place in the glorious kingdom 
shortly to be made manifest. 

Since the two houses of Israel-the Jewish and Gospel houses- 
stand in relation to each other as type and antitype, let us notice 
some of the parallels: 

The law was a shadow of good things to come, and in the Gospel 
dispensation we find the substance which cast those shadows. We 
must bear in mind also that the shadow is not the substance, but that 
it has strongly marked features of similarity. 

The Jewish house was a house of servants —"Moses was faithful in 
all his house as a servant. " The Gospel house is a house of sons- 
"Christ as a son over his own house, whose house are we." (Heb. 
3:5,6.) The founder of the typical house was Jacob, surnamed 
Israel; the founder of the anti-typical house was Christ, the true 
Israel of God. The typical house was founded on the twelve sons of 
Jacob, the anti-typical on the twelve Apostles. 

In worship also they are pattern and reality. The pattern had a 
tabernacle into which the typical High Priest went every year to 
make a typical atonement. We have the true tabernacle, into which 
the true High Priest has entered for us. (Heb. 6:20.) And, as in due 
time the typical High Priest came out to bless the people typically, 
so the real High Priest will in due time come out to bless all the 
world. 

There were under-priests there, who wore bonnets to indicate that 
they were not the head, or High Priest, while Aaron, their head, 
wore none. So we are told that the true Church, the body or bride of 
Christ, is likewise a priesthood, and that Christ Jesus is the head or 
High Priest of our profession. (Heb. 3:1.) As they offered typical 
sacrifices, so we may offer up spiritual sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2:5. 

They had circumcision of the flesh; we, says Paul, have 
circumcision of the heart. (Rom. 2:29.) They had a temple in which 
God's presence was represented; and Paul tells us that we, the 
Church, are built together a holy temple for the indwelling of God 
through the Spirit. (Eph. 2:22.) In fact everything that they had was 
a type of what we have on the higher spiritual plane. 

Their dispensation ended with a harvest, in which harvest-time 
Jesus was present in the flesh as Lord of the harvest, and the 
faithful disciples who followed in his footprints were privileged to 
be co-workers with him in reaping the fleshly house and gathering 
the ripened grain into the Gospel garner— into the privileged 
condition of the Gospel saints. In the beginning of that harvest 
Jesus said to his disciples, "Lift up your eyes and look on the fields, 
for they are white already to harvest. I send you to reap," etc. John 
4:35-38. 



Just so the anti-typical or Gospel dispensation ends with a harvest, 
at which time Jesus is again due to be present, not now as then in 
the flesh, but in glory, a spiritual being, invisible to human eyes. 
Say not now that there are yet many years and then cometh harvest; 
but, ye faithful children of God, lift up your eyes and look on the 
fields now, for they are white already to harvest. And every faithful 
disciple who now follows in the Master's footprints has the 
privilege now of being a co-worker with him in reaping this 
harvest. Such are the angels or messengers referred to in Matt. 
13:39, who are reaping under his direction. And he directs them 
through the Word by opening their understanding to discern the 
times and seasons there indicated, and the work to be accomplished 
therein. 

Their harvest was a period of seven years, beginning with our 
Lord's ministry; and up to the time of his death (a period of three 
and a half years) special effort was made to enlighten the Jewish 
house, as a whole, with reference to its high privilege. But as a 
people their ears were dull of hearing, and they "knew not the time 
of their visitation." Though this was true of that house as a whole, 
yet there were scattered individuals here and there among them who 
were ready to believe and follow the Master as soon as the truth 
could be made clear to them. To this class the remaining three and a 
half years of harvest work was devoted. The sickle of truth 
presented to them separated them from the rejected and blinded 
Jewish house, and brought them under the Gospel dispensation of 
favor. 

This seven years is the "seventieth week" of Danl. 9. Seventy weeks 
(symbolic time, weeks of years instead of days,) or 490 years, were 
set apart or determined upon Daniel's people, the Jews. Sixty-nine 
of these reach to Messiah, the prince. (Christ came as the Messiah 
at the time of his baptism, when he began his ministry, being thirty 
years old.) "In the midst of the week [the seventieth] Messiah shall 
be cut off [die] but not for himself." ("He was wounded for our 
transgressions.") But, though cut off, and though their Church was 
left desolate, yet, as the prophet had predicted, "He shall confirm 
the covenant [seventy weeks' agreement] with many for one week," 
i.e., until the full limit of the promised seventy. Accordingly, Jesus 
charges his disciples to "begin at Jerusalem" with the Gospel 
message, and it was confined to them until the seventieth week 
ended-three and a half years after Jesus' death. 

So the Gospel dispensation is the anti-type of all this. Its harvest 
also is seven years, plus thirty-three, beginning in 1874, where 
another line of Scripture proves Christ's presence to be due, and 
continuing seven years, in which the ripe wheat is being garnered 
and separated from tares, and thirty-three of consuming and 
removing the nominal system. The fullness (the elect number and 
membership) of the Gospel Church was due to come into covenant 
relation with God in 1878, when Israel's time of favor was due to 
begin; and yet, although the nominal Church was then cast off, and 



that house left desolate, the chosen vessels yet in that house must be 
separated and gathered into the barn, a position of safety and 
security, above the trouble which is coming on the Church nominal. 
That favor, ending in the fall of 1881, found all true wheat 
separated, at least in spirit, from the rejected, lukewarm, fallen, 
nominal Church. And all such gathered into this separate condition, 
will be ready to separate from it in name and person as they 
discover this to be the Lord's will. 

The time of trouble coming on the Church nominal is for the 
purpose of gathering out of his kingdom (Church) all things that 
offend. (Matt. 13:41.) They shall be swept out by the incoming 
flood of infidelity, overthrown by the winds of false doctrine, and 
finally burnt up by the scathing reproach of the world when it 
comes to fully discover Babylon's hypocrisy. Blessed is the man 
who has built his house upon the rock with the gold and silver and 
precious stones of truth. The floods may come and the winds may 
blow and beat upon that house, and the fire may test it, but it shall 
stand. Thus shall long-established and corrupt systems, claiming to 
be the Church of Christ, go down in complete wreck, and above its 
ruins the real, the true and faithful Church— a "little flock"— shall 
with Christ their head establish the glorious reign of righteousness. 

If these things are so, we are living in an important time, and upon 
our present decisions and actions the weighty interests of our future 
hinge. It behooves us, then, to take heed lest our hearts be 
overcharged with the cares of this life. Let us lay aside every 
weight and run with patience. And seeing we look for such things, 
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and 
godliness— as the prospective bride of Christ making herself ready. 



R600 : page 4 

HAS THE MASTER NEED OF MY SERVICE? 

It is a part of the economy of God, as well as of all right-thinking 
men, to seek to accomplish desired ends with the smallest possible 
outlay of expense. While in God, and in all his perfect creatures, 
there is a beautiful balancing of this principle with that of justice 
and benevolence, in fallen man it has generally overleaped the 
bounds of love and justice. 

But in the proper use of this principle of our nature, it is right to 
inquire, Is there any use or necessity for this or that course? 
Recognizing this principle, God does not call upon us to do 
anything that is useless. Though we may not always be able to 
discover the design of his commands, it is a sufficient guarantee of 
their necessity and good to know that he commands. If then, he has 
called us into his service, it is because he has a definite purpose to 
accomplish through us. Since there is actual service to be 
accomplished, and God has chosen to use human instrumentalities 



in accomplishing it, there is then actual need of faithful service, 
though God's resources are by no means exhausted when you or I 
refuse the privilege. In that case the loss is ours, not his. When the 
toil and weariness and sacrifice are ended, we will have no need to 
say, I have labored in vain; I have spent my strength for naught. 

Because there is need for actual service, we are exhorted to be 
faithful, diligent, obedient servants, always abounding in the work 
of the Lord, to make full proof of our own ministry, to so invest our 
one or many talents as to secure the greatest possible advantage to 
the Master's cause. It was because Paul 

R601 : page 4 

and others of similar mould realized the necessity and privilege of 
such service, that they so boldly undertook the great work of 
stemming the popular tide, and proclaiming the glorious Gospel at 
the risk of life and every earthly good. 

Ah, says one, that is placing too high an estimate upon human 
effort. God is able to accomplish his work if I never touch it. Yes, 
that is very true; but, if you do not touch it, some one else will, and 
you will lose the privilege. Did you ever think of that? Beware! Let 
no man take thy crown! O, how easy it is just here to fall short of 
overcoming! 

One will say, Well, I have only this one talent, and I have need to 
use that for myself. It would not bring a very large interest if I 
should invest it for the Lord. If, like some other brother or sister, I 
had many talents, it would seem to be of some use, and I would 
heartily invest nearly all for the Lord. Another, with more talents, 
will cheerfully render much, but hold back part of that which he 
covenanted to give, which was his all. Ah, say they, the Lord has no 
need of that little; he is rich, and can accomplish his work without 
it. Well, that is true with reference to others, but without your full 
and complete sacrifice of all, he cannot accomplish the work of 
bringing you to the glory to which you are called. And so far as 
others are concerned, he will raise up some other human agency 
through which to minister to them. 

It is his purpose to accomplish the great work in hand, largely 
through human agents, under the direction and leading of his Spirit. 
And if one human instrument withdraws from the service, another 
will fill the gap. Whether the Lord could have accomplished his 
work through other means is not for us to surmise; but since this is 
the method that infinite wisdom chose, who are we that we could 
devise a better? Let us see to it then that we work in harmony with 
his plans, faithfully utilizing every available talent in his service. 
"Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall find 
him so doing." Matt. 24:46. 



MRS. C. T. R. 



R601 : page 4 



"SAY YE NOT, A CONFEDERACY." 

ISA. 8:9-20. 

A confederacy is a league or covenant, a compact or alliance for 
mutual support or common action. "In union there is strength," is 
everywhere the expressed serfiment o to-day. Confederacy — 
Union— is the watchword in civil, social, and religious circles. This 
sentiment now s common, has grown out of the felt necessities of 
the times, and the fear of coming trouble and danger. 

The prince of this world (John 12:31) sees the approaching storm. 
He believes and trembles at the sure word of prophecy which 
indicates the overthrow of his power; but with characteristic genius, 
energy and presumption, he arrays himself to oppose, and if 
possible to thwart the plans of the Almighty. At present and for 
some time past he has been actively engaged in planning, 
organizing and arranging his unconscious forces. We are glad in 
one sense to say unconscious, for to be the conscious and willing 
servants of Satan would imply a fearful state of depravity. And yet 
we would that men were not so blinded as to be unconsciously led 
by their wily and deceptive foe. 

Leagues or confederacies are forming all over the world. The 
kingdoms are forming alliances for mutual protection against the 
increasing independence and power of their subjects, while 
communism or socialism is secretly plotting and forming it world- 
wide confederacy to resist enthroned power. Capitalists are forming 
alliances with each other to protect their interests, while the 
laboring classes are also combining their forces for self-protection. 

In religious circles we see the same policy pursued. The two great 
classes most bitterly opposed to one another are so-called 
Orthodoxy and Infidelity. Each is struggling for supremacy and 
power. On the orthodox side are Papacy and Protestantism, while 
the non-religious world stands in opposition. All the various sects 
of Protestantism have formed a confederacy— "The Evangelical 
Alliance"— for mutual support and common action, agreeing to 

R601 : page 5 

almost entirely ignore doctrine, and to preach simply morality, and 
the necessity of union with them, in order to be saved. And now 
friendly relations and proposals of union are beginning to be 
thought of even between Papacy and Protestantism The latter is 
losing all sight of doctrine and sees no special hindrance to union in 
a lower standard of morality, while the former is not slow to speak 
of itself as one of the Christian denominations, and of others as 
their "Methodist and Presbyterian friends, etc.," while both agree 
and unite in branding as Infidel all who oppose their system, no 
matter how firmly their faith may be rooted and grounded in the 
word of God. Infidels are also uniting forming liberal leagues, and 



banding themselves together to resist superstition and to advocate 
morality and benevolence on a basis of common sense and 
expediency. 

While all this seems expedient and necessary to these various 
classes in the world, while human reason says, Surely in Union 
there is strength, shall we as Christians who are by no means less 
interested in the final issues than others, act contrary to such reason, 
and battle singly and alone with the mighty powers of darkness? In 
this as in all matters, we look to the Word of God for instruction. 
And that instruction is given plainly and clearly- "For," says the 
Prophet, taking his standpoint down here in our time, "the Lord 
spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should 
not walk in the way of this people, saying, Say ye not, A 
confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say, a 
confederacy; neither fear ye their fear nor be afraid. Sanctify the 
Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your 
dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary." Isa. 8:14. 

Thus instructed we should have nothing to do with these 
confederacies either civil, social or religious. We are to walk 
separate from all these, joined only to the Lord and loyal to the 
kingdom of God as yet unrecognized by the world. We are to have 
no confederacy, no union with any other. The Lord's Prophet 
speaks most emphatically concerning the outcome of all these 
confederacies. 

Thus we read (Isa. 8:9,10) "Associate yourselves, O, ye people, and 
ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries; 
gird yourselves and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel 
together and it shall come to naught; speak the word and it shall not 
stand. " How plain and forcible these expressions ! They need no 
comment; and only the unbelief in the word of God-the spirit of 
infidelity- in the church nominal, prevents them from 
understanding their import. 

In the Lord of hosts alone is our sanctuary, our defence, and all who 
would walk with him must walk separate from the world. Those 
who thus walk with the Lord are so led into the knowledge of his 
plans, that those things which cause fear and trembling to others, 
are to them but the indications of the development of God's glorious 
plan. 

"Behind his frowning providence 
They see his smiling face." 

While the Lord is thus our defence and rejoicing, he is a stone of 
stumbling and a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel— Israel 
after the flesh and the nominal gospel church. "And many among 
them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared and be 
taken." They stumble and fall over the truth and are taken in the 
snare of the adversary, their faith shattered and broken; and the 
great flood of infidelity will engulf the church nominal. 



But the Prophet continues, "Bind up the testimony, seal the law 
among my disciples." This is equivalent to Daniel's prophecy "The 
wise shall understand" (Dan. 12:10); and David's— "They shall 
walk O Lord in the light of thy countenance" (Psa. 89:15); and 
Paul's- "Ye brethren are not in darkness." (1 Thes. 5:4.) Yes, to 
those consecrated ones who walk with God separate from the world 
and worldly alliances, the law and the testimony is precious— a 
constantly unfolding treasure-house of blessed promises, inspiring 
such with glorious and blessed hopes which dispel all fearful 
apprehensions. But it is bound up and sealed among these, and none 
of the unfaithful shall understand their glorious import. 

"Praise God from whom all blessings flow." 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R602 : page 5 

NO MAN BUYETH THEIR MERCHANDISE 
ANY MORE. 

REV. 18:2. 

There are already evidences of consternation and forebodings of 
disaster in the nominal Church, because of the general apathy and 
indifference of her membership and the falling off of attendance at 
her services. We hear reports far reaching of flocks without pastors, 
and pastors with rapidly diminishing flocks, and this state of things 
exists not only in this country, but also in Europe and elsewhere, as 
the following clipping from the New York Herald of January 6th 
will show: 

PASTORS WANTED. 

"Much is printed in the religious newspapers on the other side of 
the Atlantic regarding the scarcity of ministers in the United States 
and Canada. It appears that the disease complained of— pastorless 
flocks— is not confined to this continent alone. From a recent 
publication giving some religious statistics for France it is gathered 
that not less than 60,000 Protestants— nearly one-tenth of the whole 
Protestant population of the country— belong to churches which are 
without pastors. One of their churches has been without regular 
pastoral superintendence for twelve years. Eighteen churches have 
been deprived of their pastors during the year just ended. There is 
surely room for improvement here." 

Not many months ago it was stated in the WATCH TOWER, as 
quoted from some other publication, that the Presbyterian Church 
was 500 ministers short, and from the Cleveland Leader of Oct. 25, 
1883, we quote the following report of the P.E. Conference: "There 
are now in the United States 48 dioceses and 15 missionary 
jurisdictions, 67 bishops, 2,500 other clergy, 3,000 organized 



parishes, and more than 353,000 communicants: the report referred 
to the inadequate number of candidates for holy orders." This report 
shows the number of bishops to exceed the number of dioceses and 
missionary jurisdictions, while the number of pastors to parishes 
shows a deficiency of at least five hundred. 

That there has been a much larger decrease in membership and 
attendance at services, we believe, but these cannot be arrived at by 
figures: Observation, however, and the statements of ministers and 
others go far to prove it to be in a very demoralized condition. The 
Rev. Dr. Collyer evidently thinks we are on the verge of a religious 
panic. We quote from his sermon preached on Feb. 3d, and 
published in the New York Herald of Feb. 4: 

PANICS IN RELIGION AND LIFE. 

Rev. Dr. Collyer on the harm done by faithless men in the Church. 

"I notice," said the Rev. Dr. Collyer, in his sermon yesterday 
morning in the Church of the Messiah, "that when I talk with those 
who watch the world's great markets, they say that when there is an 
ever growing fever in the centres of business, if this continues we 
are going to have a panic. And I answer 'God forbid,' for I know of 
but few things in this world and life of ours so cruel and ruthless as 
a panic, or that take the manhood so completely out of men, leaving 
only a mob of poltroons and monsters. It makes no matter what 
form the evil and ugly thing may take, in a public hall or a theatre, 
or in a church where men go to worship God, or in Wall street; and 
it is no matter what our conduct may have been down to the day 
when we were confronted in a moment by this last and most terrible 
test of our manhood. If we have lost on that day the quality Herbert 
Spencer insists on as one of the choicest blessings we can possess— 
"the supremacy of self-control"— it is all over with us the rest of our 
lives. 

I notice that my brethren in their conferences deplore the deadness 
in their churches. I do not wonder at this, but I do wonder a little 
that they should even by inference lay the blame on God and talk 
sometimes as if they believed with the priests of Baal that he was 
asleep in his heavens or had gone on a journey. Because if they 
only look deeper they will see that the whole trouble lies with the 
Christians themselves. I venture to observe, but with no mean spirit, 
God knows, that the most cruel and ruthless blows ever struck 
against our common faith have been made, not by men like Robert 
Ingersoll, but by deacons of good standing in their churches, and 
prominent persons in Christian associations. Where men I will not 
name do things I will not name under the mask of religion— the 
safest mask I know of— it is no wonder so many should go apart and 
say, if this is the fruit I do not believe in the tree. No wonder that so 
many should leave the churches and that we should have what we 
may call a religious panic. And when this panic occurs no words of 
mine or of any one else can estimate the damage it does to the 
world; for it means that men throw aside all religion, all morality, 



all that is really precious in this life. But such panics and desertions 
from religion will invariably take place when we see unworthy men 
who have no real religious life in them assume the high places in 
Christian councils." 

The Rev. Wm. Loyd in a sermon (which we quote below) 
preached on the same day and published in the New York Herald, 
Feb. 4, takes a different and wider view of the situation: he regards, 
we think truthfully, the misrepresentation or malrepresentation of 
God in the horrible dogmatic theology of the dark ages, as the chief 
cause of all that is now transpiring within the walls of that "great 
city, Babylon." 

HINDRANCES TO CHRISTIANITY. 

Dogmatic theology driving people out of the Church and preventing 
its growth. 

"Rev. Wm. Loyd, in the pulpit of the Central Congregational 
church, spoke with more than his ordinary vigor. His congregation 
was a large one, for it had been announced that the pastor was to 
talk very plainly upon the position of the Church and its relation to 
the public at large. Christianity, he declared, had not made the 
progress which it ought to have shown. To-day, after nearly twenty 
centuries of existence, the Christian Church had failed to make 
more than the slightest impression upon the world. The vast 
majority of the inhabitants of the globe were strangers to it, and 
even in countries where Christ was officially recognized fully 
seven-eighths of the people were not connected with the Christian 
Church. The intellectual and cultured classes had withdrawn almost 
wholly from the Church, and those who kept without its pale were 
not people to whose immoral habits and tendencies the teachings of 
the gospel were obnoxious, but people of the most blameless lives. 
These people refused to accept the assertion of the Church that 
Christ was really the Son of God, and that through Him there was 
salvation. They accepted the teachings of morality, but rejected all 
that was of real pith in fixing the divinity of our God and Saviour. 
The thinkers of the age, here and abroad, have in almost every 
instance held to these sceptical views, and now, in place of writing 
their views only for the few who read books of philosophy and 
obstruct thinking, these thoughts were embodied in the popular 
novel and through the current works of fiction, strongly put and 
attractively worded. There is no failure of Christianity in itself, but 
there is a failure of Christianity to get a secure hold upon the 
popular heart and become a guide and mentor in the daily life of the 
people. 

In conclusion Rev. Mr. Lloyd considered the causes which had 
brought about this state of affairs. They were, he said, to be found 
within the Church itself. God had been malrepresented. In place of 
the forgiving Father for all, he had been held up in the frightful 
dogmatic theology of the past centuries as a Creator of countless 
millions of human beings who were from birth doomed to an 



eternity of suffering and woe. Christianity had suffered, too, from 
the secularization of the Church and from Church quarrels. One 
such dispute did more to hinder the progress of Christianity than a 
thousand sceptical tracts scattered abroad over the land." 

Infidelity, skepticism and apathy to religion are but natural results 
of the bad representation of God by the nominal Church, 
notwithstanding that God has little by little, "line upon line," made 
known his true character as exemplified in a great and grand plan 
for the redemption of all his human creatures from the 
consequences of Adam's transgression. The different sects, 
Protestant and Romanist, have so distorted and falsified it at every 
stage that God, whom they say is all-wise, is made to appear 
unwise; and, though they proclaim him a God of love, they make 
his acts appear those of a cruel and vindictive monster, to be feared 
rather than to be loved. 

This, together with the gathering unto her, as into a cage, every 
"unclean and hateful bird," and the love for and conformity to the 
world of her members, in church matters and in social life, have 
caused the Lord to spue her out of his mouth, and to leave her 
desolate. She is unfit to be any longer his mouth-piece. In her 
conformity to the world, and departure from the narrow way, she 
has sought out many inventions- many questionable modes for 
raising money, ostensibly to pay the Lord's bills, but really to 
gratify worldly pride in erecting costly edifices, fine organs, and in 
general display. Her ministers delight in high-sounding titles, 
contrary to the express command of Him who only is the Head of 
the Church— "Neither be ye called masters, for one is your master, 
even Christ." Had these men whose significant remarks we have 
quoted, taken heed unto the words of the Master, they would have 
been able to discern the signs of the times, and would not be 
walking now as blind men. "They shall look unto the earth and 
behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be 
driven to darkness." (Isa. 8:22.) "And he shall be for a sanctuary [to 
the sheep that hear his voice] , but for a stone of stumbling and rock 
of offence to both the houses [Jewish and Gospel] of Israel. " (Verse 
14.) 

R603 : page 5 

Jesus said the tares, the children of the wicked one, and the wheat, 
the children of the kingdom, would grow together until the harvest, 
and he explained that the harvest is the end of the age- 
consummation of the age (Revised version). And Paul says: "In the 
last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their 
own selves, covetous, boasters, ...high-minded, lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God, having a form of godliness but denying 
the power;... evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 
deceiving and being deceived." (2 Tim. 1:5-13.) And again he says 
"the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but 
will heap to themselves teachers having itching ears," i.e., teachers 
who would have pleasure in hearing the praise of men. 



Peter, referring to this same time, says, "And there shall come in the 
last days scoffers, in scoffing walking after their own lusts, and 
saying, Where is promise of his presence?" (2 Peter 3:4, Sinaiatic 
MSS.) We have here the testimony of Jesus, Paul and Peter as to 
what would be the condition of the nominal Church in the harvest, 
or last days, and we find this inspired testimony to exactly 
correspond with its present condition. And added to this we have 
the words of Jesus (Matt. 24: 14) literally fulfilled now: "This 
gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a 
witness unto all nations then shall the end come," i.e., the end of the 
Gospel age. Every nation under heaven has heard the Gospel, and it 
was so declared by the Bible societies as far back as 1866. That the 
nations have not received the Gospel testimony is true, but 
witnessing to nations is not witnessing to individuals— not one in a 
thousand have heard, and most of those who have heard have not 
accepted it. 

The nominal Church, in looking for the conversion of the world 
before Jesus comes, is totally at variance with the Scriptures. This 
falsification of the truth, and adulteration of that which should be 
the children's meat, has brought her to her present condition of 
barrenness and confusion. "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and 
is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, 
and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.... The merchants 
[symbolic— the clergy] of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; 
for [shortly] no man buyeth their merchandise any more:... the light 
of a candle [lamp— the Word] shall shine no more at all in thee; and 
the voice of the bridegroom [Jesus] and of the bride [the Lamb's 
wife] shall be heard no more at all in thee." Rev. 18:2,1 1,23. These 
are not our words, but God's denunciation— the final doom of a false 
system. 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 



R603 : page 5 

LOST AND SAVED. 

For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was 
lost.-LUKE 19:10. 

Nearly two thousand years ago Jesus, then present, affirmed this to 
be his mission; but as yet no visible evidence of its accomplishment 
appears. The world moves on in its downward course now, as then. 
Sin and misery triumph still, and century after century plunges 
successive generations into death. Have we failed to understand the 
import of the Master's words? or has he been unable to accomplish 
his purpose? or may it be that his purpose is so far-reaching as to be 
of future fulfillment? With these queries in view, let us consider the 
subject before us. 



The words lost and saved have a common significance known to 
all: A thing lost is a thing once possessed, and a 

R603 : page 6 

thing saved is a thing once possessed and then lost and finally 
recovered. Jesus said the thing he came to save was the thing that 
men had lost; and the implication is, that since he had come to save 
the thing lost, men were unable to save it for themselves, which 
experience and many scriptures clearly prove. Now if we can 
determine just what man lost, we will know just what Jesus came to 
save. Man could not lose what he never had. Adam, who stood as 
the representative of our race, had a perfect human organism, and a 
right to everlasting continuance of life, on condition of obedience to 
God. He was privileged to enjoy all the delights of his Eden home, 
and the communion and blessings of God; in short, all the 
privileges that everlasting life under perfect human conditions is 
capable of enjoying and looking forward to. 

All this Adam lost through sin, both for himself and his posterity. 
Home, happiness, communion with God, health, and life itself, 
were lost. Consequently, mankind lies in utter wreck and ruin, dead 
and dying. In having lost his right to life he fell under the dominion 
of death, whose successive steps of misery, depravity, sickness and 
pain, end in total extinction of being, from which he can never 
recover himself. 

Jesus came then to save and restore that which was lost; to restore 
man to his original (human) perfection, and to communion with 
God, to give him back his paradise restored, and all the pleasing 
prospects of future blessings that accumulating ages can bestow, 
and that the powers of perfect humanity will be capable of 
enjoying. What! does some one say, Is so much implied in those 
words of our Lord? Yes; this is one way in which our Lord foretold 
the restitution of all things. All this is implied in the word saved. 
Think of it; could the words mean less than this? Certainly not; and, 
from this and many other scriptures, we have learned to trust in the 
living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of those that 
believe. (1 Tim. 4:10). There is a special salvation for some, as well 
as a general salvation for all men, as Paul here intimates, but we are 
not considering the special salvation now. 

In the above text Jesus was speaking of the general salvation of all 
men-the saving of that which was lost. For God "will have all men 
to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 
2:4.) When men are actually saved, their restored existence will be 
as at first, dependent on obedience for its continuance, which 
obedience will be easy and productive of constant happiness when 
evil and temptation are fully removed, and the great deceiver and 
tempter is bound and finally destroyed, and when the law of God is 
written in their hearts. (Jer. 31:33). 

But, we might inquire, when does our text indicate that Jesus would 
thus save the lost? However crude and indefinite the ideas of the 



Jews and the early disciples at first were concerning the promised 
salvation, they had learned both from the prophets and from Jesus' 
teaching, that it would be accomplished when the kingdom of God 
should come. And when Jesus stated that he had now come to save 
the lost, they at once concluded that the kingdom of God should 
immediately appear. 

Because they had drawn this inference, and, to correct their false 
impression, Jesus spoke a certain parable, the import of which was, 
that he must first go away and receive for himself the kingdom, and 
return; and that they, in the meantime, should, as faithful servants, 
occupy till he would come, using the talents entrusted to them 
according to his directions, and in the interest of his cause and of 
his coming kingdom, patiently waiting for their reward at his 
coming. 

But Jesus implied that in some sense he came at that time, to save 
the lost- "The Son of Man is come," etc. And in one sense it was 
true, for he then purchased them with his own precious blood, and 
though not yet liberated from the prison of death, they may be truly 
reckoned as saved ever since their ransom was paid, for their 
raising out of death was from that moment made sure. Just as you 
might say of a pardoned criminal that he is a saved man, although 
even he himself may not yet know of his pardon nor have yet 
experienced a release. 

Though no one is actually saved now, yet the Scriptures speak of 
believers as now saved by hope, that is, by accepting of God's 
promises as unquestionably sure, they may reckon themselves as 
already fully saved; not as merely awakened from death, but as 
saved from the last vestige of death and sin— as made perfect. "We 
are saved by hope; but hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man 
seeth why doth he yet hope for?" We do not see our salvation yet, 
except by faith. "But if we hope for that we see not, then do we 
with patience wait for it." (Rom. 8:24,25.) Our hope and faith 
would indeed be vain unless salvation means much more than we 
now enjoy. 

The Apostle's statements that "God is the Saviour of all men, 
especially of those that [now] believe," and that God "will have all 
men to be saved and come to a knowledge of the truth," as well as 
many other scriptures, prove to us that all men are to be saved by 
Christ from the degradation, misery and death now upon all through 
Adam's disobedience. And yet they show us two classes of saved 
ones-all mankind and the Church. While all are saved, one class is 
specially saved. That is, by special arrangement, some (all believers 
of the gospel age) are reckoned saved in season to run for the prize 
offered during this age. One class is not more saved than the other; 
both the Church and the world are and will be completely saved 
from sin and its penalty: and the mass of the world will realize this 
in due time in their restoration to perfect human life, while those 
reckoned saved now, as though they had already received the 
perfect human life, are privileged to relinquish their new claim and 



title to it, presenting it as a sacrifice to God, holy and acceptable to 
him when offered in the acceptable time (the gospel age). And 
being thus sacrificed with Christ, they will be privileged to partake 
with him of a new nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) These will receive glory, 
honor and immortality 

R604 : page 6 

—the divine nature; while the world in general will receive the 
glory, honor and blessedness of the perfect human nature, which is 
an image of the divine. (Gen. 1:27.) The former class is thus 
specially saved, severely disciplined and highly exalted that 
through them the blessings of restitution may flow to all the world 
when God's due time shall come. 

We see, then, that while the full import of our Lord's words has not 
been understood by many, and while many believe that he is unable 
to save the lost as he promised to do, that the fact is that his plan 
was so far-reaching that short-sighted, dying men could not 
measure or comprehend it. As now seen, the truth uttered in those 
few words required nearly three thousand years for its full 
accomplishment. At his first advent Jesus gave himself a ransom to 
save all (1 Tim. 2:6); during the centuries since, he has been 
developing the class who have in this time followed him in 
sacrifice, and who are to share with him in the work of saving or 
restoring all things, and within the coming thousand years the work 
of saving men will be completed. "If," then, "when we were 
enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much 
more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life." (Rom. 5:10.) 

Because in God's order men could only be saved by a payment of 
their penalty which would be the BASIS of their reconciliation and 
atonement with God, therefore, as a means to an end, we see that 
Jesus' mission at his first advent was to save in the sense of 
redeeming, while his second advent will complete the work by 
restoring to perfection all the redeemed— all for whom Christ died, 
and by the grace of God he tasted death [sin's penalty] for every 
man. (Heb. 2:9.) 

There is one other thought of special importance in this text. It is 
that the Son of Man came to seek that which was lost. Now we 
inquire, Is there any evidence of very earnest seeking of lost ones 
on the part of our Lord? Some would think not. All men were lost, 
and this text implies, while John 12:47 clearly declares his purpose 
to save all; but he said, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel." (Matt. 15:24.) He did not seek out any of the lost 
Gentiles, and charged his disciples not to do so for some years. But 
Jesus did seek out a certain class-the meek-who were waiting for 
the promised salvation; and it was his purpose to begin with 
Jerusalem, to save such as would believe, and to give to those of the 
seed of Abraham who believed, the first offer of the high calling. 
And during the centuries since, he has only been seeking out and 
saving (reckoning saved) the same class (the meek) among the 



Gentiles, and making to such believing ones the same offer of the 
divine nature —a heavenly calling. 

But a grander time of seeking is yet to come, for all the millions 
that are completely lost in death are yet to be sought out and saved. 
And where shall they be found? Notwithstanding the theories of 
men to the contrary, the Scriptures plainly teach that in death man's 
being is dissolved, that he is destroyed, blotted out of existence, that 
he is nowhere to be found. And with this fact in mind we might 
inquire with the Prophet Job, "If a man die shall he live again?" 
With men such a thing seems quite impossible, but "Why should it 
be thought a thing incredible that God should raise the dead?" (Acts 
26:8.) He that was able to create is also able to re-create those once 
completely destroyed. And through the Prophet Isaiah the Lord 
speaks of the restitution as a new creation, saying, "Behold, I create 
new heavens and a new earth"-not the physical earth, for that 
abideth forever— but the world of mankind is to be re-created. And 
the Lord says: "Be ye glad and rejoice forever in that which I 
create." (Isa. 65:17,18.) That the restored or re-created being will 
recognize himself and also his neighbors of former acquaintance, is 
unquestionably proven by many scriptures (Ezek. 16:61,63; 20:43; 
36:31; Zech. 12:10; Psa. 22:27), and illustrated in the few cases 
where the dead have been measurably restored, as Lazarus and 
others. 

Job answers our question very clearly when he says (chap. 7:21), 
"Now shall I sleep in the dust; and thou shalt seek me in the 
morning, [the morning of the resurrection or restitution] BUT I 
SHALL NOT BE"-I shall be destroyed, blotted out of existence. 
But nevertheless, though thus destroyed, he says, "Thou shalt call 
and I will answer thee." (Job 14:15.) Like Lazarus, at the call of 
Jesus, earth's dead millions shall again spring into existence. David 
declares the same truth when he says, "Thou turnest man to 
destruction and [then] sayest, return, ye children of men." And with 
him we must say, "Bless the Lord, O my soul; who redeemeth thy 
life from destruction?" (Psa. 90:3; 103:1,4.) O that all the world 
could now realize the glorious import of those words of our Lord, 
"The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost." 
It was a glorious truth to realize at his first advent, that the plan of 
God had so far developed that the promised Messiah had actually 
come to save men by the sacrifice of himself. But it is still more 
glorious now to realize that our Lord has come the second time, to 
apply the benefits of that sacrifice, to claim and restore his 
purchased possessions, to actually and completely save that which 
was lost. 

While we have thus stated what we believe to be the Scripture 
teaching concerning the salvation of men, we would yet more 
particularly answer the inquiry of some- 



WHA T MUST I DO TO BE SA VED? 

Perhaps the reader already sees that he has nothing to do. All that 
was necessary to procure your salvation was done long ago, before 
you were born; and in consequence of the redemption provided, all 
mankind, whether they ever knew it, or believed it or not, are going 
to be brought to life again, are going to be saved from the Adamic 
death. God will have all men to be saved; and though they may 
never have known him before, to be then brought to a knowledge of 
the truth. 

Well, we seem to hear some one say, that is a strange answer. I 
thought you would tell me to pray or to get some Christian friends 
to pray for me, that I must try to realize that I am the chief of 
sinners, that I must kneel at a mourner's bench, or something of the 
kind, but you have not even told me to repent or believe. You 
simply say that I am saved, and that I have had, and can have 
nothing to do with it. 

No, friend, we do not say that you are saved, but that you will be 
saved; and that you have had, and can have nothing to do with the 
means which procured your salvation. It is a free gift of God, in 
consequence of which you will be saved in the coming age; but you 
are in no sense saved now unless you have come to believe in 
Christ as your Redeemer. If you do believe this Bible truth, then 
you may through that faith reckon yourself as saved now— saved by 
hope; but you must wait for the actual salvation until God's due 
time. (2 Thes. 3:5.) Of course faith in and reliance on Christ as your 
Redeemer implies a realization of your need of a Redeemer, and a 
repentance and turning from sin. You may have been one of the 
very chief of sinners, or you may not have been so bad as some 
others; however, you were bad enough to merit the just 
condemnation of God's law, for he who offends in one point is 
guilty of all. (James 2: 10.) He is a violator of the law, and as a 
consequence is under condemnation. If you have always lived just 
as morally and as carefully as you could, you have fallen short of 
perfection, because of the weakness of your nature, inherited 
through Adam's fall. (Rom. 5:12.) But though nothing that you have 
done or could do could save you from death, that which Christ has 
done procures your release from it. 

Paul said, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be 
saved." This is the condition on which we receive the reckoned 
salvation now, and it will also be the condition on which the world 
will receive their actual full salvation in the ages to come. We must 
bear in mind that the awakening of men from death is only the 
beginning of their salvation. Not until they have, under the 
discipline of the next age, reached perfection, are they fully saved. 
Although we might truly say men are saved when first awakened 
from death, they are not "saved to the uttermost" until brought to 
full perfection of being. But none will be thus "saved to the 
uttermost" who do not accept of their release from death as the 
direct result of the sacrifice of Christ. And realizing this, they must 



repent of past sins and turn to God. Otherwise they die the second 
death, from which there is no release. 

Well, says our inquirer, this seems true and Scriptural, but what 
advantage is to be gained by being reckoned saved now? Would it 
not be as well to wait and give ourselves no concern about it, but let 
God's plan take its course? O no, we answer, there is an advantage, 
a great advantage to be gained by prompt faith and obedience as 
soon as we can gain sufficient knowledge on which to base our 
faith and obedience. 

The special privilege of those justified by faith (or reckoned saved) 
during the gospel age, has been their right to present themselves as 
acceptable sacrifices to God-joint-sacrifices with Jesus Christ, and 
thereby to become joint-heirs with him of all things. That privilege, 
we believe, began with the day of Pentecost and ended in October, 
1881.* While this special privilege was not offered to any before or 
since that time, another special privilege was granted to believers 
before this age, and we see no reason why a similar privilege may 
not be granted to believers since the gospel age ended. 

Those justified by faith in past ages will have no need of trial and 
discipline in the next age, for their judgment is past; and 
consequently in the instant of 



*It may be proper, to guard against misunderstanding, to say that 
though all had sacrificed to the extent of CONSECRATION at that 
time, all have not yet completed the sacrifice and will not till 
actually dead. 

R605 : page 7 

their resurrection they will be raised to perfect human existence. 

A similar blessing, we believe, is in store for those of the world 
who now repent of sin, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as their 
Redeemer and rightful Lord, and wholly turn to God. As heretofore 
frequently shown, we find that we are now living in the Day of the 
Lord, in the beginning of the Millennial Age— the Times of 
Restitution. And since our Lord is present for the very purpose of 
restoring life and all things, we think it possible for such to remain 
without ever passing into death. It is just as easy when God's due 
time comes to keep men from going into death as it is to raise them 
out of it. This is not possible in the case of those who are to change 
their nature and become "new creatures"; it applies only to those 
justified ones who never started for the high calling. Therefore we 
should expect that such should in answer to prayer be healed from 
sickness, etc., but they cannot be brought to full perfection until the 
saints are first glorified; for "They without us shall not be made 
perfect." (Heb. 11:40.) 

Probably very few will come to realize their privilege now. The 
tendency of the world is more and more towards skepticism, and 



few can claim this privilege; nevertheless; we believe it to be the 
privilege of any such who have faith to claim it. 

In answer, then, to the question, What must I do to be saved? we 
would say, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be 
saved." Your salvation may begin now, and progress until you are 
restored to the perfection of your being —saved to the uttermost. For 
he (Christ) is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God 
by him." (Heb. 7:25.) 

ED. D. R. 



R605 : page 7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Question. Please explain Mark 16:15-20. 

Answer. It is very important to observe the times and seasons 
indicated in the Scriptures. This commission was given in the 
spring-time of the Gospel Age, when the all-important work of the 
Church was seed sowing. The commission, Go into all the world 
and preach the gospel to every creature," indicated that it was no 
longer confined to the Jew. 

But seed sowing was not the only work of the Church. They had 
something to do in the way of cultivating the tender plants which 
spring up from the sown seed. 

The spring-time and the summer of the Gospel Age are both past, 
and the autumn with its harvest work is here. "Lift up your eyes, 
and look on the fields, for they are white already to harvest. And he 
that reapeth receive th wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal: 
that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together. 
And herein is that saying true, One soweth and another reapeth," 
etc. 

Jesus spoke these words with reference to the harvest of the Jewish 
Age, but since that age was a pattern of this, it is as emphatically 
true here. The principal part of the sowing of this age was done by 
the early church, while all the reaping is our special privilege. But 
when the golden grain is all gathered in the faithful sower and the 
faithful reaper, who diligently observed the times and seasons, shall 
rejoice together. 

Paul's counsel, "Do good to all men as you have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith," should be continually borne in 
mind. While about our special business of reaping in presenting 
advanced truth to consecrated saints, we should improve every 
opportunity for dropping some seeds of truth among others with 
whom we come in contact. 

But we should not make the mistake of expecting this new seed to 
flourish and come to maturity in this age. There are a thousand 



years ahead of us for this work, and it will be the special work after 
this harvest is ended. But it is consecrated believers only who may 
be developed and perfected now. He that believeth and is baptized 
with the baptism that Christ was baptized with— into death— shall be 
saved now to the high calling offered in this age. But he that 
believeth not shall be damned (condemned) as utterly unfit for the 
high office to which those saved in this age are called. But though 
thus condemned now, they will have abundant evidence for faith, 
and ample opportunity to be saved and brought to human perfection 
in the coming age, when the blind eyes shall be opened and the deaf 
ears shall be unstopped. 

Verses 17 and 18 mention certain signs which should accompany 
believers, and verse 20 shows that the Lord did thus work with the 
early Church, confirming their word with the promised signs. But 
Paul shows us (1 Cor. 13:8-10) that when the necessity for such 
signs is done away they will no longer continue. They were a 
necessity in the introduction of Christianity, but we have now 
abundant and substantial evidence on which to rest our faith 
without them. 

Q. Does Matt. 24:6 teach that "wars and rumors of wars" are a sign 
of the end of the Gospel Age? 

A. No; we think not. Wars and rumors of wars have characterized 
earth's history, with varying frequency and cruelty, ever since the 
fall of man. But the Scriptures assure us that the time of the end of 
the Gospel Age, or end of the dominion of the "prince of this 
world," will witness a more general and wide-spread warfare than 
was ever known before, involving all the powers of earth. The 
indications of such an uprising we now see in the rapid and world- 
wide development of the principles of Communism. Already men's 
hearts are beginning to fail them for fear of those things that are 
coming on the earth, and the cloud, which continues to grow darker, 
is fast overspreading the whole heavens. Before many years the 
storm will burst in all its fury, "and there shall be a time of trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation." Dan. 12:1. 

Jesus tells his disciples that they will hear of many wars and rumors 
of wars, but tells them not to be troubled about it, for all these 
things must come to pass. As long as Satan rules the world strife 
and war and confusion must reign, and you shall be hated and 
afflicted and killed for my name's sake. But amid all these troubles 
the saints, knowing that these things must be so for a time, and that 
"the end is not yet," must patiently endure until "he comes whose 
right it is" to take the kingdom from the usurper and reward his 
faithful saints. 

So also famines and pestilences and earthquakes are not to be 
regarded specially as signs of the end. Though they will doubtless 
be frequent, and perhaps more so in the time of the end, like wars 
they have been a part of Satan's policy from the first. It is not to be 
presumed that the prince of darkness will suffer the binding 



influences of the new Prince, which are now at work to fetter his 
power without a struggle. Without a doubt his rage will spend its 
force in distressing mankind in various ways, for he knoweth that 
he hath but a short time. 

Q. If the punishment of the wicked is merely a blotting out of 
existence, how do you understand that the punishment of the 
wicked is equal to the reward of the righteous? 

A. The Scriptures nowhere state that there will be such equality. 
They do not teach that the misery of the wicked must tally with the 
glory and blessedness of the saints. That idea was promulgated by 
the adversary through Papacy, but has no existence in the Word of 
God. All other punishments except that of the second death are 
designed as corrective, and this final punishment shows that God in 
mercy takes away the being which could only be a source of misery 
to itself and others. In mercy God will blot such out of existence. 
But, "As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death 
of the wicked." (Ezek. 33:11.) 

Q. Please explain 1 Pet. 4:17,18— "For the time is come that 
judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, 
what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And 
if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the 
sinner appear? 

A. The term judgment may be properly applied to the process of 
trial, or to the result of trial— the decision or verdict. In the former 
sense the judgment of the Church began over eighteen hundred 
years ago, and has been progressing ever since. But in the latter 
sense, it is due in the end or harvest of the Gospel Age. Hence the 
separating of wheat and tares, and also of the ripe and unripe wheat, 
now going on. 

And if the judgment of the Church, as to who is fit or unfit to 
receive the Gospel prize offered to us, has begun, what shall the end 
or decision of this judgment be concerning them that obey not the 
Gospel of God?— not concerning them that never heard, or that had 
no ears to hear it (Rev. 2:11), but concerning them that had a 
hearing ear, that did once hear with gladness and appreciate the 
Gospel, and then, for various reasons, did not obey it-the ungodly, 
not necessarily vicious and in direct opposition and defiance of 
God, but those claiming to be his and yet not fully obedient. There 
are very many such. What shall the end of this judgment be to 
them? 

Let the Psalmist answer: "They are like the chaff which the wind 
driveth away. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the 
judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous." (Psa. 
1:4,5.) Like the chaff they will be carried away by the winds of 
false doctrine, or the storms of opposition; 



R606 : page 7 



they will not be able to stand the test, or counted worthy to be 
gathered with the faithful. But, "blessed is the man that walketh not 
in the counsel of [such unfaithful ones] the ungodly, nor standeth in 
the way of [these] sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But 
his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he meditate 
day and night." Though in this judgment a thousand unfaithful shall 
fall at his side, and ten thousand at his right hand, he shall stand, 
and in due time will receive the great reward. 

Verse 1 8 shows that the righteous, or those who pass the judgment 
of this age and win the prize of the high calling, will scarcely, or 
merely, be saved-that is, with difficulty. It will require all their 
faith, and all their effort: those who do not exercise faith and put 
forth all their effort will not be able to stand. 

Q. Please compare Luke 6:29,30, with 1 Tim. 5:8, and tell me how 
both these principles can be carried out. There is a miserly and idle 
class who would completely strip the frugal and industrious if they 
would literally obey Luke 6:29,30; and before long we would find 
the command of 1 Tim. 5:8 impossible, while the class referred to 
would be encouraged in indolence and improvidence. What is duty? 

A. This is a very practical question, and one not unfrequently 
forced upon many. We think, however, that Luke 6:31 settles the 
difficulty. It reads: "And as ye would that men should do to you, do 
ye also to them likewise. " Mark, it does not say, as they would have 
you do to them, but, as you would have them do to you. This makes 
quite a difference. You, as a true child of God, are controlled by the 
highest principles of love and justice, and would therefore only 
desire the same of your neighbor. Love and justice would, if 
possible, feed and clothe your neighbor if he is unable by industry 
and economy to do it for himself. But neither love nor justice to 
him or to yourself would encourage indolence, prodigality or 
meanness. 

Verses 27 to 30 are not in opposition to the principle expressed in 
the golden rule, but teach what should be our attitude towards our 
enemies who hate and despitefully use us. Their simple teaching is, 
Don't strike back or try to get even with them. Show them that you 
are willing to endure hardness, and even to suffer violence and 
injustice if need be. Verses 30-36 teach us to show a spirit of 
liberality that will shame their meanness, and a love and mercy that 
will win their secret respect even while they openly oppose us. The 
kingdom of heaven suffereth violence now, but in due time the 
reward will be realized. 

Q. Please explain the following texts: (1) John 3:36-"He that 
believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not 
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him." 

A. It is proper to say that we have a thing either when we are in 
actual possession of it, or when we have a clear deed or title to it. 
Thus you might say you have a piece of property in Europe, though 
you are not there to possess it, but you hold the deed signed and 



sealed and made out in your name. Just so he that now believeth on 
the Son of God, the Redeemer who purchased us with his own 
precious blood, has now everlasting life; not that he is in actual 
possession of it, but he holds a clear title to it, signed by Jehovah 
himself and sealed with the precious blood of Christ. 

In the next age, when brought to a knowledge of the truth, all the 
world must likewise recognize Christ as their Redeemer and Lord 
and trust in and submit to his authority, else they shall never see life 
in its fullness and perfection; and God does not recognize as life 
anything short of perfection. The wrath or condemnation of God 
abideth on all others, and will end in final destruction, if not 
removed, either in this age or the next. Only a few are yet free from 
condemnation (1 John 5:19), and many blind eyes must be opened 
and deaf ears unstopped before the mass of the world can believe, 
come into harmony with God, and have life everlasting. 

Q. (2) "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that 
believeth not shall be damned." Mark 16:16. 

A. He that believeth and is baptized in the likeness of Christ's death 
shall be of the special class saved during this age. The advantage to 
the class saved during this age is the high exaltation to a new 
nature— the spiritual. But he that believeth not shall be damned, or 
condemned, as entirely unfit to receive the favor offered during this 
age. Nearly all the world is so damned, or condemned, but they are 
not irrecoverably damned as unfit for any service; for we have seen 
that God has glorious favors in store for them when they shall have 
been brought to knowledge, faith and obedience— even restitution. 

Q. (3) "And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that 
they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned who 
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." (2 
Thes. 2:11,12.) 

A. The preceding verses show that the reference here is to the 
development of the "Man of Sin"— Papacy. But, all who have been 
deceived by the great Papal system were not of the class who had 
pleasure in unrighteousness. The deceptions and errors of Papacy, 
still promulgated through Protestantism, even to-day continue to 
fetter many of God's children to some extent. But, however sincere 
were many of the ignorant and deceived ones who afterward 
formed a part of the Papal system, its "COMING was after the 
working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and 
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness." That is, those who 
were instrumental in introducing this system were men who, though 
they knew the truth, received it not in the love of it, but had 
pleasure in unrighteousness. They sought to pervert the truth for 
their own selfish ends, and in so doing they found able support in 
Satan, "the God of this world." 

For this cause God left such, as he always does, where they placed 
themselves, in the hands of the enemy, who strongly deluded them 
into believing the lies they sought to propagate, that they all might 



be condemned who had pleasure in unrighteousness. We have often 
heard it lightly remarked that if one tells an untruth several times he 
begins to believe it himself. This is indeed a fearful fact, and an 
evidence of the increasing power of Satan over such. What a fearful 
condition to be in, especially for any whose judgment is in the 
present age, and whose trial must be completed in this life. [See 
article, "The Judgment," in December issue.] Perilous indeed is the 
condition of those who at any time pervert the truth of God for 
selfish ends; though they do it 

R606 : page 8 

at first with trembling and fear, they will shortly do it with 
boldness, and with a degree of sincerity which gives evidence of 
their strong and awful delusion. 

Q. (4) "Thou believest that there is one God: thou doest well: the 
devils also believe and tremble." James 2:19. 

A. Though it is true that "without faith it is impossible to please 
God," Paul here shows that faith is not the only thing necessary to 
please him. To believe that there is a God is well; that is a step in 
the right direction, but that is not enough. There is no special virtue 
in believing an evident truth; but it is lying and self-deception to 
disbelieve any truth of which we have clear evidence. The devils 
also believe and tremble at the word of the Lord because they know 
his power. Faith must be accompanied by obedience to God in so 
far as the imperfect earthen vessel is able to render it. The daily life 
must give evidence of faith in all God's promises, and of a love and 
gratitude which humbly and gratefully accepts his favors. 

One other thought might be noted here, viz: that the faith of devils 
can only inspire trembling, dread and fear, for having 
presumptuously sinned against God in the face of truth and 
knowledge, so manifest to those dwelling in his actual presence, 
there remaineth no more opportunity for them. That was their 
judgment day, and in it they decided their final destiny, which is 
destruction. And knowing it, they tremble as the time draws near. 
(Luke 4:34; Matt. 8:29.) 

But because of God's gracious promises our faith inspires us with 
hope and joy; for our judgment day is not yet past. But it is a 
solemn thought that it is passing with those who have been brought 
to a knowledge of the truth. And therefore it becomes us, while 
rejoicing in hope, to "take heed lest we fall." 

Q. (5) "Then he [Jesus] said unto them [the disputing Pharisees], I 
go my way, and ye shall seek me and shall die in your sins: whither 
I go ye cannot come." 

A. Jesus was going away to the Father, to a higher condition, the 
divine nature. Had these Pharisees acted differently, they might 
have followed him to that high exaltation. The privilege of 
following him was soon to be offered to the meek and lowly of 
heart. And as a mark of special favor it was to be offered to the Jew 



first; but these Pharisees, in their pride and unbelief, lost their 
opportunity. Not having faith in Christ, they were not even 
justified, and therefore they died in their sins. 

But being blinded-at least partially so, as Jesus said they were 
(Matt. 15:14) —in the coming age their blindness shall be taken 
away, their pride will be humbled, and then will they seek Him 
whom they with wicked hands had crucified and slain, and will 
humbly acknowledge him as both Lord and Christ. And the 
forgiveness sought in Jesus' dying prayer will be granted; but the 
opportunity of following Jesus to the divine nature will have 
forever passed. 

Q. (6) "And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed." 
Acts 13:48. 

A. To ordain means "to set in order," "to arrange according to rule." 
(See 

R607 : page 8 

Webster.) To ordain, or set in order, for eternal life, is partly our 
work and partly God's work. God's part of the work was to provide 
the necessary sacrifice for sin, and to make known to us its efficacy 
and our privilege of sharing its benefits. Our part of the work is to 
believe God, to accept these benefits, and act accordingly. 

If, when men hear, they are not disposed to be sincere and honest 
with themselves, but rather love darkness than light because their 
deeds are evil, they have not taken the first step toward the setting 
in order for eternal life. If they are not even disposed in favor of 
truth and righteousness, how can they believe? The sense of the 
passage, then, is that as many as were disposed, or inclined, toward 
truth and righteousness, believed. The idea is clearly expressed in 
Rotherham's translation— "As many as had become disposed for 
age-abiding life, believed." 

Q. Was the promise to Abram, Gen. 13:14-17, ever fulfilled? If so, 
when- if not, when will it be, and how? 

A. In Acts 7:5, we read that God gave to Abram none inheritance in 
the land of promise; no, not so much as to set his foot on, yet he 
promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his 
seed after him. And in Heb. 11:13, we read: "These all (Abram and 
others mentioned) died in faith, not having received the promises, 
but having seen them afar off were persuaded of them, and 
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and 
pilgrims on the earth. " As heretofore shown, the promise will be 
literally fulfilled to Abram in the incoming Millennial Age, and will 
soon be realized; for already the fig-tree begins to put forth 
whereby we know, even if we had no other evidence, that summer 
is nigh. 

Q. I have read in "FOOD," page 98, the answer to part of a query 
which arose in my mind while learning of the coming restitution, 



viz.: Would there be room for them on the earth if the billions of 
the dead were resurrected? But while that is fully answered, I still 
query, How would so large a population subsist? 

A. Even if we could think of no way, it should be no obstacle to 
reposing faith in the positive promise of God. Remember Abraham, 
God's promise to him was most improbable (Gen. 18:10, and 22:2; 
17:21), yet he "staggered not" at that, but believed God-so should 
we. But foreseeing this query on our part, our Father has explained 
how it shall be accomplished, saying, "The earth shall yield her 
increase" ; "the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad, and 
the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose." "In the wilderness 
shall waters break out and streams in the desert." (Isa. 35:1-6.) Thus 
we see that the changes which God has in contemplation, indicate 
that he has foreseen all the necessities of his plan, and will make 
provision for the needs of his creatures in what is termed a natural 
way, and at the same time let us remember that He shall be there to 
superintend who turned water into wine, and with two loaves fed 
five thousand. 

Q. Since we read that God can "by no means clear the guilty," how 
shall we harmonize that with other statements of Scripture which 
show that our sins were imputed to Jesus and he died for them; 
while his righteousness was imputed to us, and we shall live on that 
account, or as elsewhere stated by His (Jesus') stripes we are 
healed? 

A. Suppose a man found guilty of some crime is condemned to 
imprisonment or $1,000 fine. He has no money, and is imprisoned. 
His friends go to the Governor asking his pardon, and get his reply 
thus: I cannot and will not pardon any man who is really guilty. If 
you can show that the law was bad, or that the decision of the court 
was unjust, that would be a reason why I should do him justice by 
pardoning him, and setting aside the penalty. But if it is admitted 
that the "law is good," and the decision and penalty just, then I can 
by no means clear the guilty— I cannot pardon him. 

Suppose, then, that you sold your property, and securing the 
amount of the fine, went and paid it FOR the guilty one. Would not 
this illustrate the sinners case? Jehovah does not clear or pardon 
them, but redeems them by providing the ransom for sin. 

Q. When the Millennium begins, what becomes of those who are 
not Christians? Are all to die and then to have a resurrection, to be 
brought to Adamic perfection? 

A. As you are doubtless aware we understand Scripture to hold out 
very different promises to the true Church of this age, from those to 
the world to be fulfilled in the Millennial Age. Hence we answer, 
your question supposes that you ask concerning the world, which, 
however, includes many nominal Christians who are in a general 
way believers in Christ, but who never have sanctified themselves, 
never consecrated, and who, therefore, are not new creatures, but 



still of the human nature and heirs with the world of those promises 
of restitution and blessing which shall flow to the natural man. 

Among all these, light, knowledge, truth shall increase and bring 
attendant blessings and happiness. For a further answer to your first 
question, we refer you to article entitled "Sanctifying the World," in 
the TOWER for Feb., 1883. 

From your second question we judge that you do not fully 
appreciate DEATH. Death has passed upon all humanity, and all 
are in death and under its control, even before the last spark of life 
becomes extinct. Strictly speaking, everything is in death which is 
perishing; hence only two men ever were fully alive- Adam 
through sin brought death. The sentence against him was, "Dying, 
thou shalt die" (Margin), and as soon as the sin had been committed 
the penalty began to take effect. And Jesus when he became a man, 
like Adam before the fall, had neither death nor cause of death (sin) 
in him, but "in him was life" which he gave as a ransom for ours. 
All others have been in the dead or dying condition. 

Likewise we have seen that resurrection does not merely mean to 
lift men from the tomb with only a spark of life, but includes this 
and all the process following it, which brings them up entirely out 
of the dying condition to the perfection of their human nature. 

Thus seen, there will be no occasion for others to enter the tomb 
when the kingdom of heaven has been fully established in the earth. 
[Which we understand will be about 1914 A.D.] The Great 
Physician-the Christ-will then be among men in power and the 
work of healing and restoring all things, but faintly foreshadowed 
by Jesus' earthly miracles, will commence. The resurrection work 
will progress both with those who are in their graves and also those 
not so far down in the dark "valley of the shadow of death," and all 
will have the strength and help provided, by which they may regain 
the mountain top of human perfection and life which Adam lost the 
right to through sin, but which right was redeemed for all by Christ. 

Q. What am I to do? I am a Baptist. I cannot now agree with them, 
and cannot see how I can consistently remain in the Baptist Church- 
-giving my influence and support to what I now see to be error, 
even though there are good people in it, and some seeming good 
moral influence is being exerted by it. Yet there is no Church here 
holding the views which the WATCH TOWER maintains. Should I 
withdraw? 

A. We can only repeat to you the word of the Lord, quoted and 
expounded in other issues of the TOWER. If his command, "Come 
out of her (Babylon) my people," be not sufficient for you, what 
could we say that would have more weight with you? 

We believe the "Baptists" to have as little error as perhaps any of 
the sects. Back in the days of Bunyan they were evidently very near 
the Apostolic arrangement of the Church, but it has drifted into the 
popular sectarian channel with the others-it now has its creed, 



boundaries and its titled ministry, and ignores the teachings of the 
Scriptures to teach human tradition, and is now as much a member 
of the "Image" (Rev. 13:14-17) as any other sect. We can see no 
other way for you to do than to withdraw your name, influence and 
support from the institution. 

You are probably mistaken about there being no members of the 
Church of Christ [whose names are written in heaven] in your 
place; and as a member of that Church to whom God has given 
greater light, it is your duty, as it should be your joy, to let your 
light shine, and thereby bless the other members. There may be 
some of them with you in the Baptist Church, some in the 
Methodist, Presbyterian, and other sects, who, while really 
consecrated to the Lord, have been deceived as you were into 
rendering to sectarianism the service meant for God. Remember 
that Elijah once thought himself alone, and supposed that all Israel 
was worshipping Baal's image, but God informed him that there 
were seven thousand who had not. So it is to-day, the truth is daily 
seeking out those who are faithful and feeding them. All such will 
heed God's word, and are willing to face the frown of the popular 
sentiment of the nominal Church, and confess Christ and his 
teachings. 

It should be our constant endeavor to seek out such. You know not 
how many starving saints may be hungering for the bread which 
you can supply. Don't expect to find them among the most popular 
Christians-the eminently pious— though there may be some such, 
but as a general thing it is now as it was in Jesus' day, that the poor 
of this world are the rich in faith. May God bless the humble 
messengers and receivers of his glorious truth. 

Q. In the July issue you say "the Jew... could not keep the Law. 
Please tell us what portion of it they could not keep? You also 
mention "the life promised under that Law covenant -but what life 
was promised under that Law? 

A. The Law is one whole law with ten divisions. To keep the Law 
was to meet the requirements of each of the ten items. The promise 
of life was to any who could keep the whole perfectly, and he who 
offended or violated one part was a violator of the Law, and had no 
claim on the life promised to the obedient. (Jam. 2:10.) The 
Apostles and Jesus assure us that none but Jesus ever kept that law 
inviolate, therefore he was the only one who had a right to life, 
hence it is that the Law did not demand his death, but when he died 
it was willingly a sacrifice for our sins. (See 1 Pet. 3:18; 1 John 3:5; 
John 6:51; 10:18.) 

The life promised was a right to continue to live-human life. 

Q. Please explain Rom. 8:14-17. You teach that the Spirit is not 
received by any until sanctification, but these brethren here 
addressed were seemingly unsanctified as shown by Rom. 6:19. 



A. These two Scriptures are in harmony with our teaching, and with 
each other. Rom. 6:4,8,11,12,18, and 22, show that the persons 
addressed were truly consecrated in heart and mind to the Lord. The 
"presenting" vs. 13 and 19, refers not to consecration, but to the 
carrying out or fulfilling of the covenant already made. They had 
covenanted to render, or had presented their minds to the Lord, now 
they must not forget to spend the life and strength of every member 
of their bodies in his service. 

Q. What became of Jesus' flesh when he as a spiritual being 
ascended to heaven? 

A. See "Food for Thinking Christians," pages 61 and 62. If you 
have none you can get a copy free by addressing this office. 

Q. Please explain Isa. 11:11. "And it shall come to pass in that day 
that the Lord shall set his hand again, the second time, to recover 
the remnant of his people which shall be left from Assyria, and 
from Egypt, and from Pathos, and from Cush, and from Elam, and 
from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea." 

A. This prophecy of Isaiah seems parallel to that of Jeremiah 16:14- 
17. "Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be 
said, The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel out of 
the land of Egypt; but the Lord liveth that brought up the children 
of Israel from the land of the north (Russia, north of Palestine, 
where the greatest number of that people are now found, and from 
which they are now being driven by fierce persecution), and from 
all the lands whither he had driven them; and I will bring them 
again into their land that I gave unto their fathers." Yes, the 
deliverance from Egypt of the remnant of Israel, who lived to see it, 
was a deliverance they never forgot, but that deliverance will seem 
insignificant when compared to the great deliverance which the 
Lord will accomplish when he sets his hand again, the second time, 
to recover the remnant of that people living in the day of the Lord, 
here referred to. For proof that the day of the Lord is now upon us, 
see "Food for Thinking Christians," and note that these things are 
already beginning to come to pass. This day is this Scripture being 
fulfilled in your ears- whosoever hath an ear, let him hear. 



R608 : page 1 

VOL. V. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL AND MAY, 1884. 
NO. 9. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 
101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 



we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



R608 : page 1 

THE DELAY of the last two issues has been unavoidable; a 
variety of circumstances rendered it so. We hope the readers will 
excuse it. The same circumstances will still further delay the long- 
promised book, MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN, but we are doing the 
best we can. 



CHANGE OF ADDRESS. 

We have removed our business office to NO. 44 FEDERAL ST., 
ALLEGHENY CITY, PA. Hereafter all mail matter should be 
directed to the new office, but MONEY ORDERS should be made 
payable at Pittsburgh, Pa. 



page 1 

ROBBING THE MAILS. 

Some one in P.O. employ has discovered that we often get letters 
containing money, and has been robbing us lately. The only SAFE 
way, therefore, will be for you to send by P.O. MONEY ORDERS, 
or REGISTERED LETTERS, or BANK DRAFTS. Please 
remember this. 



R608 : page 1 

APRIL AND MAY. 

Our removal and other circumstances have so far delayed us, that 
we think it prudent to omit one number and let this one do for the 
two months. This will help to get matters straight in our office, and 
each subscriber can reckon his subscription as paying for one 
month ahead so that it will be no pecuniary loss to any of you. 



R608 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The central point of interest during this month was the 
commemoration on the night of the 8th inst., of the death of Christ 



our Passover— slain for us. This has always been an interesting 
occasion, and this last was no exception, as indicated by our own 
experience here and the letters received from every direction from 
those of like precious faith. 

In some places only two or three assembled, in others more, and 
some isolated individuals alone, but the general testimony is that 
the Master was present at least in spirit; and for aught we know was 
personally present. All seem to have felt, "It is good for us to be 
here." 

The church at this place had a precious season, several from other 
parts making it convenient to be with us. The little company 
numbered about a hundred, and while we partook of the symbols of 
the body and blood of the Lamb of God-"our Passover"-we called 
to remembrance the import of the ceremony —the necessity that 
whoever would be of the first-born must be under the blood and 
must eat or appropriate the slain Lamb. The thought was 
impressive, too, that we not only partake of Christ Jesus' merit, but 
that, as shown in the supper, we commune with or share with him 
as members of the body broken, being made members or parts of 
the same loaf. We heard his words to those who asked for a place in 
the kingdom, "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?" 
And with them we answered, By the help of God we are able; and 
we heard the Master's response, "Ye shall indeed drink of the cup"— 
ye shall indeed share in my sufferings and be privileged to fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ: "Drink ye all of it." 

We tried to realize the privilege we enjoy during this Gospel age, in 
that we are permitted to share in the sacrifice without which we 
could not hope to be accounted worthy to sit with him in his throne. 
(Rom. 8:17.) After supper we sang a hymn and went to our homes 
remembering the scenes and incidents of the night and following 
day over eighteen hundred years ago, and rejoiced to realize that the 
sufferings of Christ are nearly ended and the glory to follow almost 
begun. 

Many letters recently received ask for preaching, and truly the 
laborers are few. Pray ye the Lord of the harvest to send forth 
laborers into his vineyard, and as you earnestly pray you will come 
to the point where you will say, Lord cannot I do something?-Lord 
send me. Whoever seeks will find, and to those who knock a door 
of opportunity will open. Unwillingness to serve in an obscure and 
small way is the trouble with many. In the Lord's army as in earthly 
ones there are more privates than captains and corporals needed. 
Let us fall into line, put on the uniform of a Christian life, and 
engage in whatever branch of the service we find opportunity. If 
faithful in lesser things we may be advanced to service requiring 
still greater self-denial and sacrifice. Let each seek to put into active 
service whatever talents he possess; thus he will prove himself a 
good and faithful servant, and enter the joys of his Lord. 

page 1 



We present below extracts from 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Peoria, Ills., April 11, 1884. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:— Your welcome letter received. I lecture 
twice Sunday and expect large audiences. Have made more visits 
and acquaintances than usual, and as usual found a few willing to 
listen, if not to hear. 

Mrs. A. celebrated the Passover with me, using the elements, bread 
and wine. Although such a celebration had always greatly affected 
both of us as used in the nominal church, yet the two alone using 
Christ's words and symbols on the anniversary, enjoyed the feast as 
never before. We are so glad you suggested the observance even to 
the ones or twos. Our experience is, that upon proper preparation so 
as not to partake "unworthily" (not discerning the Lord's body) 
great benefit is received. For a day previous we read the proper 
Scriptures and ZION'S WATCH TOWER comments, and while 
communing we read, gave thanks, and conversed on the subjects 
connected. I hope none of the saints are so poorly instructed that 
they cannot think the thoughts, utter the thanks, and speak of 
Christ's work and glory in proper words. We are strengthened and 
rejoiced, having partaken of the bread— truth; and of the wine— the 
cup the Lord offers us. 

As a result of the examination that the celebration calls up, I shall 
endeavor to be more fully alive to every opportunity to preach the 
gospel— even to the ones or twos. I thank God that I am willing to 
use the talents entrusted to me. A minuter search for the few grains 
of wheat in the mass of chaff I have often resolved to make. I must 
do more visiting and feeding of saints. It cannot be so very hard to 
part with the deaf and sightless, saying, "Nevertheless the kingdom 
of heaven has drawn near unto you." A few more rebuffs daily I can 
bear and I MUST. 

Requesting your prayers, I am 

Yours in Christ, 

J. B. AD ANSON. 

P.S. I have my chart on the street in front of the house I board in, 
and many assemble around it; many talks and precious seasons 
when we find heart ears. 



March 5, 1884. 

EDITOR OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER: -Dear Sir-I am learning 
more and more of the plan of our Creator for the redemption of the 
world, and I am so glad that you sent us "Food for Thinking 
Christians," for it was what I wanted. I was a member of the 
Congregationalist church but not in sympathy with its teachings. I 



longed for something better. I thank God that I have it now. I am 
resting in Jesus and I am trying to let others know of the better way. 
My little book has been out a good share of the time, and it has 
been the means of setting some to thinking. I am all alone in this 
way of thinking, not even my husband sympathizes with me, and I 
suppose that I am considered very singular, but I am willing to 
suffer for the truth's sake. The papers that I received for distribution 
I have sent to those I thought would read and think too. Being an 
invalid, I seldom get away from home, so I do not know what effect 
they had. After having done all that lies in my power I am willing 
to let it rest in God's hand. I am nearly sixty years old, and am glad 
that I have found the truth even at this late hour. I ask an interest in 
the prayers of God's people, for I do believe in prayer. I want to be 
found among the faithful, not only on account of a future reward, 
but for the joy it gives me here to know that I am doing God's will. 

R608 : page 1 

Passaic Co., N.J., March 31, 1884. 

DEAR BRO.:-The WATCH TOWER for this month has not 
reached me, and I think the subscription may have expired. 

Sister paid it last year, I think, and it seems I ought not 

to be among "the Lord's poor" when I have the comforts of home, 
etc. ; but I am flatly refused the amount for a paper that has been the 
means of my withdrawal from the M.E. Church, and even my 
postage and change are watched so closely that I have not been able 
to save even the small price of the subscription. However, I have 
the prospect of some change by washing, which I will send as soon 
as accumulated, with that of an acquaintance who is reading my 
"Food" and will be a new subscriber. Meanwhile please continue 
sending the paper, for it furnishes me more food than any reading 
matter I can get, explaining to me Scripture, and increasing 
continually my interest in God's Word. And in almost every case 
where I become puzzled or troubled over some text, the next paper 
(by direction of God I am sure, not chance,) furnishes the solution. I 
was troubled about "Let not your hearts be overcharged with the 
cares of this life." My cares are so numerous, my hands so busy, my 
head in such a state of confusion often, that Satan vexed me with 
the text; but your paper emphasizing "hearts" brought me such 
comfort that I was filled with praise that my heart is not in these 
things, though I find I have great need to watch. I am compelled to 
suffer much because of my non-relation to the nominal church, 
being accused of self-righteousness, etc., but I endeavor to count it 
all joy, treading alone, like Jesus, the wine-press. Pray that God 
may keep me in all humility, making my calling and election sure. 
Yours in Jesus, . 



page 1 



Russell, Kan. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I thank God that you sent or rather 
that he sent me your publications. Through studying them God has 
shown me my position before him. I can look back on my past life 
and see how he has been preparing me for this very day, and O how 
my heart does swell in loving gratitude to him for his loving 
kindness towards me. I have not been connected with any church 
for the last twenty-five years, but when your publications came 
along I recognized the Good Shepherd's voice and you know how 
sweet that voice is to them that love him. I rejoice to know that he 
counted me worthy to be numbered with the flock; and this was a 
great surprise to me that he should call on one seemingly so 
unworthy. It was a long time before I could get to understand how I 
had consecrated before 1881 but it was made clear to me at last, and 
when I had this settled then I found that I had oil enough in my 
lamp to go to look for the Lord's second coming, and I have found 
him.... 

Your Bro. in Christ, 



R609 : page 1 

WATCH YE THEREFORE. 

"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong." 1 
Cor. 16:13. 

The careless, indifferent, and lukewarm may lightly heed the 
words of warning, and scarcely discern the necessity which 
prompted them; but the faithful saints earnestly aspiring to attain 
that whereunto they are called, realize the necessity and thankfully 
heed them. 

We should bear in mind that our foes are unseen, wily, and 
deceptive, and that if there is a weak or unfortified place that is 
where the enemy will make the attack. We need therefore to study 
well our position, and to know every avenue by which the enemy 
may approach. First, last and all the time we need to watch that the 
spirit of Christ in us is not displaced by the spirit of the world 
which so continually surrounds and allures us from our chosen 
course. We need to watch that 

R609 : page 2 

we be not entangled with the cares of this life; we need to watch 
that no root of bitterness springing up may trouble us. We need to 
watch that the fruit of the spirit of God is manifest in all our 
actions. Have we got them, and are they being cultivated and 
developed in us daily? Let us read slowly and bring not our 



neighbors, but our own hearts to the test of God's word— "The fruit 
of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance... .And they that are Christ's 
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. 

What a glorious character yours must be if you have all these fruits 
in their perfection! But that I know you have not. The soil of your 
heart and mine is too poor to expect so much from it, but are we 
pulling up the weeds and doing the necessary pruning and 
cultivating; and in consequence are these fruits developing toward 
perfection? Is our love broad enough to make us patient with those 
whose Christian graces have not developed so rapidly as ours may 
have done? O how we need to watch here, and to guard against the 
roots of bitterness which may spring up! 

Has our love for God and our desire for that goodness which so 
shines in his character, drawn us often to his word? and has our 
faith so laid hold upon its precious promises as to fill our hearts 
with joy and peace. We know this is the case with many, but this 
joy and peace may grow yet more by constant feeding on the word 
of truth. Watch here that you do not neglect to feed upon the word, 
and watch that in coming to it you may come with meekness, a 
simple childlike desire to learn God's ways, and not to establish 
your own. 

While thus exhorted to set a vigilant watch over our Christian 
character lest it be dwarfed, withered or utterly destroyed, we are 
also told to "stand fast in the faith"; and in order that we may so 
stand fast, to equip ourselves and be strong, as men arm and prepare 
themselves for the battle. 

Many make a great mistake in supposing that it is not a very 
important matter to stand fast in the faith; but Paul esteemed it of 
utmost importance. It is possible for every student of the Scriptures 
to have a clear, definite, positive faith, symmetrical and 
harmonious; and to be able to give to every one that asketh, a 
reason for the hope that is in him. If our faith is not thus definite 
and clear, we are just in condition to be blown about by every wind 
of doctrine. O how we need to watch here. Only those strongly 
supported by the truth will be able to stand in this evil day. 

Finally, not only must we keep a vigilant watch over our faith and 
character ourselves, but if we would be strong, we must watch unto 
prayer, and thus keep constant and open communication with the 
heavenly grace and secure the necessary help in every time of need. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R609 : page 2 



WHAT IS IT, AND WHEN AND HOW? 

DEAR SIR: Please explain in your next issue the following 
sentence in the March WATCH TOWER, page 6, middle of second 
column, viz: "Those reckoned saved now, as though they had 
already received the perfect human life, are privileged to relinquish 
their claim and title to it, presenting it as a sacrifice to God, holy 
and acceptable to him when offered in the acceptable time. And 
being thus sacrificed with Christ," &c. This relinquishing their 
claim to salvation, and being sacrificed with Christ, What is it, and 
when and how? 



Dear Sister: It affords us pleasure to endeavor to make still plainer 
the point referred to. Former ideas of salvation were so vague and 
indefinite that when now we speak as the Apostle did of a 
"common" or general salvation, and of a special one, many are 
confused. The central thought in salvation used to be to us, as with 
most Christians it yet is— an escape from everlasting torture. But 
now we have learned that salvation is an escape from death, and 
that it will be fully accomplished by a resurrection. And we find 
that while salvation has been purchased for ALL MEN by the 
precious sacrifice of Jesus, and that consequently all men will be 
saved out of death [which includes a release from all present 
imperfections of body and mind], yet we find that there is a special 
salvation to be shared only by the few, and that the salvation 
[resurrection] of these is called a chief or first resurrection, and that 
it is attainable only by a class, who, during this Gospel age follow 
the example set by Jesus in the beginning of the age —who suffer 
distress and reproach during this age for Christ's sake. 

To come more particularly to your questions: What is this special 
salvation? we answer it is a salvation from death, and in that respect 
like the "common" salvation; but it is more, for while mankind in 
general get back "that which was lost" (Luke 19:10), viz.: human 
nature (a fleshly image of the divine) in all its beauty and perfection 
of mind and body, and a right as such to live forever, these 
esteemed worthy of this chief resurrection, this special salvation, 
will receive everlasting life as new creatures of the divine nature. 
Thus it is seen that salvation to both is from death and to 
everlasting life, but life as human beings to one class, and as divine 
beings to the other. 

To answer your second question: When may this chief salvation be 
obtained? we answer, In the Gospel age. The invitation to run the 
race for the prize of our high calling was never made before the 
gospel age began. In fact Jesus was the first one to run the race. He 
was the first or fore-runner, and we seek to follow in his footsteps, 
as he hath set us an example. This is the age in which as a FAVOR 
some are called to "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ," and to enter into his glory, which is to follow when the 
sufferings are all filled up. Since, then, this age fills up or 



completes the sufferings of Christ, a share in which is the condition 
on which the new nature is bestowed, it follows that the attainment 
of divine glory is limited to the Gospel age. Now is the 
ACCEPTABLE year [or time] of the Lord, i.e., whoever during this 
time, while the sacrificing is in progress, presents himself a 
sacrifice to God, will be ACCEPTABLE provided he is one of 
those "called"; and none are called but those who are JUSTIFIED 
by faith in Jesus as a propitiation or satisfaction for their sins. 

That only justified believers in Christ are acceptable sacrifices, and 
that only such are "called" or invited to become heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ" by suffering with him (Rom. 8:17; 1 
Pet. 2:20,21), is proved by many plain statements, and forcibly 
illustrated in the typical circumstance of Abraham calling a bride 
and joint-heir for his son. That is unquestionably an illustration for 
the calling of the Gospel Church as a chaste virgin (2 Cor. 11:2), to 
be the Bride, help-meet, and joint-heir with the true Isaac— Jesus. It 
has before been shown that Eliezer, the servant sent to select her, 
typified the Holy Spirit of God by which the Church is "called" and 
"led" to her journey's end. But the point to which we now call 
attention, is the particularity of Abraham about the class of people 
from whom this bride of Isaac was to be selected. The servant 
might not go anywhere —"Thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of 
the daughters of the Canaanites...but go unto my country, and unto 
my kindred, and take a wife unto my son." The teaching of this is 
clear-sinners (typified by Canaanites) are not called to be the Bride 
of Christ, no, the invitation is sent to those who are by justification 
esteemed to be related to God. In a word, it is those who by faith in 
the ransom have become justified as human beings-these are 
invited to a still closer relationship, to become joint-heirs. 

Your third question is: How may this chief salvation be obtained? 
We answer: it can only be obtained by the sacrifice of the human 
nature. It must be "worked out," "run for" and "fought for;" we 
must suffer with Christ if we would reign with him. We must give 
up, surrender, sacrifice, the human nature and its rights and hopes 
purchased for us by our Redeemer, if in exchange we would have 
existence of the same duration, everlasting, but on a higher plane of 
existence, the divine nature. Though we must work it out and 
sacrifice to obtain it, yet when it is remembered that the human 
nature as we inherited it through Adam was forfeited and that the 
justified human nature which we exchange was a free-gift of God 
through Jesus, then it would be but proper to esteem that divine 
nature which we get in exchange for its sacrifice -as a GIFT also. 



R610 : page 2 



DON'T UNCHAIN THE TIGER. 

"Don't Unchain the Tiger!" was the trumpet blast that terrified 
triflers at a perilous period of the late war. It was the title of a fly 
sheet of warning which was not unheeded in those days. 

The warning has again been heard: Don't unchain the tiger! 

A warning to the fools of fortune, squatted on their golden piles 
amid the surging hordes of starvelings: Don't unchain the tiger! 

A warning to the ruck of millionaires whose millions have been 
racked out of the men by whose muscle they were created: Don't 
unchain the tiger! 

A warning to the huge, grinding, swindling corporations, which 
disregard all right and every man's rights in their vampirish lust: 
Don't unchain the tiger! 

A warning to the gamblers in men's food, men's toil, men's land, 
and men's lives, who grind the faces of the people that fall in their 
tracks: Don't unchain the tiger! 

A warning to all who live by the organized brigandage of the times: 
Don't unchain the tiger! 

The tiger is gaunt and hungry, as he restlessly trails his chain. 

The tiger got loose for a moment in New York, in the summer of 
'63, and we who remember the week of the draft riots are not likely 
to ever forget it. 

The tiger got loose again in the summer of 1 877— the year of the 
continental railroad strike— and it took a hundred thousand armed 
men to scare him back to his lair in the jungle. Don't unchain the 
tiger! 

The tiger is not mankind, though he may lurk in the heart of the 
community. He is bred there by wrong; raised to life by it, and is 
stirred to action; he would have no being but for it. 

The right thing to say to the wrong doers now under warning, is 
not, "Don't unchain the tiger," but don't breed the tiger; don't raise 
him to life; don't stir the hot-bed out of which he grows; don't let us 
have a tiger among us that needs to be chained; let us have neither 
tiger nor chains; away with the wrongs by which he is generated. 
Sure as death, in the long run, he will be here if they are not put 
away. 

But what of the men who, in the interest of mankind, ought to put 
them away? Congress and the Legislatures are full of schemers who 
reck not of aught but their own ends, and think of naught but the 
bribe-giving corporations upon which they fatten. 

The people themselves must take things in hand. Chain up wrong, 
and chain it strong, before it breeds the tiger. —John Swinton. 



The above words by a well known representative of the labor 
interest, contains much truth. The Cincinnati riots during the past 
month have added another illustration to the ferocity of the "Tiger" 
when brought to life. 

But though wise men and good men may cry aloud and warn of the 
dangers ahead, yet the warnings will not be heeded. The love of 
money will still further grind and the love of power will lead to still 
greater frauds until the Tiger, bred of almost despair, will devour 
and destroy his adversaries. 

Yet this, with other evils, will work out for mankind a deliverance 
and under the guiding hand of the New King will prepare the way 
for the rule of righteousness, when Justice shall be recognized and 
the GOLDEN RULE govern among men. 

That present governments will be overturned by this "Tiger" is the 
united testimony of the prophets. Thus God often causes the wrath 
of man to praise Him.— EDITOR. 



R610 : page 2 

JOY UNSPEAKABLE. 

A good story is told of a little blind child who once had a surgical 
operation performed that resulted in restoring her to sight. The 
oculist had skilfully pared off the integument which had prevented 
the light from passing through to the retina, and then the eyes were 
bandaged for awhile, until the wounded parts should be somewhat 
healed. At length the hour arrived when the bandage, which had 
from time to time been partially and temporarily removed, was to 
be removed altogether. Ah! what a moment of supreme interest and 
anxiety to all her friends, but more especially to the little patient 
herself, who as yet had never seen. This child, when her eyes could 
bear the light, and she was permitted by her kind physician to open 
them, and for the first time to look out upon all the beauty there was 
around her, realizing indeed as no words could ever show "that the 
light is truly sweet, and that it is a pleasant thing for the eyes to 
behold the sun," cried out with delight, "O, mother, why did you 
not tell me it was so beautiful?" The mother, bursting into tears, 
replied: "I tried to tell you, my dear, but the words wouldn't make 
you understand." Precisely; and so, withal, is it with the Christian 
when he attempts to tell what is the joy unspeakable and full of 
glory, the peace of God that passeth understanding, the love of God 
shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Ghost, and what is the 
excellency of the knowledge of that Christ for whom he would, if 
necessary, joyfully suffer the loss of all things.— Sel. 



R610 : page 2 



INFIDELS AND THE BIBLE. 

A German writer relates that at a literary gathering at the home of 
Baron von Holbach, where the most celebrated infidels of the age 
used to assemble, the gentlemen present were one day commenting 
on the absurd, foolish and childish things with which the Holy 
Scriptures, as they maintained, abound. But the French philosopher 
and infidel, Diderot, who had himself taken no small part in the 
conversation, suddenly put a period to it by saying, "But it is 
wonderful, gentlemen, it is wonderful! I know no man in France 
who can write and speak with such ability. In spite of all the evil 
which we have said, and undoubtedly with good reason, of this 
book, I do not believe that you, any of you, could compose a 
narrative so simple, and at the same time so elevated and so 
affecting, as the narrative of the sufferings and death of Christ— a 
narrative exerting so wide an influence and awakening so deep and 
universal feeling, and the power of which after so many hundred 
years would still be the same." This unlooked for remark filled 
every one with astonishment, and was followed by a protracted 
silence.- Selected. 



R6 1 1 : page 2 

THE times are critical, not here alone, but all over the world. 
Prospering in purely material interests, as I fully believe the people 
at large have never done before, the elements to bring on the 
gravest moral changes are simultaneously at work everywhere. The 
problems now lavishly presented for agitation touch the very 
foundation of religious faith, of moral philosophy, of civil 
government, and even of human society. New forms of power are 
developing themselves, seriously menacing the solidity of all 
established institutions. Even that great conviction, ever cherished 
as the apple of your eye, and which really is the rock upon which 
our political edifice rests, the durability of representative 
government, bids fair to be sooner or later drawn into question on 
solid grounds. The collision between the forces of associated capital 
and those of associated labor is likely to make itself felt throughout 
the wide extent of human civilization.— Charles Francis Adams. 



R610 : page 3 



CUMBERED WITH MUCH SERVING. 



Christ never asks of us such busy labor 
As leaves no time for resting at his feet; 
This waiting attitude of expectation 
He oft'times counts a service most complete. 

He sometimes wants our ear, our rapt attention, 
That he some sweetest secret may impart; 
'Tis always in the time of deepest silence 
That heart finds deepest fellowship with heart. 

We sometimes wonder why the Lord has placed us 
Within a place so narrow, so obscure, 
That nothing we call work can find an entrance; 
There's only room to suffer— to endure. 

Well, God loves patience; souls that dwell in stillness, 
Doing the little things, or resting quite, 
May just as perfectly fulfill their mission, 
Be just as useful in the Father's sight, 

As they who grapple with some giant evil, 
Clearing a part that every eye may see; 
Our Saviour cares for cheerful acquiescence 
Rather than for a busy ministry. 

And yet he does love service, where 'tis given 
By grateful love that clothes itself in deed; 
But work that's done beneath the scourge of duty 
Be sure to such he gives but little heed. 

Then seek to please him, whatsoe'r he bids thee, 
Whether to do, to suffer, to lie still; 
'Twill matter little by what path he leads us, 
If in it all we sought to do his will. 

-Selected. 



R611 : page 3 

FLESH AND BLOOD. 

"Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye 
have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood 
hath eternal life." "The words that I speak unto you are spirit and 
are life." "It is the spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth 
nothing." Jno. 6:53,54,63. 



It was a custom with Jesus to express truth under cover, in "dark 
sayings," and to many this is one of the darkest. When they heard it 



the Jews wondered, saying, "How can this man give us his flesh to 
eat?" and many of the disciples murmured, and said, "This is a hard 
saying, who can hear it?" And to-day, while it is generally 
recognized that Jesus did not mean that they were to eat his literal 
flesh, few have a clear idea of what he did mean. 

Some have hastily concluded that because the Master said his 
words were spirit or spiritual, that therefore to appreciate them they 
must seek the very opposite of the literal meaning of the words; and 
such have concluded that the expression "flesh and blood" means a 
spiritual nature. They overlook the fact that Jesus did not say that 
the flesh was spiritual, but the words. 

That the Lord did not refer to a spiritual nature when he used the 
words "flesh and blood," is easily seen when all of his words are 
remembered. Did he not say, "My flesh... I will give for the life of 
the world"? (ver. 51.) Did he mean that he would give his spiritual 
nature? If so, if he gave that for us, then he has not a spiritual nature 
now; for we remember that he "gave all that he had." (Matt. 13:44.) 
It cannot be that he gave away all that he had of the divine nature 
for the life of the world. Speaking of the same thing again he said, 
"This is my body broken for you... and my blood shed for many for 
the remission of sins." Who can for a moment suppose that the 
divine nature is here meant? Was it the spiritual that was broken 
and shed, or was it the human— the "body prepared" for sacrifice 
(Heb. 10:5) and taken for the suffering of death (Heb. 2:9)? Which 
think you? 

In view of these and other statements of Scripture, let none interpret 
these words of Jesus to mean that his spiritual nature was broken, 
and that all are to eat it. Better far confess as did some of the Jews, 
"We cannot tell what he saith" [meaneth]. 

But some one else suggests that, possibly "flesh and blood" here is 
used as referring to MORAL PERFECTION, and that all must eat 
or receive moral perfection from Jesus or they have no life. This is 
as far from the import of Jesus' words as the other suggestion, for 
while it is true that to have everlasting life all must have moral 
quality, yet such is not the meaning of the words of our Lord now 
under consideration. Let us test it and see. Was Jesus' MORAL 
PERFECTION "laid down," "given," or "broken" for us? Assuredly 
not; to "break," or give up, or lay down moral perfection, would be 
to become MORALLY IMPERFECT. Hence it is clear that the 
"spirit" or MEANING of Jesus' words was not that we are to eat his 
divine nature nor yet his moral qualities. 

What, then, is the spirit or import of the words "blood and flesh" 
here used? We answer, The same spirit or significance should be 
attached to these words here as elsewhere. Flesh and blood 
uniformly represents HUMAN NATURE as many Scriptures 
prove.* 

Now, let us try this definition of "flesh and blood," and see whether 
it will fit and fill all the conditions. Was Jesus' human nature "laid 



down," "given" and "broken" for the life of the world? Yes, verily; 
he took our human nature, which is a "little lower" than the nature 
of angels, that he might give it as a ransom for all. He gave his 
human nature as a ransom for our human nature; he bought us with 
his own precious blood; he "gave all that he had" (Matt. 13:44) for 
us. And thus "as by a man came death, by a man also came the 
resurrection of the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) It was the man Christ 
Jesus that became our substitute or representative, giving his human 
nature a ransom for ours. 

If, then, this definition is found to meet all the conditions under 
which the expression is used, it is thus proved to be the correct 
meaning or spirit of the Master's teaching. 

But we inquire: In what sense can we eat Jesus' human nature? We 
must still remember to look for the spirit or meaning of the words, 
for the EATING is as much a symbol as the flesh and blood. To eat 
is to appropriate to one's self the life-giving properties of the thing 
eaten. Now, let us see, how does it harmonize to say, Unless you 
appropriate to yourself Jesus' human nature given, broken, and laid 
down for that very purpose, you have no life in you. This is in 
perfect harmony. Humanity lost all right to life through Adam, 
hence are now dying and dead, having in them no right to life; and 
though the ransom has been given, though the body has been 
broken, it is a part of God's plan that no man shall ever reach 
human perfection (life) again, except by a full recognition of the 
ransom price and an appropriation by faith of those rights which the 
man Christ Jesus secured by giving his flesh (human nature) for all. 
And as fast as we appropriate, God imputes; and thus the 
righteousness of Christ, and its right of life everlasting, are imputed 
to us. 

Thus by faith we eat or appropriate to ourselves that which was 
sacrificed for us. Unless we thus eat or appropriate to ourselves the 
rights and merits of the man Christ Jesus, who was sacrificed FOR 
us, it is evident that we would have no life, nor right to life in us. It 
is in or by or through him that we obtain back again the life lost for 
us by the first Adam— neither is there salvation (life) in any other, 
for there is none other name under heaven given among men 
whereby we must be saved [from death]. Acts 4:12. How 
dangerous, then, is the position of those who deny the ransom and 
its necessity and value as the life-restoring power given for the 
whole world. Neither they nor any shall ever have life until they do 
eat or appropriate that which was sacrificed. Hence the Apostle 
marks as one of the most serious offences any attempt to depreciate 
that sacrifice, or deny its necessity, saying, "Of how much sorer 
punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath 
trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of 
the covenant wherewith he was sanctified an UNHOLY [common 
or ordinary] thing." 

So, then, the eating or appropriating to ourselves of the "flesh and 
blood" [human nature] of Jesus, JUSTIFIES us from sin and its 



penalty death— justifies us to human life and its privileges. (Rom. 
5:18,19.) This is the "common," that is to say, general salvation. 
(Jude 3.) But to the "little flock" being selected or elected out from 
among the saved world— called to be saints, joint-heirs of God with 
Jesus Christ, there is a special salvation mentioned by the Apostle. 
(1 Tim. 4:10.) 

These called to this "high calling," and to become "partakers of the 
divine nature," not only eat or appropriate life by appropriating the 
value of Jesus' sacrifice, but THEY do more. Having been justified 
to life as men, i.e., having obtained back again (in faith) the rights 
lost for them by Adam, the call or privilege of this class during 
THIS AGE is that they may sacrifice or "break themselves, laying 
down their lives as Jesus did, thus becoming "dead with him" in 
hope that thereby they shall be accounted worthy of the promise 
made to them, that they shall live with him, and partake of the 
divine nature bestowed on him as a reward for the sacrifice of the 
human nature. 

It is thus that the Apostle refers to this class, not only as having 
eaten or appropriated Jesus' sacrifice to themselves, but also as 
having become associated with him in the sacrifice. He says of the 
Lord's Supper: "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the 
communion [sharing] of the blood of Christ? The bread which we 
break, is it not the communion [sharing] of the body of Christ? [Is it 
not thus that we illustrate the "filling up of the afflictions of 
Christ"? Col. 1:24.] "For we being many are one bread [loaf] and 
one body [the body anointed] 1 Cor. 10:16,17. 

So, then, in a word— one loaf of life-giving bread has been provided 
from heaven for all mankind, and during the Gospel age an 
opportunity has been offered to some of joining the body of Christ 
and sharing with him in sacrificing the human nature and inheriting 
with him the divine nature. 

Thus we see that while to have eaten Jesus' flesh literally would 
have profited nothing, yet to appropriate the rights which he 
possessed and laid down for men, is to have a right to perfect 
human life and all its privileges. "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son 
of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you." 



*Matt. 16:17; Jno. 1:14; Col. 1:22; Phn. 16; 1 Cor. 15:50; 1 Pet. 
1:24, and 3:18, and 4:1. 



R612 : page 3 



"WHO ART THOU THAT REPLIEST 
AGAINST GOD?" 

ROM. 9:20. 



It is the mistaken idea of some that justice requires that God 
should make no difference in bestowing his favors among his 
creatures; that if he exalts one to a high position, in justice he must 
do the same for all, unless it can be shown that some have forfeited 
their rights, in which case such might justly be assigned to a lower 
position. 

If this principle be a correct one, it would show that God had no 
right to create Jesus higher than angels and then to exalt him to the 
divine nature, unless he intended to do the same for all the angels 
and for all men. And to carry the principle still further, if some men 
are to be highly exalted to be partakers of the divine nature, all men 
must eventually be elevated to the same position. And why not 
carry the principle to its extreme limit, and apply the same law of 
progression to the brute and insect creation, and say that since they 
are all God's creatures they must all eventually attain unto the very 
highest plane of existence-the DIVINE NATURE. 

Perhaps none would be inclined to carry the principle— if principle it 
is-so far. Yet if it is a principle founded in simple justice, where 
could it stop short and still be just? And if such were indeed the 
plan of God, where would be the pleasing variety in all his works? 
All nature, both animate and inanimate, exhibits the glory and 
diversity of divine power and wisdom. The modest violet does not 
develop into a rose, the blade of grass does not develop into a tree, 
a bird does not develop into some other creature. But if progression 
from lower to higher natures were a part of God's plan, how inferior 
that plan would be to what it really is! If every blade of grass were 
to become a tree, or every flower a rose, and every forest warbler 
had ceased its song, what a weary, monotonous picture we should 
have! 

But such is not God's plan; for as "the heavens declare the glory of 
God, and the firmament showeth his handiwork" in wonderful 
variety and glory, much more shall his intelligent creation exhibit 
the variety and superior glory of his power. So we conclude from 
reason, from the analogies of nature, and from the express teaching 
of the Word of God. 

It is very important that we should have right ideas of justice. A 
favor should never be esteemed as a justly-merited recompense. If 
you bestow a favor, and it is received as an act of simple justice, as 
nothing more than you ought to do, you feel disappointed. An act of 
simple justice is no occasion for special gratitude, nor is it any 
proof of love; but God commendeth his great love to his creatures 
in an endless train of unmerited favors, which call forth their love 
and praise in return. 

God had a right, if he chose, to make us merely the creatures of a 
brief space of time, even if we had never sinned. Thus he has made 
some of his creatures. He might have permitted us to enjoy his 
blessings for a season, and then blot us out of existence. It is only of 



his favor that we have an existence at all, but how much greater 
favor is the redemption of the existence once forfeited by sin. 

And further, it is purely of God's favor that you are a man and not a 
beast; it is purely of favor that angels are angels, a little higher than 
men; and it is purely of God's favor that Jesus is made a partaker of 
the divine nature. It becomes all his intelligent creatures, then, to 
receive with humble gratitude whatever God may bestow. Any 
other spirit justly merits condemnation, and if indulged will end in 
abasement and destruction. It is a mark of gross ingratitude to say, 
My favor is of less value than my neighbors, and to aspire to attain 
a favor not promised. A man has no right to aspire to be an angel, 
never having been invited to that position; nor has an angel a right 
to aspire to the divine nature, that never having been offered to 
them. This was the crime of Satan which brought his abasement, 
and will end in his destruction. (Isa. 14:14.) "Whoever exalteth 
himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted," (Luke 14:11), but not necessarily to the highest position. 

Partly from this false idea of justice, and partly from other reasons, 
the subject of election as taught in the Scriptures has been the 
occasion of much dispute and misunderstanding. That the 
Scriptures teach election few would deny, but on just what principle 
the election or selection is based is a matter of considerable 
difference of opinion, some claiming that the election is an 
arbitrary, unconditional one, and others that it is conditional. There 
is a measure of truth we believe in both of these views. 

An election on God's part is the expression of his choice for a 
certain purpose, office, or condition. We have just seen that God 
has elected or chosen that some of his creatures should be angels, 
that some should be men, that some should be beasts, birds, insects, 
etc., and that some should be of his own divine nature. We also see 
that their election to these conditions is not because of their own 
merit or demerit, but that it is purely of favor that they have 
existence in any condition. 

But let us confine ourselves to God's elections among men. None, 
we presume, would question the fact that the election of Isaac rather 
than Ishmael, of Jacob rather than Esau, and of Israel rather than 
other nations of the world, to enjoy the special favors of God, were 
unconditional elections. And Rom. 9:11 makes the very plain and 
positive statement that the election of Jacob over Esau was made 
before the children were born, so that it might be evident that the 
election was not because of the merit or demerit of either, but of 
God's unconditional choice. So also Isaac, and the nation of Israel, 
were chosen before they were born. 

"So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of 
God that sheweth mercy," or favor. (Rom. 9:16.) It was not because 
these chosen ones were better than others that God selected them, 
but it was because God had a 



R612 : page 4 



right to do as he pleased with his own, and because he chose to 
exercise that right for the accomplishment of his plans. If you 
owned a number of buildings, and chose to use one as a dwelling, 
to turn another into a store, and another into a factory, who could 
dispute your right to do so, since the buildings are your own 
property? So God asserts his right to do what he pleases with his 
various creatures. And "Who art thou, O man, that repliest against 
God? Shall the thing formed say unto him who formed it, Why hast 
thou made me thus? Hath not the potter power over the clay to 
make one vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor [without 
honor]?" Rom. 9:21. From original nothingness all were created by 
the same divine power. 

"Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, his [man's] maker: 
ASK me of things to come. Concerning my children, and 
concerning the work of my hands, command ye me? I have made 
the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched 
out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded." "Thus saith 
the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the 
earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he 
formed it to be inhabited. I am the Lord, and there is none else." 
(Isa. 45:10-12,18.) None have a right to dictate to him. 

If God has established the earth, and if he formed it not in vain, but 
made it to be inhabited by restored, perfect men, who are we that 
we should reply against God and say that it is unjust not to change 
their nature and make them all partakers of a spiritual nature like 
unto the angels, or like unto his own divine nature? How much 
more becoming to come humbly to God's Word and "ASK 
concerning things to come," than to "command" or assert that he 
must carry out our ideas? 

"Lord, keep back thy servants from presumptuous sins: let them not 
have dominion over us." None of God's children, we believe, would 
knowingly dictate to the Lord; yet how easily and almost 
unconsciously we may fall into such an error. We need to look into 
the glass frequently, lest such dispositions remain undiscovered. 

The human race are God's children by creation-the work of his 
hands— and God's plan with reference to them is clearly revealed in 
his Word. Paul says that the first man (who was a sample of what 
the race will be when perfect) was of the earth, earthy; and his 
posterity, with the exception of the Gospel Church, will in the 
resurrection still be earthy- human-adapted to the earth. (1 Cor. 
15:38,44.) David says that he was made only a little lower than the 
angels, and crowned with glory and honor, dominion, etc. (Psa. 8:4- 
8.) And Peter, and Jesus, and all the Prophets since the world 
began, declare that the human race is to be RESTORED to that 
glorious perfection, and are again to have dominion over earth as 
their representative, Adam, had. 

This is what God has elected, or chosen, the human race for. And 
what a glorious portion! Close your eyes for a moment, if you can, 



to the scenes of misery and woe, degradation and sorrow, that yet 
prevail on account of sin, and picture before your mental vision the 
glory of the perfect earth. Not a stain of sin mars the harmony and 
peace of a perfect society; not a bitter thought, not an unkind look 
or word, but love welling up from every heart to meet a kindred 
response in every other heart; benevolence marking every act. Then 
there shall be no more sickness, not an ache, nor a pain, nor any 
evidence of decay— not even a fear of any such thing. Think of all 
the pictures of comparative health and beauty, of human form and 
feature, that you have ever seen, and know that perfect men and 
women will be of still surpassing loveliness. The inward purity and 
mental and moral perfection will stamp and glorify every radiant 
countenance. Such will earth's society be; and weeping, bereaved 
ones will have their tears all wiped away when thus they realize the 
resurrection work complete. 

R613 : page 4 

And this is only the change in human society. We call to mind also 
that the earth which was "made to be inhabited" by such a race of 
beings, is to be a fit and becoming abode for man. It shall no more 
bring forth thorns and briers, and require the sweat of man's face to 
yield his bread, but "the earth shall" easily and naturally "yield her 
increase." "The desert shall blossom as the rose," and the lower 
animal creation will be perfect, willing and obedient servants. All 
the grasses will not develop into trees, nor every modest flower into 
one monotonous form of beauty. No; nature with its pleasing 
variety will call to men from every direction to seek and know the 
glory and power and love of God, and mind and heart will rejoice in 
him. 

Think you that with ungrateful heart man will turn from such loving 
favor to envy an angel's estate? No, not for an instant. We call to 
mind the expression of gratitude from an only child when 
Christmas morning displayed the special evidences of a mother's 
love. Viewing his treasures with childish delight, he said, "Mamma, 
did you do all this for one little boy?" Such will be the gratitude of 
perfect human hearts. Men will not then, as they now do, with 
restless, feverish pulse and morbid desire, crave and long for 
exciting change or greater variety. No, they will have learned and 
proven that "Godliness [God-likeness] with contentment is great 
gain." (1 Tim. 6:6.) This restless desire for something new, that 
now prevails, is not a natural, but an abnormal condition, due to our 
imperfection and to our present unsatisfactory condition. It is not 
God-like to restlessly crave something new. Most things are old to 
God, and he rejoices most in those things which are old, and have 
attained their perfection. So will it be with man, when restored to 
the image of God. 

Well, says some one, will not Abraham and the Prophets, and 
others of past ages, who were so faithful to God, and who suffered 
so much for conscience sake, have a right to feel envious of the 
Gospel Church some of whom have not suffered half so much, and 



yet will be so much more highly exalted? Not at all. They will 
recognize God's right to do what he will with his own, and they 
shall be satisfied when they awake with God's likeness as Adam 
had it. (Psa. 17:15; 36:8; 63:5; 104:13; Jer. 31:12-14.) The perfect 
man will not know or understand the spiritual glory, that being 
wisely hidden from him; and he will be so absorbed and enraptured 
with the glory that surrounds him on the human plane, that he will 
have no aspirations for things unseen and not revealed. A glance at 
present experience will illustrate this-for how hardly, with what 
difficulty do those who are rich in this world's goods enter into the 
kingdom of God. The few good things possessed even under the 
present reign of evil and death so captivate the human nature that 
we need special help from God to keep our eye and purpose fixed 
on the spiritual promises. 

We notice also that the election of the Gospel Church is in a sense 
an unconditional election; for we read (Eph. 1:4,5) that it was 
chosen or elected "before the foundation of the world"— long 
enough before they were born, to prove that it was not of merit, but 
of favor. And moreover we read that "Whom he did foreknow he 
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son;. ..and 
whom he did predestinate them he also called; and whom he called, 
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also 
glorified." 

This shows that the election or choice of the Church was a pre- 
determined thing on God's part; but mark, it is not an unconditional 
election of the individual members of the Church. Before the 
foundation of the world God determined that within a specific time 
(the Gospel Age) he would offer a special favor to those living 
during that time. And the class he then intended to favor (and no 
others) he also determined to conform to the image of His Son, who 
is "the express image of the Father's person"— that is, he determined 
to change the nature of this class from human to spiritual, and the 
highest form of the spiritual, the "divine nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) 

And whom he thus determined to favor he called; but all who 
receive the call do not appreciate it. Some fail to make their calling 
and election sure, and therefore of the many called only a few are 
chosen. The class who actually receive the great favor offered "are 
called, and faithful, and chosen." (Rev. 17:14.) Their being called 
or invited to the high position is mentioned to show that they do not 
presumptuously aspire to it without invitation. 

"And whom he called, them he also justified." The class whom God 
calls to this high position he first redeemed and justified through 
Christ. Such believers as appreciate and accept the invitation to the 
high position, were first JUSTIFIED through faith in the Redeemer- 
-reckoned free from sin, sin being no longer imputed to them. 
Being thus divested of all condemnation, they are free to so run that 
they may make their calling and election sure. As long as we were 
in bondage to sin and death we could not move; but having by faith 
passed from death unto life, we are reckoned as free from sin as the 



world will be when actually made perfect, and therefore we may 
strive lawfully for the prize of our high calling. Since the privilege 
of running for the great prize was the only advantage to be gained 
by being justified during the Gospel Age, those who disregarded 
and did not appreciate the call are not reckoned justified. 

"And whom he justified, them he also glorified" (Gr. doxazo, 
honored.) They are honored now by being set apart for this special 
position, separated from the world, and marked or sealed with his 
Spirit; and in due time they will be more highly honored in the full 
realization of the "exceeding great and precious promises." 

All this wealth of favor predetermined on the Gospel Church was 
wholly unconditional —of God's own free will and choice. We 
never should have thought of seeking such a thing, nor dared to 
claim it on the strength of merit, nor to aspire to it without 
invitation. 

But as to whether you and I shall be of that favored class is quite 
another matter. That is conditional, and if we would be counted in 
this class we must fulfill those conditions, all of which are well 
known to us. "Let us therefore fear lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it." 
(Heb. 4:1.) While the great favor is not of him that willeth, and of 
him that runneth," it is to him that willeth, and to him that runneth. 

Having thus, we trust, clearly vindicated God's absolute right and 
purpose to do what he will with his own, we would call attention to 
the fact that the principle which characterizes the bestowment of all 
his favors is the design of each for the general good of all. The 
highest exaltation is for the greatest service and blessing of all. Let 
meekness, humility and benevolence make ready the sons of God 
for their high service. 



R618 : page 4 

WHAT SIN WILL DO. 

There was but one crack in the lantern, and the wind has found it 
out and blown out the candle. How great a mischief one unguarded 
point of character may cause us! One spark blew the magazine and 
shook the whole country for miles around. One leak sank the vessel 
and drowned all on board. One wound may kill the body. One sin 
destroys the soul. It matters little how carefully the rest of the 
lantern is protected, the one point which is damaged is quite 
sufficient to admit the wind; and so it little matters how zealous a 
man may be in a thousand things, if he tolerate one darling sin. 
Satan will find out the flaw and destroy all of his hopes. The 
strength of a chain is to be measured, not by the strongest, but by 
the weakest link, for if the weakest snaps what is the use of the 
rest? Satan is a close observer, and knows exactly where our weak 
points are; we have need of very much watchfulness, and we have 



great cause to bless our merciful Lord who prayed for us that our 
faith fail not. Either our pride our sloth, our ignorance, our anger, or 
our lust would prove our ruin, unless grace interposed; any one of 
our senses or faculties might admit the foe, our virtues and graces 
might be the gates of entrance to our enemies. Oh, Jesus, if thou 
hadst indeed bought me with thy blood, be pleased to keep me by 
thy power even unto the end.— C. H. Spurgeon. 



R614 : page 4 

"THE LETTER KILLETH, BUT THE SPIRIT 
GIVETH LIFE." 

"Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not 
of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit 
givethlife." 2 Cor. 3:6. 

A reckless application of Scripture without due consideration of 
the context has ever been a fruitful source of error among 
Christians, and not unfrequently proves a stumbling block even to 
those considerably advanced in the knowledge of the truth. A single 
expression of any writer or speaker, when isolated from his line of 
thought or argument, might be construed to prove the very opposite 
of what he intended. This if done intentionally would be dishonest. 
But as a general thing it is merely the result of a reckless habit. A 
single text occurs to the mind from memory, and a meaning is 
attached to it without consulting the context to see if the line of 
thought there pursued will bear it out. 

For this reason, a peculiar, and we think hurtful conclusion, has 
been drawn by many from the above words of the Apostle Paul. We 
would therefore inquire —the letter of what, killeth? and the spirit of 
what, giveth life? 

Many presume that it is the letter of God's word and are therefore 
inclined to esteem the word lightly, while they attach all importance 
to the spirit. But the word is the voice of the spirit. An esteemed 
Christian friend expressed the sentiment of this class as follows: I 
look for divine guidance in three ways: through God's spirit, his 
providences, and his word, which I esteem in the order named. And 
some evidently mistaken leadings, entirely out of harmony with the 
Word, gave sad evidence that the supposed leadings of God's spirit 
were merely the fancies of the human spirit. "Sanctify them through 
thy truth, thy Word is truth," was Jesus' prayer; and his command, 
"Search the Scriptures... for they are they which testify of me." 
Again he says, The spirit shall receive of mine [those things written 
in the Scriptures] and shall show them unto you. John 16:14. 

We have no intimation in the Scriptures that the Spirit of God leads 
his children through any other medium than that of his Word. In 
fact we have the express statement of our Lord to this effect, in 
John 16:13— "He will not speak from himself; he will speak 



whatever he may hear." (See Diaglott, R.V., Rotherham and 
Young.) 

To speak from himself, would be to speak independently of the 
Scriptures and to render them of only secondary importance. God 
could speak to his children now in visions and dreams, as he did 
before the Scriptures were completed, but since these, his "two 
witnesses," the Old and New Testaments were prepared, he has 
honored them as the medium for the communication of his will. 

We do not doubt that God sometimes impresses some scriptural 
truth or principle upon the mind both in our waking and sleeping 
hours, to thus arouse and quicken us; but if we have any strong 
impression that is not in harmony with the Word of God, we may 
be sure that it comes from another spirit, and not from the Spirit of 
God. To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to 
this word, it is because there is no light in them." Isa. 8:20. 

Just so we would also scrutinize the circumstances of life, lest that 
which is only a device of Satan, might be mistaken for the 
providence of God, and an indication of his will. We should call to 
mind the fact that in this age "the kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence," that we are opposed by the powers of darkness at every 
step. How 

R614 : page 5 

often for instance when we would make some special effort to 
advance the truth, do we find one or a variety of circumstances 
conspiring against us. And if the adversary can only delude us into 
the idea that these circumstances are the providences of God 
indicating his will, how easily will he accomplish his purpose and 
our hindrance; whereas if we recognize their true source, as soldiers 
of Christ we will battle against adverse circumstances, and plant the 
standard of the heavenly kingdom in view of the world. 

We should not expect to conquer circumstances without 
experiencing suffering, deprivation, and loss of earthly things; often 
we shall be wounded, and sometimes partially defeated and greatly 
discouraged. But if our purpose is founded in the truth, don't let us 
be deceived into the idea that the providence of God is against us, 
but let us look to the Captain for direction as to how we may master 
the situation. While thus bearing in mind the policy and deceptive 
arts of our great opposer, we also remember the comforting 
assurances that "The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord," 
and that "Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the 
Lord upholdeth him with his hand." Psa. 37:23,24. 

Yes, circumstances which are now largely in the hand of the 
enemy— "the prince of the world," such as sickness, business 
perplexities, loss of friends, strong opposition by the enemies of 
truth, and many things which may appear merely accidental, may 
even cause us to fall for a time partially defeated in our purpose to 
glorify God. But, blessed thought! though we may sometimes thus 



fall, we shall not be utterly cast down, for "the Lord upholdeth with 
his hand." 

But without a full conviction that we are really doing the Lord's 
will in that which we strive to accomplish, it would be unwise thus 
to strive against opposition, and therefore we would inquire, Is 
there any way by which the soldiers of Christ may know and fully 
recognize the command of their Captain? In other words, How may 
we know when our steps are ordered or directed of the Lord, and 
that we are not being deceived by the enemy? The Psalmist, we 
think, gives the key to the answer, when he prays, "Order (direct) 
my steps in thy Word." (119:113.) Yes, just so we find it; the steps 
of a good man are all ordered or directed in the Word, and with "the 
law of his God in his heart, none of his steps shall slide." Psa. 
37:31. 

The Word of God furnishes principles, precepts and examples 
broad enough to indicate the Lord's will in the minutest affairs of 
life, but we must have constant recourse to it; and with full purpose 
of heart we must not only seek to know, but to obey it. 

Seeing, then, that God has thus honored his Word as the channel for 
communicating his will to men, we cannot conclude that it is his 
Word that kills, while his Spirit, acting independent of it, and as a 
superior guide gives life. If this were our belief, we should cease to 
study the Word, and look for the leadings of the Spirit through 
dreams and visions and circumstances. 

But referring again to 2 Cor. 3:6, we notice that Paul is comparing 
the Jewish dispensation with the Gospel dispensation. He shows 
that the law given to Israel, which was indeed ordained unto life, 
i.e., which guaranteed life to the obedient, was found to be unto 
death, because Israel was totally unable to keep it. The only 
condition of the law was, Obey! and he who fails in one point is 
guilty of all. If you can obey it perfectly, then you can have life. 
But though Israel with united voice said, "All that the Lord hath 
spoken we will do" (Exod. 19:8), doubtless greatly rejoicing in the 
prospect of everlasting life, yet not one was able to keep it. Why? 
Because they had only the letter of the law engraven on the tables 
of stone, and not the spirit of the law (which is love) written in their 
hearts. Therefore as death had reigned from Adam to Moses, so it 
continued to reign, for all were unable because of inherited 
weakness to keep God's perfect law. And so that glorious law 
ordained or arranged to perpetuate life, was found to be "the 
ministration of death." 

But since the Son of God took our nature, being born under the law, 
fulfilling all its requirements, and thus having a right to life, gave 
his life as a substitute or ransom for ours, we are introduced into a 
new dispensation. We are no longer under law, but under grace. 
(Rom. 6:14.) God's requirement is not now do if you would live, 
but the good news now is, that "there is now no condemnation to 



them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after 
the spirit." 

In our present imperfect condition, no matter how much we 
endeavor to keep the law, and thereby merit life, we fail; it is 
impossible. The letter of the law condemned or killed every man 
that ever lived, except Jesus; and very many, inspired by its 
promise of life, tried to keep it in all sincerity. Verily, it has been 
abundantly proven that the letter of the law killeth. 

But since we have been freed from the letter of the law by the death 
of Christ, he having fulfilled and settled our obligation, we have a 
new offer of life on a new condition, viz., if we walk after or strive 
to keep the spirit of the law. To such there is no condemnation. 
They may thus have life through Christ. The spirit of God's law is 
love. As Jesus and Paul taught, "Love is the fulfilling of the law." 
(Matt. 22:37,40, and Rom. 13:10.) We are as unable to fully keep 
the spirit of the law as Israel was, but we are only required to walk 
after or strive to keep it, and in so far as in our weakness we fail, 
the merit of Jesus supplies our deficiency. 

It is then the spirit of the law (love) manifested in us, which, 
through Christ, gives or guarantees life. Even though that spirit be 
not fully developed, "he that has begun the good work in us is able 
to complete it." Our desire and effort to keep the very spirit of the 
law is reckoned as a perfect keeping of it, while our inability to do 
so is compensated for by the sacrifice of Christ. When men are 
restored to perfection, the law of God will be written in their hearts 
(Jer. 31:33), and its spirit of love will permeate their whole being, 
and its retention will be their guarantee of everlasting life. The 
letter of the law killeth, but the spirit of the law giveth life. "Thanks 
be unto God who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus 
Christ." (1 Cor. 15:57.) 



R613 : page 5 

"AS" AND "SO." 

NEWELL. W. FIELDS. 

"As thy days, so shall thy strength be." Deut. 33:25. 

"As the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward 
them that fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he 
removed our transgressions from us. Like as a father pitieth his 
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him." Psalm 103:11-13. 

"As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round 
about his people from henceforth even forever." Psa. 125:2. 

"As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher 
than your ways. As the rain cometh down and the snow from 
heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and 
maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, 



and bread to the eater, so shall my word be that goeth forth out of 
my mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall prosper in 
the thing whereto I sent it." Isa. 55:9-1 1. 

"As the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth the 
things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord God will cause 
righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations." Isa. 
61:11. 

"As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father; so he 
that eateth me, even he shall live by me." John 6:57. 

"As by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift 
came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's 
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one 
shall many be made righteous." Rom. 5:18,19. 

"As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." 1 
Cor. 15:22. 

"As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in 
him." Col. 2:6. 

"As Christ forgave you, so also do ye." Col. 3:13. 

"He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even 
as he walked." 1 John 2:6. 

"Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the 
day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world." 1 John 
4:17. 



R615 : page 5 

THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD. 

When Adam was created it was that he might be the Lord of this 
world. To him was given "the dominion" [Gen. 1:28] after "the 
likeness" of God; to be an "image" or miniature representation of 
the Lord of all. When Adam fell, he, of course, lost his birthright— if 
we may so express it. His dominion and possessions passed into the 
hands of the crafty conqueror. Since then Satan has been the Prince 
and God of this world. 

Paul calls him "the god of this world," "the prince of the power of 
the air," etc. Jesus recognized his position in the words of the title 
of this article. (John 14:30.) In the great temptation (Matt. 4:1-11), 
when Satan could neither make our Lord to doubt or tempt the 
Father, his last desperate stake was "the dominion." He evidently 
knew that the mission of the Christ was to win back "the kingdom" 
which he (Satan) now held and ruled through his minions, the 
blood-thirsty kings of earth. This offer was no farce; it was the 
climax of the temptations, the last resort of a baffled enemy. 



Hades is— not the palace, but— the prison-house of Satan. His castle 
is in the air, his dungeon is the prison-house of death. Into this he 
has been packing his victims since Adam's fall. Into this Jesus 
himself entered, but he captured the kings, and will yet bind "the 
strong man," "spoil [rob] his house," and lead forth "a multitude of 
captives." 

Sickness, disease, accidents and other mysterious dispensations of 
Providence (so-called) are but the instruments of Satan; and the 
messengers-not of light but of darkness-by which he gathers in his 
harvest. 

The grim reaper, death, is Satan's Brigadier-General-not the Lord's. 
Can a house be divided against itself? Jesus was manifested that he 
might destroy death, and him that hath the power of death, THAT 
IS the DEVIL. (Heb. 2:14.) 

The arch-deceiver, he who was a liar from the beginning, has 
carefully instructed his messengers to blame the God of love for all 
the misery that exists and comes upon the world. 

When the cherished little rose-bud baby is secretly stricken by the 
arrow of the arch-enemy, it is said to be the Lord's hand who has 
transplanted it in Paradise. A very pretty thought, if there was any 
truth in it, although even this fiction (as was intended) does not 
reconcile the parents to the act of the spoiler. Frequently it is just 
the opposite. The widow and orphan in their anguish doubt the love 
and goodness of Him whom they blame for robbing them of their 
loved protector. This is just what the deceiver wanted. 

When the prophet of the Lord would comfort the stricken he said, 
"Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears. " Why, 
Jeremiah? Are they in heaven, transported there as our and the 
Lord's jewels, to draw our hearts there, and lead us to follow them? 
Thus putting aside Jesus as our Leader and Desire? No, the prophet 
of the Lord says: "They shall come again from the land of THE 
ENEMY." 

When the hidden shaft suddenly strikes some one who had been 
apparently well before, ignorance delivers the verdict, "Died by the 
hand of God." When a promising and useful member of society 
falls by the hand of a hell-inspired ruffian, we are told to bow to the 
decision of the All-wise. 

If our Lord set up his kingdom eighteen hundred years ago and has 
been ruling ever since, would there not be an excuse for the citizens 
who sent the message: "We will not have this one to reign over us"? 
Can any one look calmly at the misery of the past six thousand 
years and not discern who has been the ruler of this world? Surely 
they would exclaim with Job: "The earth is given into the hand of 
the wicked one; he covereth the faces of [deceiveth] the judges 
thereof: if not, where and who is he [the rightful ruler]? 



Let those who have the truth stand up for the character and glory of 
the Father and of His Son, who is about to take to himself His great 
power and reign. 

Then, when the battle is over, we shall see a different order of 
things; when earth's sons may each sit fearlessly and peacefully 
under his own vine and fig-tree, rejoicing in the fruit of their own 
planting. (Micah 4:4.) 

Then there will be no more appalling accidents [?] as are now so 
common— caused frequently by a refusal to bear the expense of 
safeguards and preventatives. 

Death is everywhere. Carelessness, recklessness, covetousness, 
drunkenness or devilishness may each be the instrumentalities, but 
Satan is the director of all. Let us give the Devil his due in the 
fullest sense, and bravely stand for the honor of the name of our 
Lord, praying, "THY KINGDOM COME." 

W. I. M. 



R615 : page 5 

JEWISH HOPES. 

Referring to the future of Palestine and the hopes of the Hebrews 
centered therein, the N. York Herald says: 

"While the great Christian Powers stand with mail-clad hands to 
grasp the coveted and tempting bit (Palestine) when the moribund 
Turk lets go his hold, a historic figure steps forward and declares, 
"The land is mine!" And when the Powers turn to look at the 
Speaker they recognize the Jew— the child of the patriarch who 
lived in Palestine when it was first invaded and who would himself 
fain be present to receive it as his own when its possession is 
disputed thirty-six centuries after! 

What a wonderful coincidence! "Not so," says the Jew, "it is not 
coincidence, it is my destiny. " Let us now briefly glance at the 
position of the Jew in this question of the future Palestine. Nations 
are born from ideas. From the idea of German unity grew the 
German Empire into actual fact, proclaimed to the world in 
Versailles, with French cannon to answer amen to German prayer 
for its welfare. From the cry of "Italia irridenta" was born the new 
Italy of to-day, whose thunder will again wake Mediterranean 
shores. From the tradition of ancient Greece the modern Greece 
was created. So Christians understand how the long cherished 
aspirations of the Jew may yet be realized; and while they fully 
concede that while to the Jew above all belongs Palestine, while he 
above all is specially qualified to develop the future of that teeming 
country, while his possession of it would solve the fears of the 
jealous Powers, the establishment of the Jew in it would be an act 



of justice, and a worthy atonement for the fearful wrongs 
perpetrated upon him— the martyr of history. 

THE PROPHECY OF RESTORA TION. 

As for the Jews themselves, to say how they long for restoration is 
hardly necessary. On the 9th of their month Ab, they fast for the 
destruction of their temple and the national calamities attending 
those events. There is not a morning or evening but what they pray, 
"Gather us together from the four parts of the earth;" "Restore our 
peoples as of old;" "Dwell Thou in the midst of Jerusalem," and 
these words are uttered in every city where the Jew is found— that 
means throughout the world. Such constancy is almost beyond 
belief. Their patriotism is beyond all bounds, and to this day the 
Spanish Jew in all lands (even in this distant country), put some of 
the dust of Palestine or "tierra santa," as they call it, on the eyes of 
their dead— a pathetic evidence of their love for the sacred soil. 

"When the railway reaches Jerusalem, 

R615 : page 6 

Messiah comes," alludes to Isaiah 66:20, where the prophet in his 
vision sees the exiles returning by all manner of conveyances, 
among them what he calls "kirkaroth. " The English version 
translates it "swift beasts," which is, of course, too indefinite, or 
"dromedaries," which is certainly incorrect. Philologists are not 
wanting who derive the word from kar, "a furnace," and kar-kar "to 
sway,"— asserting that the prophet sought thus to coin a word for 
what was shown him in his vision, a train in rapid motion. "When 
Nicholas reigns redemption comes" is in allusion to Isaiah 63:4, 
from which verse Hebraists evolve, by what they term "Rashe 
Teboth," the sentence, "All Judah shall hear and behold the fall of 
Nicholas, emperor of Muscovy, on account of the oppression of the 
children of Judah, and after happening our fall will happen our real 
redemption, and near at hand for the children of Judah will be the 
good tidings of the Gishbite prophet." These and such as these are 
important inasmuch as they indicate Jewish thought. 



R615 : page 6 

THE LIBERTY OF THE SONS OF GOD. 

"The creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God." Rom. 
8:21. 

At present none have liberty; the entire human race is under a 
fearful yoke of bondage. A bitter, relentless and merciless enemy 
holds the dominion, and leads his unwilling captives along the 
pathway of suffering down to the prison of death. By reason of this 
"the whole creation groaneth and travaileth together in pain." 



R616 : page 6 



But the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for deliverance. 
Will it ever come? Six thousand years of tyranny and suffering has 
not obliterated earnest expectation and longing hope. All do not 
hope for deliverance because of the promise of God. With many the 
hope is begotten of desire. From the very earliest ages of history 
men have hoped for a "good time coming," a "Golden Age," in 
which a balm for life's various ills should be discovered. Groaning 
in pain, they waited and hoped, though they knew not, and know 
not yet, how their earnest expectation shall be more than realized. 
In some hope has almost died out in despair, or has become vague 
and uncertain; but believers in the Word of God, clinging to his 
promise, anxiously inquire, How long, O Lord, how long must we 
wait for its fulfillment? To this inquiry the inspired Apostle replies, 
that mankind must wait until the manifestation of the Sons of God; 
and the saints must wait until the entire "body" of Christ, of which 
they are members, is complete and adopted to the higher plane. 

Again we inquire of Paul, Who are these sons of God, and how will 
they be manifested? His answer is that all those who are now led by 
the Spirit of God, and who have consequently received the spirit of 
adoption, are the sons of God, for whose manifestation the groaning 
creation waiteth (vs. 14,15). These adopted sons-adopted into the 
divine family, made partakers of the divine nature, and joint-heirs 
with Jesus— shall be manifested together with him. When he shall 
appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory. Col. 3:4. 

For this glorious appearing of the divine sons and heirs of God the 
groaning creation must wait. But, thank God! we have the glorious 
message to bear that the manifestation and the blessing are just at 
hand. At present the world does not recognize the sons of God, for 
now they, in following the footsteps of their Lord, are as he was, 
despised and rejected of men. But shortly this will be reversed, and 
mankind will recognise their exaltation and glory. Already their 
Lord and head has come to gather and glorify his chosen ones. 

The deliverance of the groaning creation, we are told, is to be into 
the same glorious liberty that these sons of God will then be 
enjoying. It will be a complete deliverance from the bondage of 
corruption. When all are fully delivered "there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more 
pain, for the former things are passed away. Rev. 21:4. 

It is the mistaken idea of some that deliverance into the liberty of 
the divine sons of God means a transforming into the same nature 
and condition. But deliverance, or liberty, has reference simply to a 
common bondage, in which both classes had been held, and from 
which both classes will be released, one class to the perfection of 
life as human beings, "a little lower than the angels," (Psa. 8:5,6), 
the other class to perfection of life in the divine nature- "so much 
better than the angels" (Heb. 1:4; 2 Pet. l:4)-that is, the bondage of 
corruption, or death. As Jesus was delivered from the bondage of 



death, and as the church will be delivered from the bondage of 
death, so likewise will the whole creation be delivered from death. 
"Now Christ has been raised from the dead, a first-fruit of those 
having fallen asleep." And just as sure as the first-fruit came, so 
surely will all the after-fruits appear. All will enjoy the same liberty 
from death, and from all its accompanying distress and sorrow. All 
tears shall be wiped away. 

But there is still something more implied in this expression, "the 
glorious liberty of the sons of God." It carries with it the idea that 
the liberty which God will grant will not be license to follow the 
bent of a depraved nature, but that it will be a blessed liberty from 
that depravity, and full freedom to follow the inclinations of a 
nature free from sin and in harmony with God, where the good of 
self and others will receive due and equal consideration. Surely that 
will be glorious liberty. Men sometimes call that liberty which is 
only Satan's license to trample on another's rights; but how different 
will be the glorious liberty of the sons of God! Though Jesus and 
his bride will be of the divine nature, while the mass of mankind 
will have a restitution to the perfection of the human nature, all will 
enjoy the same blessed liberty from the bondage of corruption 
(death), and the privilege of following the inclinations of then- 
perfect being, which will be in harmony with and well pleasing to 
God. 

One other statement of Paul in this connection— "The creature 
[mankind] was made subject to vanity [frailty- Diaglott] , not 
willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in 
hope." (v. 20.) That is, God, through the penalty of Adam's 
transgression, placed the entire race under death's dominion and 
bondage-made them subject to it. Not that man willingly came 
under the control of his captor, death, but contrary to his will and 
choice, God put him under it as a penalty for transgression. 

Yet it was not a hopeless bondage, for when God condemned and 
gave mankind into death's control, he planned his redemption and 
ultimate deliverance again to the former liberty- the liberty or 
freedom from death and pain which is the common privilege of all 
God's sons on every plane of being. In hope also that his experience 
under bondage would be of future benefit, and forever thereafter 
deter him from evil. 

For this very purpose— the delivering of the groaning creation— the 
sons of God, now being prepared, are shortly to be exalted to that 
nature and consequent position of power, which will enable them to 
accomplish the glorious work— a "RESTITUTION of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world 
began." 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R616 : page 6 



NO USE. 



There is no use in putting up the motto, "God bless our home," if 
the father is a rough old bear, and the spirit of discourtesy and 
rudeness is taught by the parents to the children, and by the older to 
the younger. There is no use in putting up a motto, "The Lord will 
provide," while the father is shiftless, the mother is shiftless, the 
boys refuse to work, and the girls busy themselves over gew-gaws 
and finery. There is no use in putting up the motto, "The greatest of 
these is charity," while the tongue of the backbiter wags in that 
family, and silly gossip is dispensed at the tea-table. There is no use 
in placing up conspicuously the motto, "The liberal man deviseth 
liberal things," while the money clinks in the pockets of "the head 
of the household," groaning to get out to see the light of day. In 
how many homes are these mottoes standing— let us say hanging- 
sarcasms, which serve only to point a jest and adorn a satire! The 
beauty of quiet lives, of trustful, hopeful, free-handed, free-hearted, 
charitable lives, is one of surpassing loveliness, and those lives shed 
their own incomparable fragrance, and the world knows where to 
find them. And they shall remain fresh and fadeless when the colors 
of pigment and the worsted and the floss have faded, and the frames 
have rotted away in their joints.— Sel. 



R616 : page 6 

SPIRITUALISM AND THE CHURCHES. 

Dr. Sprecher, while pastor of the First Presbyterian church in 
Oakland, Cal., preached against Spiritualism, or at least in such a 
manner that Spiritualists could not claim him as one of their 
fraternity. But a sermon of his on Sunday evening, February 24th, 
in Calvary church, San Francisco, of which he is pastor, presents 
him in quite another aspect. It is true that in this sermon, or lecture, 
as it was called, he speaks against spirit mediums and 
materializations; but Spiritualists will care little for that while he 
endorses and pleads for all that is essential to the existence and 
growth of Spiritualism. That we are correct in this statement every 
reader must admit who has any knowledge of Spiritualism and of 
the claims upon which it is based, when he reads the following, 
which we clip from the Chronicle's report of his lecture: 

"The subject of Dr. Sprecher's lecture last evening was, 'Do the 
spirits of the departed revisit this world, and do they manifest 
themselves to men at this day?' There was, he said, an almost 
universal belief in an intermediate state of spiritual existence 
between death and the day of resurrection, during which period the 
soul was conscious, but in a different state from that upon which it 
would enter after the final judgment. This caused some doubt, but it 
was difficult to see the reason why. The Scriptures speak of angels 
and ministering spirits, and there are also instances mentioned 
therein of the spirits of the departed reappearing, while there is not 



a word which prevents a belief in the power of a spirit to revisit the 
earth if it so desired. The probabilities were all one way, and it was 
not at all unreasonable that if in the spirit world we retain the 
affection for those we leave behind, which we entertained while on 
earth, that we should desire to see them again. The speaker believed 
that the affections did not die with the body, and that our friends, 
either as disembodied spirits or as spirit bodies, may visit and 
minister to us. This belief was not Spiritualism, as the term is 
generally understood, and was not incompatible with Christianity, 
and a Christian who held such a belief should not fall into the error 
that he had 

R617 : page 6 

forsaken his faith and must therefore seek refuge in Spiritualism." 

We record our emphatic denial of the assertion that the Scriptures 
give any instances of "the spirits of the departed reappearing," and 
we invite any one to point out to us the texts wherein such 
reappearing is supposed to be given. We will examine them in our 
columns for the benefit of our readers. 

But, aside from this, we remark that the doctor is right in saying 
that the belief he announces is "not incompatible with Christianity"- 
-as he and his associates understand Christianity. But we insist that 
it comprises all that is vital to the existence of Spiritualism. And 
Spiritualists would no doubt rather have the doctor remain in his 
church and bring up the members to a recognition of spirit 
intercourse and spirit ministration, than to leave the church and 
professedly "seek refuge in Spiritualism," where his influence in 
favor of the assumed facts of that belief would not be so great as it 
now is, as pastor of a popular orthodox church. 

And Spiritualists will not care much for his avowed disbelief in the 
reliability of mediums. They are always ready to admit that there 
are impostors among the mediums, and this admission robs the 
doctor's indictment of its force. But when he claims that his 
statements will apply to all mediums, then they will confront him 
with some millions who oppose their observation and experience to 
his, many of whom have put the mediums to the severest tests, and 
are fully convinced that there was no collusion or trickery in the 
manifestations. We give the doctor's position on this point as 
reported: 

"He then turned to the second head of his discourse, and said that 
whether or not spirits did manifest themselves at the present day, 
was a question of fact which could be put to the proof. The modern 
Spiritualists assert that they can materialize spirits, and volumes on 
the subject have been written by men of science and of no science. 
If such a thing were true, it was the most stupendous subject of the 
age. It was a subject to which the speaker had paid a great deal of 
attention, and after carefully following up the records of all the 
most celebrated mediums of the world, he was unable to recall one 
who had not, sooner or later, been proven a fraud. Whenever any 



one was bold enough to seize the materialized spirit, it had turned 
out to be either the medium or an accomplice. This had occurred so 
often that there was no room for doubt in the mind of any one that 
the whole thing was an imposture. Again, if a medium could call up 
the spirits of the mighty dead they could tell us something new; but, 
although the spirits of the great masters of poetry and prose, great 
scientists and inventors, have been time and again materialized, 
they seemed to have left all their genius behind them, and know no 
more than the least gifted of mortals. And this could not be laid to 
any lack of expression or want of education on the part of the 
medium, for a great as well as a small thought could be expressed 
in defective language." 

Thousands upon thousands have with him concluded that "if such a 
thing were true, it was the most stupendous subject of the age." And 
the great majority, having a greater love for popular error than for 
unpopular Bible truth, will take the premises assumed and laid 
down by Dr. Sprecher, and logically conclude that the thing is true. 
We do not believe that mesmerism, psychology or clairvoyance can 
be explained upon natural principles. We are aware that professed 
scientists have their explanations of these things, but, as one said to 
us when closely questioned on the subject, "That is our theory of 
the matter; but whether or not it is true we cannot positively say." 
But the number who have heard inexperienced and illiterate 
mediums, while entranced, speak in language which they could by 
no means command in their normal condition, is so large that the 
last part of the paragraph quoted above will have no effect at this 
day in overthrowing their claims to "spirit inspiration." The 
following paragraph concludes the report. As it is a noteworthy 
discourse on the subject, we thus give the report in full: 

"There were many who believed in Spiritualism because they saw 
wonders which they could not account for on natural principles. But 
that was simply folly, for no medium had ever performed tricks 
equal to those of the professional jugglers of India, who disclaimed 
the agency of any supernatural power. They are simply illusions. 
Mesmerism and clairvoyance and mind-reading, which are agencies 
of mediumism, are all explainable upon natural principles, as is also 
the belief that many persons have that they see spirits. Medical 
works abound in instances of the latter, and prove that it is the 
result of an abnormal condition of the system, and that these 
supposed visions can be produced by mechanical appliances. The 
speaker had no faith in the habitual appearance of spirits, but there 
was one case in which it did seem possible for the spirit of one to 
communicate with another-at the hour of death. Many instances 
have occurred where a person has been apprised of the death of 
some dear relative or friend in that manner, and the fact of the death 
and the very hour and minute has been subsequently 

R617 : page 7 



confirmed, together with the circumstances as they appeared at the 
time. The power of the mind and will of one upon another in close 



sympathy of thought and feeling was very great, and it was possible 
that the soul in its extreme experience might communicate with a 
kindred soul. These occurrences could not be coincidences. But this 
was not Spiritualism. The communications came direct without the 
aid of a medium. The speaker concluded by warning his hearers 
against the danger of being led into grave mistakes by listening to 
the advice of mediums, who are often in collusion with those who 
sought not their welfare." 

We cannot think he has shown his reasoning powers to great 
advantage, according to this report. First, every probability, and 
facts of Scripture, he claims as proof in favor of the spirits of the 
departed reappearing. Then he states his belief that the interest of 
the departed in the welfare of the living is not lessened by their 
death. And next he attacks the mediums, clairvoyants and 
materializers as humbugs, and finally claims the possibility of one 
spirit communicating with another at the hour of death. But 
"possible" has no more place in this connection than in the other 
cases, as phenomena are presented under other circumstances 
which can be accounted for only by admitting their supernatural 
origin. And if his premises are correct, then all the phenomena 
shown by the most pretentious mediums may be true or genuine. To 
admit his premises is to admit the possibility of every claim of the 
Spiritualists to be just. 

Not long since we saw the belief expressed by a writer that Bishop 
Bowman is a Spiritualist. We heard the Bishop speak of the 
presence and ministrations of his departed in such a manner as to 
lead us to believe that he was a full believer in Spiritualism; and his 
disclaimer, immediately made, did not change our opinion, if he 
meant just what his words expressed. 

These positions of well-known ministers are the positions of hosts 
of ministers in the land who are making Spiritualism popular, and 
preparing the way for its general acceptance by the churches. The 
churches and the Spiritualists are drawing more closely together. In 
a "reception" recently given to a Mrs. Lord, in Boston, she said, as 
reported in the Banner of Light: 

"She remembered that in the audience before her were some who 
had not yet seen their way clearly to accept the light which was 
shining upon the pathway of mortals to-day. But why should the 
Christian Church deny the possibility of present as well as past 
inspiration. Though human tongues fall out of speech, would 
immortal love send back no echo across the waves of death? Could 
he who promised the full harvest forget the weeping sower? If such 
a bridge as that of Brooklyn could be reared by feeble human 
means across the pulsing tides, could not angel-minds plan and 
spirit-workers build a bridge of communion over the soundless 
waters of death? Spiritualism came to take away no one's faith, but 
to give knowledge to each and all-to make assurance doubly sure 
that the course of human life is an upward one, and the chain of 
being stretches through an eternity of progress." 



This profession that Spiritualism came to take away no one's 
Christian faith, but rather to give knowledge of that which before 
was only belief, is "a new departure" for Spiritualists, but they are 
all fast advancing to that position. All now claim that Spiritualism 
is a religion, while very many claim that it is the Christian religion 
perfected. This is their part of the "compromise," while the 
churches are admitting the return of the spirits of the dead, and their 
intercourse with mortals, which is all that Spiritualists ask them to 
admit, and the members are assured that they need not leave their 
communions because of their entertaining such belief. If anything 
more is needed to place the churches and Spiritualists on common 
ground, we cannot imagine what it is. These main points admitted, 
minor questions will settle themselves. 

These things are not unexpected to us. He who knows "what is 
man," and "who knows the end from the beginning," has placed on 
record in the "sure word of prophecy" just such a state of things. 
Miracles to deceive, yet professing a pious intention, are plainly 
spoken of in Rev. 13 and 16, as being done in the last days. Our 
Saviour, in Matt. 24, and Paul in 2 Thess. 2, speak of these things, 
and all place these deceptions 

R618 : page 7 

just before the second advent of the Lord. Why, oh why, will not 
Bible readers and professed Bible believers look at these matters 
candidly, and accept the warning message which heaven sends for 
our instruction at this time? If the multitude will follow in the broad 
way, and choose darkness rather than light, we pray that God will 
give zeal and power in the proclamation of the message, that a little 
flock, a remnant, may accept it and receive the kingdom as their 
reward. (Luke 12:31-37.)— Selected. 



R618 : page 7 

THE TRADITION OF THE MEHDI. 

Oddly enough Mohammedans are the most stubborn of adventists, 
looking forward with full assurance of faith to the second coming 
of Christ. Closely connected with this article of Moslem belief is 
the doctrine of the Mehdi, who is to prepare the way for the coming 
of Christ and is to assist him in conquering an evil world. The 
universal acceptance of this doctrine by all Moslems is the source 
of the attention now paid in the Moslem world to the claims of any 
adventurer who calls himself a Mehdi. 

Since the fame of the rebel chief of the Soudan has extended to the 
ends of the earth, it may not be amiss to group together the 
principal traditions accepted among Moslems as to those last days 
of the earth, of whose approach the coming of the Mehdi is to be a 
sign. 



The Koran forms but a small part of the basis of the Moslem faith. 
It is explained and extended by a vast array of reputed sayings of 
the Prophets. These traditional sayings are authenticated by a long 
chain of evidence, and have among most Moslems equal force with 
the Koran itself. It is in these traditions that one must look for the 
full details of the prophecies by which Moslems are taught to 
forecast the approach of the end of all things. It is true that the 
traditions are often conflicting and abound in wonders. A Moslem 
divine once said to me frankly: "I am ashamed to speak of these 
things; for when men set about making a religion they always 
forget that their work will be criticised." But the traditions are 
accepted by the masses in Turkey; and he who should openly reject 
them would be accounted as worse than a blasphemer. The 
traditions are the main source of the Moslem religion as expounded 
in Turkey. 

Mohammed is reputed to have said that the world was already in its 
last period when he entered upon his ministry. "Comparing your 
times with the times of past revelations," he said, "your epoch is the 
time between mid-afternoon and sunset. " The Jews had the 
morning, the Christians the noon, and to the Moslems was given the 
perilous period of the decline of light. The duration of the Moslem 
era is fixed by tradition at more than one thousand and less than 
fifteen hundred years. 

These signs of the end are to be of gradual development. There will 
be an increase of ignorance among the people. The exposition of 
the holy law will decline and cease. Doctors of the law will be 
wicked and oppressive. The people will drink wine. Ignorant men 
will sit in high places and be accounted wise. The fool and the son 
of a fool will become a ruler of the people, and men will give bribes 
to be delivered from his wickedness. Men will obey their wives and 
disobey their parents. It can easily be seen that the time of the end 
cannot be far off if these are its signs. New Yorkers had best look 
around them as they read among other tokens that "very high 
houses will be built, and love for musical instruments will 
increase," in the wicked last days! 

There will be so great a scarcity of honest men that every 
trustworthy man will be famous far and wide, and those who are 
accounted wise and brilliant will not possess the smallest atom of 
faith in God. The people will hate, and try to destroy all who speak 
the truth, and missionaries of Anti-Christ will preach, in all the 
world, lies acceptable to men. Finally, most terrible of all, women 
will become rebellious, and will begin to put various sorts of 
curious things on their heads, and will begin to wear tight-fitting 
dresses. We may, perhaps, agree with the pious old Moslem who, 
long years ago, grouped these "signs" together— "My brethren, the 
most of these evil customs are already in full vigor among you." 

But these lesser tokens only lead up to the greater signs, without 
which the end of the world will not come. Prominent among these 
greater signs is the appearance of the Mehdi, or "Guide." He will be 



of the family of the prophet and his name will be Mohammed, son 
of Abdulla. He will be a perfect man, full of holy knowledge, and 
he will come at a time when there is no longer a Caliph. This 
provision, by the way, the Soudan Mehdi avoids by declaring that 
the Turks are not true Mohamedans, and that, therefore, their Sultan 
cannot be recognized as Caliph. The Mehdi will become the center 
about whom all true believers will be grouped. He will himself 
believe that which is true in the faith of all religious sects, and all 
true people of God will be united in him without sectarian 
differences. All these people he will lead to Jesus Christ. For about 
the same time with the coming of the Mehdi, Moslems believe that 
Dejjal (Anti-Christ) will appear. Some seem to regard him as a 
beast, but the best authorities among the Turks declare that this 
Dejjal will prove to be a one-eyed Jew from Khorasan. On his 
forehead will be written the word Kiafir (blasphemer) in letters 
which all true believers-and they alone-can read. Seventy 
thousand Jews will follow after him, and he will go through the 
whole world, visiting all countries, during a space of forty days. It 
should be remarked, however, that of these forty days the first is to 
be as long as a year, the second as long as a month, the third as long 
as a week, and the rest each twenty-four hours long. During the 
time of this Dejjal Moslems expect that Jesus Christ will descend 
from heaven for a period of forty years. He will slay Dejjal with a 
javelin, and then the whole earth will be filled with righteousness. 
Neither man nor beast will any more know hate, but everywhere 
happiness and equality will reign. So shall begin the last stage of 
the earth's existence. Then other great signs and wonders will 
occur. Gog and Magog will overrun the earth, and by their 
oppression of the people of God will usher in the last day. Then 
they will be miraculously destroyed, and God's true people will be 
translated in the twinkling of an eye, so as to escape the horrors of 
the age of fire. 

Such is the tradition of the Mehdi and its chronological importance 
to Moslems. In Turkey, pious souls point out that the 
demoralization of the people is fully up to the mark that has been 
foretold. Immorality is rife. Men are crushed for speaking the truth. 
The one fixed rule for business is fraud. Ignorant men are put in 
high places. Courts of the holy law sell their decrees to the highest 
bidder. Women are discontented with their state of subjection, and 
they hate the uncouth envelopes which the law forces upon them in 
the place of a graceful dress. The year 1300 of the Moslem era has 
passed. According to the traditions, the world has less than two 
hundred years to live, and it is high time for the Mehdi to come. 
With an eagerness that arises from sincere faith in these prophecies, 
the Moslems of Turkey watch every obscure man who seems 
inclined to rise up and become a leader of the people. Any such 
man they are ready to hail as the Mehdi, if they can find for their 
faith the shadow of an excuse. 

There is something pitiful in the sight of these multitudes, 
conscious of hopeless corruption, so enervated that they have hope 



of renewal only in a direct intervention of God, and yet so 
convinced that this intervention can only be through some visible 
agency that they are content mutely to drift along just as they are 
rather than risk taking steps which might be disapproved by him 
that is to come. But pitiful as the spectacle 

R619 : page 7 

is, there is in it much to stir the Christian's heart. 

The followers of the false prophet are at last arriving at an epoch in 
their history when they are taught to expect enlightenment through 
Jesus Christ. Discount, because of their wrong idea of Christ, all we 
choose from this expectation of the Moslems; allow for their 
supposition that Christ will come to enforce the Koran upon the 
nations; remember their firm hope that Christ's first act on earth 
will be to put to the sword all the Christians of the present day; 
modify the picture of the faith of these people by all such 
considerations, and still you have the fact that the waiting millions 
of Islam believe the time to be drawing near when Jesus shall teach 
them the truth. To the Christian there is something thrilling in the 
thought that even now the Moslem nations are anxiously watching 
for a "guide" to lead them to Christ.— H. O. Dwight, of 
Constantinople, in N.Y. Independent. 



R619 : page 7 

TENT-MAKING IN CORINTH. 

Among the Jews in early times it was customary to teach all the 
children the full details of some useful calling.... And here now in a 
verse we learn that Saul of Tarsus had been reared to the trade of a 
tent-maker in his early years, and resumed it as an occupation 
when, as Paul the apostle, some necessities fell upon him to 
undertake the work of personal support. There will be profit in our 
contemplating him in this altogether new character as a working- 
man about his business. 

I. Let us begin with a careful examination of the singular artisan life 
he lived in Corinth. 

1. Our earliest point of notice is found in the fact that he chose a 
decent and reputable calling. This trade was an honorable one for 
the craft was composed of industrious citizens, and their products 
were useful and valuable. Now this explicity. Some occupations 
there are which no one can follow, and keep his Christian 
profession clean and clear. ... 

2. Then we must observe that Paul sought consistent partners in his 
business. God guided him when he "found" such amiable people as 
Aquila and Priscilla already established there in the strange city... 

3. But most of all, in these degenerate times of ours, we must notice 
that Paul pursued the work of his calling honestly. ...As this small, 



tired man sat there, in the midnight and the noon, sewing 
industriously till his feeble eyes ached with the overstrain, talking 
meanwhile with Aquila and his bright wife, we have not the 
slightest doubt that he always knotted his thread when he took up 
his needle, that he pulled each stitch through conscientiously as in 
the sight of God, and that he fastened the end of it when he finished 
the seam. For we do not see how those people could have had 
family prayers, unless they knew they had been "doing successful 
business on Christian principles." 

4. Once more: we must observe that Paul held his business 
cautiously in hand. No doubt his tents brought excellent prices, and 
it is likely the trade increased. But he looked on tent-making as a 
means to an end; and he did not set himself just to gain money. He 
never let his business run away with him, or interfere with his 
religious life. 

5. Hence, we are not surprised to discover that Paul used his 
opportunities wisely even when hardest at work. We do not suppose 
that Aquila and Priscilla were Christians previous to Paul's arrival 
at Corinth.... Probably Paul was the instrument in their conversion. 
Think of the glorious talks they had together! 

II. So now we reach a second question: What was the effect of this 
apostle's working at his trade upon his profession as a Christian 
preacher? We answer, It gave vast force to it. 

1 . For one thing, it illustrated his often-repeated maxims concerning 
the 

R619 : page 8 

dignity of honest labor. If an able-bodied follower of Jesus Christ 
refused to work, he had no right to eat. 2 Thess. 3:7-13. This 
vigorous and busy apostle evidently believed that there remained no 
room whatsoever for drones in a Christian hive. ...If any further 
illustration is needed than is furnished in these words already 
quoted, think of his address down there by the lonely seashore, 
when he bade farewell to the elders of Ephesus. Oh, how that scene 
rises on our minds! See the worn man as he stands there on the 
sands; every line on his face shows labor and care: he is true and 
genuine, and can be trusted. Acts 20:32-35. 

2. But now let us lay alongside of this another consideration: Paul's 
tent-work in the shop of Aquila added immeasurable force to his 
ministry, because it removed all ground of cavil as to his making a 
gain out of godliness. There was some reason for his peculiar 
solitude in this vain and fastidious city; we know he did not refuse 
money sent him from other places. It is worth our while to ascertain 
exactly what was Paul's whole doctrine on this subject. 1 Cor. 9:4- 
14. We understand from a passage so extensive and so explicit as 
this that Paul never intended to prejudice the rights of others, or 
surrender his own. He instructed his young friend Timothy to 
preach on this point. 1 Tim. 5:17,18. But when indiscreet men 



caviled, Christians must avoid the very appearance of evil. So this 
cheerful-hearted preacher laid hold of his needle, pulled the silesia 
up over his knee, and went on sewing tent-coverings five days in 
each week. He afterwards told them frankly that he used some of 
the Philippians' gifts to him to help out that season. 2 Cor. 1 1:7-12. 
And he seems rather proud and glad as he tells them so.— Chas. S. 
Robinson. 



R619 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Mechanicsville, Mo., April 13, 1884. 

"DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-.. .The Apostle, in writing about the 
Lord's Supper, says: 'Ye shew the Lord's death till he come' (1 Cor. 
1 1:26). And the Lord said: 'Do this in remembrance of me,' 
evidently meaning, Remember me in my absence. To me the 
inference seems strong that the commemoration should now cease, 
because the Lord is now present. What think you?" 

Answer. A careful reading of Paul's words quoted above, with the 
context, fails to indicate to us any prohibition of the observance 
after the Lord has come and is present. On the contrary, the 
Apostle's argument here is, that when we break the loaf, etc., we 
show our communion or participation with Christ in death, as 
members of the one loaf, the one body. Hence it is quite proper that 
we should, so long as we are in the flesh, and so long therefore as 
the sufferings of the body of Christ are not ended, and the measure 
of his afflictions not filled, it is both proper for us to fill them up 
and share the cup, and also to symbolize it. 

Concerning our Lord's words, "Do this in remembrance of me," we 
do not think he meant, remember me during my absence. He was 
present at the first supper, and if it be improper to remember his 
death except during his absence, it was equally improper to 
remember it before his absence. 

What Jesus did mean we think was this: The Passover as a type and 
a part of the law shall surely have a fulfillment. The fulfilling of it 
is now commencing. I am the anti-type of the lamb that was slain 
and eaten, and every other feature must be fulfilled— the entire type 
will be fulfilled when the kingdom of God shall have fully been 
established; when you, all my disciples who follow me, as parts of 
the first-born, shall be passed over, delivered from death, in the 
resurrection. Therefore, as oft as you eat this— commemorate the 
Passover— look beyond the type and realize in me the anti-type of 
the lamb. Do this in remembrance of me, and no longer in 
remembrance of the typical lamb. 



Q. Are Enoch and Elijah dead or living? 



A. Of Enoch very little is told us, except that he walked with God 
(Gen. 5:24), and that God revealed to him some things relative to 
the kingdom of God, will be seen by reference to Jude 14:15. Gen. 
5:24 tells us that "he was not [found], for God took him;" and Heb. 
11:5 proves that he did not die. How, or where, God took him, or 
for what purpose, is not revealed. This seems to be one of the secret 
things which Moses says belong unto God. Deut. 29:29. 

Elijah, we are told, went up by a whirlwind into heaven. The word 
here translated heaven is shamayim, meaning "heaved up," or "high 
things." It is sometimes applied to the firmament or region of the air 
(Gen. 1:8), and sometimes to the throne of God. When the latter is 
referred to, the term "heaven of heavens" is frequently used. (1 
Kings 8:27.) We must judge of its meaning in this case by its 
harmony with other Scriptures. Jesus, after his resurrection, went to 
heaven, the throne of God; but John says (chap. 3:13), "No man 
hath ascended up to heaven but he that came down from heaven, 
even the Son of Man." Hence we must conclude that the 
atmospheric heavens were the heavens into which Elijah ascended. 

It is nowhere stated that Elijah did not die; and that he ascended 
into the air until lost to sight does not prove that 

R620 : page 8 

he did die. Neither does the vision on the mount of transfiguration 
prove that he is, or was then alive, since that was only a vision— as 
Jesus said, "See thou tell the vision to no man." As Elijah was a 
type of the Church, his ascension was also typical of the ascending 
bride, soon to meet her Lord in the air— not the literal air: air is 
symbolic of the universal kingdom. Heretofore Satan has been the 
prince of the power of the air; now Christ has come to reign, and 
Satan will shortly be dethroned. Soon the overcoming Church, 
being changed from human to spiritual conditions, will meet her 
Lord in the kingdom. 

What became of Elijah's body we do not know, neither do we know 
what became of the body of Moses. Things not revealed belong to 
God. 



Q. A class of people called Sabbath or Seventh-day keepers, claim 
that the Roman Catholic Church established the First day of the 
week as a substitute for the seventh. Is this true? 

A. The claim of Romanists in this matter as in others, stands or falls 
with their other claim, that their Church was established in the first 
century by the Apostles— Peter being their first Pope. All this we 
deny, and claim that the Church whose "names were written in 
heaven," was the original and only Church established or 
recognized by the Apostles, and that is OUR CHURCH. Romanism 
was an apostasy from OUR CHURCH, as are also all other sects. 
As to the observance of the first day by our Church in early days 
and the teachings of the Apostles on the subject (who are the 



STANDARDS of our Church,) see article "The Ten 
Commandments," in the October, 1883, issue. So, then, if the early 
Church was the Church of Rome, then they say truly, but if not, the 
claim that SHE instituted the change from the Seventh to the First 
day, Sabbath, is false like many others she puts forth. 



R620 : page 8 

LIFE AT HOME. 

For all of us our life at home must constitute a great part of that 
life in which, by patient continuance in well-doing, we have to seek 
for glory, honor and immortality; for many of us it practically 
constitutes the whole. 

There are millions of women, millions of girls, to say nothing of 
little children, who have no life worth speaking of beyond the 
boundaries of the family. Whatever fidelity to God, whatever love 
for Christ, whatever justice, whatever kindness, generosity and 
gentleness they are to illustrate in their spirit and conduct must be 
illustrated there. And even men who have their business and their 
profession to follow during the greater part of the day find occasion 
in their home-life for forms of well-doing and ill-doing that are not 
possible elsewhere. I like a broad and rich life for myself— full of 
varied interests; and I should like to see the lives of most men, and 
of most women too, animated by the inspiration and refreshed by 
the free air of activities and interests outside their own home. But 
no shining achievements elsewhere can palliate the guilt of 
coldness, injustice, ill-temper in the family; and the noblest public 
virtues have roots in the gentleness, the industry, of self-sacrifice 
and the truthfulness of which only those who are nearest to us have 
any knowledge. 



R620 : page 8 

IMPORTANCE OF BEING ABLE TO 
DESPISE RIDICULE. 

I know of no principle which it is of more importance to fix in the 
mind than that of the most determined resistance to the 
encroachments of ridicule. Give up to the world, and to the ridicule 
with which the world enforces its dominion, every trifling question 
of manner and appearance? It is to toss courage and firmness to the 
winds to combat with the mass upon such subjects as these. But 
learn from the earliest days to insure your principles against the 
perils of ridicule; you can no more exercise your reason, if you live 
in the constant dread of laughter, than you can enjoy your life if you 
are in the constant terror of death. If you think it right to differ from 
the times, and to make a stand for any valuable point of morals, do 



it, however rustic, however antiquated, however pedantic it may 
appear; do it, not for insolence, but seriously and grandly, as a man 
who wore a soul of his own in his bosom, and did not wait till it 
was breathed into him by the breath of fashion. Let men call you 
mean, if you know you are just; hypocritical, if you are honestly 
religious; pusillanimous, if you feel you are firm; resistance soon 
converts unprincipled wit into sincere respect; and no aftertime can 
tear from you those feelings which every man carries with him who 
has made a noble and successful exertion in a virtuous cause.— 
Bible Banner. 



R620 : page 8 

WESLEY ON DRESS. 

If you could be as humble when you chose rich apparel (which I 
flatly deny) yet you could not be as beneficent, as plenteous in good 
works. Therefore every shilling which you needlessly spend on 
your apparel, is in effect stolen from the poor! For what end did you 
want these ornaments? To please God? No!— but to please your own 
fancy or to gain the admiration and applause of those who were no 
wiser than yourself. If so, what you wear you are in effect tearing 
from the back of the naked; and the costly and delicate food you 
eat, you are snatching from the mouth of the hungry. For mercy, for 
pity, for Christ's sake, for the honor of His Gospel, stay your hand! 
Do not throw this money away. Do not lay out on nothing, yea, 
worse than nothing, what may clothe your poor, naked, shivering 
fellow-creatures. 

Many years ago, when I was at Oxford, on a cold winter's day, a 
young maid (one of those we keep at school), called upon me. I 
said, "You seem half-starved. Have you nothing to cover you but 
that thin gown?" She said, "Sir, this is all I have." I put my hand in 
my pocket, but found no money left, having just paid away what I 
had. It struck me, "Will thy Master say, 'Well done good and 
faithful steward. Thou hast adorned thy walls with the money 
which might have screened this poor creature from the cold.' O 
justice! O, mercy! are not these pictures the blood of the poor 
maid? See their expensive apparel in the same light; thy gown, hat, 
head-dress ! " 

Everything about thee which costs more than Christian duty 
required thee to lay out, is the blood of the poor! O! be wise for the 
time to come. Be more merciful; more faithful to God and man; 
more abundantly clad (like men and women professing godliness) 
with good works. I conjure you all who have any regard for me, 
before I go hence, that I have not labored, even in this respect, in 
vain, for near half a century. 

Let me see, before I die, a Methodist congregation full as plainly 
dressed as a Quaker congregation; only be more consistent with 



yourselves. Let your dress be cheap as well as plain. Otherwise you 
do but trifle with God and me, and your own souls. I pray let there 
be no costly silks among you, how grave soever they may be. Let 
not any of you who are rich in this world endeavor to excuse 
yourself from this by talking nonsense. 

It is stark, staring nonsense to say, "Oh, I can afford this or that!" If 
you have regard to common sense, let that silly word never come 
into your mouth. No man living can afford to throw away any part 
of that food or raiment into the sea, which was lodged with him on 
purpose to feed the hungry and clothe the naked. And it is far worse 
than simple waste to spend any part of it in gay or costly apparel. 

For this is no less than to turn wholesome food into deadly poison. 
It is giving so much money to poison both yourself and others as far 
as your example spreads, with pride, vanity, anger, lust, love of the 
world, and a thousand "foolish and hurtful desires" which tend to 
"pierce them through with many sorrows." O God, arise and 
maintain thy own cause ! Let not men and devils any longer put out 
our eyes and lead us blindfold into the pit of destruction.- Sermon 
by John Wesley. 



R621 : page 1 

VOL. V. 
PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1884. 
NO. 10. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 44 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat-yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

WE have removed our business office to No. 44 FEDERAL ST., 
ALLEGHENY CITY, PA. 



SOME one in P.O. employ has discovered that we often get letters 
containing money, and has been robbing us lately. The only SAFE 
way, therefore, will be for you to send by P.O. MONEY ORDERS, 
or REGISTERED LETTERS, or BANK DRAFTS. Please 
remember this. 



WALL CHARTS. 

Some time ago we published some charts suitable for hanging on 
the wall —about twenty-five inches long on rollers —otherwise a 
copy of the CHART OF THE AGES, found in FOOD FOR 
THINKING CHRISTIANS, page 105. 

We know of no better method of studying the Plan of God, or 
explaining it to others, than by means of this chart. We have a few 
copies still on hand, and will furnish them free to any who are 
willing to pay Express charges on them. 



THIS MONTH we shall revise our lists, and shall strike off quite a 
number of names-of such as we have not heard from for the past 
eighteen months. 

This will include many of the LORD'S POOR LIST. We desire that 
the TOWER shall not go to those who are not interested in it, and 
feel sure that none are so poor that they cannot afford a postal card 
on which to accept of our proposal to put them on the Poor List for 
another year. Should we by mistake fail to send next month to any 
who have paid, or who have asked it free, please notify us 
promptly. Those ordering on FREE LIST will please state that they 
are the Lord's children and unable to pay. We do not wish to send it 
FREE to those who can but do not wish to pay. 



R629 : page 1 



WE work together, if far apart, 

Hands in unison, heart to heart. 

We work as having one common aim: 

We work as bearing the same good name; 

We dare not loiter, but still pursue 

The work of the Master, with him in view. 



R621 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"IT SHALL SUREL Y COME AND NOT TARRY. " 

"I will stand upon my watch, and fix my foot upon the Tower: and 
I will watch, to see what will be said to me, and what I may answer 
to him [the unbeliever] that reproveth me. And the Lord answered 
me [or gave me an answer for such] saying: Write the vision and 
make it plain upon tables that he that readeth it may run over it [be 
able to prove to himself its correctness.] For, as yet, the vision is for 
an appointed time, and it shall appear at the end, and shall not lie. If 
it [appear to] make any delay wait for it: for it shall surely come, 
and it shall not tarry." Habakuk, 2:1-3.— Douay Translation. 

This command has been obeyed. By various means— Charts, 
Diagrams, Concordances and explanations the vision or revelation 
of God's word has been placed within the reach of the people; yet 
they are slow to believe that this Gospel age will ever pass away 
and give place to another; and they say as was foretold, "Where is 
the promise of His coming (presence)? for since the fathers fell 
asleep all things continue as they were from the beginning." (2 Pet. 
3:4.) This indicates that the class who when the end comes are in 
darkness concerning it, are unbelievers of God's testimony. This is 
also further stated by this same prophet (verse 3) "Behold, he that is 
unbelieving, his soul [understanding or mind] shall not be right in 
himself; [It will be because he is not right at heart,] but the just 
shall live in his faith [not slow to believe all that God hath spoken 
by the mouth of all His holy prophets.] 

When we and others called attention in 1876 and 1877 to the 
presence of the Lord, and showed that it was taught by the 
revelations of God's word, we found few ready to believe our 
report, and many said, "Where is the promise of His presence?" The 
only answer we could then give them was, that they should examine 
the Scriptural evidences offered. But soon outward evidences 
appeared which corroborate the Scriptures: the railroad riots of 
1878 came, and Socialism in Germany, Nihilism in Russia, and 
Communism in France, began to put on a bold front, and it became 
evident that the governments of the whole civilized world are 



resting on the very edge of a smoking volcano, which at any 
moment might burst forth and destroy them. 

In their haste some supposed that all things concerning this day of 
the Lord, were to transpire immediately, but no, the apostle shows 
that its trouble will come like spasms, like great waves following 
each other, each bringing nearer the grand climax stated by the 
prophet: "I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will 
destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations." (Hag. 2:22.) 

These increasing spasms of trouble are referred to by the apostle 
under a striking illustration, when he says, it comes "As travail 
upon a woman," (1 Thes. 5:3, Psa. 48:6.) Indeed, the troubles of the 
day of the Lord are but the labor pains of the old, as the new 
dispensation is ushered into existence. 

Just when men had almost forgotten the trouble of 1878 and 
Socialism, comes another pang— a semi-panic— but not as previous 
panics have been, severest on the poor, but the very opposite, 
severest on the rich; the millionaires are suffering now. 

The prophet proceeds to describe this feature of the day of trouble, 
saying: "As wine deceiveth him that drinketh it, so shall the proud 
man be [deceived], and he shall not be honored who enlargeth his 
desire as the grave and is like DEATH, which cannot be satisfied 
though he [death] gather unto him all the nations and assemble unto 
him all the people." (Ver. 5.) 

What a photograph of to-day: Once to be extremely wealthy was to 
be "honored," but we have reached the time mentioned by the 
prophet when such as have no limit to their greed for gain, but like 
the grave would endeavor to swallow all yet never be satisfied, 
"shall not be honored," but rather the reverse. 

As knowledge increases throughout the world among the masses, 
they are coming not only to question the rights of kings, and to 
inquire how and why one man is supposed to be born with the right 
to command and rule another, his equal or superior in ability, but 
they are inquiring also, "How comes it that these millionaires roll in 
wealth which they not only cannot spend, but cannot even know 
how to stow away, while so many others, their intellectual, moral 
and physical equals, barely have life's necessities? Since money 
stands as the equivalent of service, and since the possessors of vast 
wealth have never rendered the world extraordinary service, the 
logical conclusion is that they accumulated the excess of their 
wealth dishonestly, i.e., without giving an equivalent service to the 
world for it. 

This verdict of the people is expressed by the prophet also, (vs. 
6,7,) "Shall not all these take up a parable against him and a dark 
speech concerning him? And it shall be said, Woe to him that 
heapeth together that which is not his own. How long also doth he 
load himself with thick clay? Shall they not rise up suddenly that 



shall bite thee; and they be stirred up that shall tear thee, and thou 
shalt be a spoil unto them?" 

This calls to mind a New Testament prophecy which corresponds to 
the above: "Go to, now ye rich men, weep and howl for your 
miseries which shall come upon you. Ye have heaped treasure 
together for the last days. Behold the hire of the laborers who have 
reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud crieth: 
and the cries of them which have reaped have entered into the ears 
of the Lord of armies. ...Be patient, therefore, brethren, unto the 
coming of the Lord." (James 5:1-8.) 

This trouble upon the rich, it is expressly stated, will be among the 
events of the last days of this age; and not only so, but the apostle 
refers to it as taking place in the Day of the Lord- when he has 
come. And these circumstances now transpiring corroborate exactly 
the testimony of the Scripture- the vision "written and made plain 
upon tables," that we are now living (since 1875) in the beginning 
of the Day of the Lord. 

All that is written of this day will not transpire at once, but each 
convulsive spasm will prepare for another until the climax is 
reached. The scriptural evidences of the Lord's presence were clear 
to some of us before these outward evidences commenced, and 
these only corroborate previous convictions, but as the Day of the 
Lord advances others who could not see it from the Scriptures will 
learn it from the transpiring events, until all— the rich men and the 
mighty men, and the poor men, the bondmen, and the free men, all, 
shall realize that "the great day of His wrath is come" and shall seek 
the protection of the great mountains (governments) and rocks 
(societies) to shield them from its trouble. (Rev. 6:15-17; Luke 
23:30.) 

Is it asked why the presence of the Prince of Peace should cause so 
much trouble? We answer that he is not only a peaceful governor, 
but a King of righteousness and there can be no true and lasting 
peace or happiness aside from principles of justice. In the 
establishment of his kingdom it is necessary to overthrow present 
kingdoms, because they are upheld by injustice and tyranny. For the 
same reason titles, and honors of birth, based upon fraud and 
injustice of the past ages, no less than the wealth and honor grasped 
dishonestly in our own day, must all fall under the condemnation of 
the new King who declares that the humble and lowly shall be 
exalted, and the proud and arrogant debased. During his reign, "the 
meek shall inherit the earth. 

The present financial trouble among the rich is probably not yet 
ended, their weeping and howling will probably be yet greater, and 
it is not confined to this land alone, but seems to affect all the 
money centres of the world. Presently it will cease, to be succeeded 
by a still more severe trouble after another interval of rest. 

Nor should we forget that the present prince, our Lord, is no more 
favorable to religious monopolies and boastful titles, etc., than to 



financial and political ones, and these shall no more than the others, 
escape destruction. The same proud and haughty spirit which leads 
the world to grasp titles and honor and to increase its wealth, has 
been and is leading the various sects of the nominal church; and the 
result to both is the same— "Pride goeth before destruction and a 
haughty spirit before a fall." Let us not be deceived; it is the same 
spirit which boastfully says, Our denomination is building at the 
rate of one church a day and hopes soon to double this, which 
during the past month introduced into a conference for the election 
of Bishops, the trickery and wire-pulling of a political convention, 
in the endeavor of the various candidates to be greatest while 
making a show of In honor preferring one another. 

Yes all these fraudulent earthly systems, each claiming to be the 
true church, shall lose the honor and prestige they so much covet. 
Their falsities and shams shall be disclosed in this day that shall try 
every man's work of what sort it is. It will be a blessed deliverance 
from a man-imposed yoke, to many of God's dear children who are 
now in these sects, and who are influenced and bound by 

R622 : page 1 

their theories and customs, mistaking the nominal churches of earth 
for the true church whose names are written in heaven, and whose 
law is the word of God and not of men. 

Yes this liberty, religious, financial, and political, is what mankind 
needs and longs for. It is a precious boon, but the path by which it 
shall be gained is steep and thorny. The 

R622 : page 2 

overturning of present gigantic systems and monopolies, religious, 
financial, and political, by the new King in this His day, causes "a 
time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation; no nor 
ever shall be. (Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21.) 

Now the world is full of suffering, 
Sounds of woe fall on our ears, 
Sights of wretchedness and sorrow, 
Fill our eyes with pitying tears. 

'Tis the earth's dark night of weeping, 
Wrong and evil triumph now; 
We can wait, for just before us 
Beams the morning's roseate glow. 

We are waiting, hoping, praying, 
For Messiah's glorious reign, 
For we know He'll reign in justice, 
Right and truth shall triumph then. 

Worldly pleasures cannot win us 
While we wait for that bright day: 
Worldly splendor cannot charm us, 
While its light beams on our way." 



R622 : page 2 



HABAKKUK'S PROPHECY. 

Lest any should suppose the foregoing to be a forced construction 
of a portion of Habakkuk's prophecy, we here give below a general 
review of the preceding and succeeding context, which abundantly 
corroborates and emphasises the above. Our running comments are 
in brackets, and the translation is one gleaned from several 
authorities. 

Chap. 1:2-4. "How long, O Lord, have I entreated, and thou 
wouldst not hear? How long shall I cry out unto thee because of 
violence, and thou wilt not save? Why hast thou shown me iniquity 
or grievance, and the robbery and violence that are before me? And 
there is a judgment, but oppression is more powerful. Therefore the 
law is powerless and justice cometh not forth victorious; for the 
wicked compasseth about the righteous: therefore doth justice come 
forth perverted." 

[Certainly these words can well be applied to this "present evil 
world," when God seems to many to be indifferent as to whether 
good or evil succeeds, and permits evil to triumph, the godly to 
suffer persecution, and the wicked to flourish. In view of this, the 
prophet asks as the representative of all who love righteousness, 
"How long, O Lord," shall it be thus? When shall the present evil 
world give place to that wherein dwelleth righteousness?] 

[The Lord answers the cry, declaring] : "Look ye about among the 
nations, and behold and be astonished and astounded, for I will 
fulfill a work in your days ye would not believe if it were only told 
you. [If you did not see some evidences you would consider the 
things impossibilities.] For lo, I will raise up the Chaldeans, that 
bitter and hasty nation [people], which shall march through the 
breadth of the land to possess the dwelling places that are not theirs 
(vs. 5,6). [The people who are to do the astounding work among the 
nations are here called Chaldeans, and represent, we believe, the 
masses of the peoples of earth who, under the names Communists, 
Nihilists, Socialists, etc., are organizing with the avowed intention 
of overturning present governments. Chaldeans is a fitting name. 
Literal Babylon was the capital city of literal Chaldea, a vast 
country, so symbolical Babylon reigns over the people of the 
civilized world, who, therefore, might in symbol be fitly termed the 
Chaldeans.] 

"They are dreadful and terrible, and from them shall proceed the 
judgment upon these [evils and nations] and their burden" [or 
restraint]. 

"Swifter than leopards are their horses, and fiercer than the evening 
wolves; their horsemen spread themselves abroad, for their 
horsemen shall come from afar; they shall fly as the eagle that 



hasteth to eat. They will all come for violence." [Horses represent 
doctrines in symbol, and horsemen teachers of those doctrines. The 
ferocity of the doctrines is here shown, and the rapidity with which 
they will spread, and the fact that the teachers of these doctrines 
will be foreigners.] 

"Their faces will be set in opposition to the east." [The east is the 
direction of the sunrising, and here represents the dawn of the 
Millennial Day. Hence, the language here indicates that though 
these shall cause a measure of judgment to come upon evil 
institutions, yet they will not be in harmony with the true light, but 
in opposition to it; their mission is violence.] "And they gather the 
bounden ones as the sand." 

"And they will make sport with kings and princes will be a play 
unto them: at every stronghold will they laugh, and they will cast 
up earth mounds and capture it. Then [by reason of their success] 
doth their spirit become arrogant and they are surpassingly proud, 
and offend, imputing this their power unto their God. [Not realizing 
that they have been used as the Lord's great army to overthrow 
oppression and to bring down the proud and to thresh the mountains 
(kingdoms), they shall boast themselves of the victory of 
Liberalism.] 

"Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord, my God, my Holy One? 
We shall not die. O Lord, thou hast ORDAINED THEM for 
judgment; and, O Protector, THOU hast appointed them to 
CORRECT NATIONS. [This is the confidence of the saints, as here 
expressed by the prophet.] 

In the third chapter of this same prophecy the standpoint is 
changed, and the prophet rehearses the trouble coming upon the 
world during the day of the Lord, from the Lord's standpoint, 
showing whose power it is that shall really shake the kingdoms and 
bring in everlasting righteousness. Primarily reference is made to 
the marvelous display of God's power on behalf of Israel in their 
deliverance from Egypt, but we must not forget that Israel's 
deliverance from the darkness and bondage of Egypt into fruitful 
Canaan, was but an illustration of the world's deliverance, to be 
accomplished in the establishment of earth's new kingdom. 

Chap. 3:2. "O Lord! I have heard thy fame, and was afraid: O Lord! 
thy work-in the midst of the years of sorrow [or time of trouble] 
revive thou it; in the midst of the years make it known; in wrath 
remember mercy." 

"God came from Teman, the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. 
His glory covered the heavens, and of his praise the earth was full. 
His kingdom was like the sunlight; rays streamed forth out of his 
hand unto them, and there was the hiding [or secret] of his power." 
In truth, when realized properly, the Lord's coming and kingdom 
are blessings; for as the Sun of Righteousness he brings light and 
blessing and joy; when properly seen his every act (hands in 
symbol) sheds light and blessing. This is for a time kept secret and 



not recognized by men, though it is the object of his taking his great 
power.] Pestilence shall go before his face [moral pestilence shall 
flee, as darkness does when the sun rises] and burning coals went 
forth at his steps [dross and stubble shall be consumed as 
righteousness steps in.] 

"He stood and measured [judged] the earth; He looked and melted 
the nations and the ancient mountains [governments] were crushed 
to pieces; there sunk the perpetual hills: his ways are everlasting. I 
saw the tents of Cushan [dwellings of darkness or blackness, 
symbolizing iniquity] in affliction: they trembled— the curtains 
[those who caused obscurity or darkness] in the land of Midian 
[strife]. 

"Thy bow was made quite bare; like severe rods of punishment 
goeth forth thy word. Selah: thou didst cleave [open] the rivers 
[truth-channels] of the earth"... ."In indignation thou wilt tread the 
earth under foot; in thy wrath thou wilt astonish the nations. Thou 
wentest forth for the salvation of thy people: for salvation with thy 
Christ. Thou struckest the head of the house of the wicked [Satan] 
and destroyed the foundation with the high towering walls." [It is a 
complete overthrow.] "Thou didst strike through with his own 
spears the chief of his warriors— them that came out as a whirlwind 
to scatter me.". .."But thou didst pass along over the sea with thy 
horses, over the piled up billows of great waters." [The Lord's 
doctrines were enforced and conquered the great multitude— the 
"raging waves of the sea."] 

"I have heard and my inmost parts tremble, at the report my lips 
tremble ...I trembled in myself that I might REST in the day of 
trouble." 

In this "Day of the Lord" those only can REST who are built upon 
the rock foundation, who are strengthened by the heavenly manna, 
continually refreshed by the living water of truth, and in obedience 
to their covenant are following in the footsteps of Jesus. Such shall 
know the truth and the truth shall make them free. Such shall walk 
in the light and not be in darkness that that day should come upon 
them as a thief and a snare. (1 Thes. 5:1-5.) Such may rest in the 
remembrance that the trouble brings the chariots of salvation for the 
deliverance of the just. 



page 2 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

FRIEND C. T. RUSSELL:-I have received the WATCH TOWER 
and the TABERNACLE which you sent me, and have gained more 
information from them than from all I have ever read before. I have 
been quite a Bible student; but very much of it was a sealed book to 
me. But since I have read the TOWER and your tracts, those very 



much perplexed questions are clear. Now I wonder why I did not 
see it before. 

Since I have read Z.W.T. works, I have introduced some of the 
ideas gained therefrom into our Bible class, and it has produced a 
startling effect, and it has caused many to search the word of God. 
The doctrine is new, yet many are very much interested; but some 
few think it is heresy. I once preached what I supposed to be the 
Word of God, but I find that I did not understand the book then. I 
had not a proper idea of the plan of salvation. But thanks be to God, 
I begin to see its beauty and harmony. What was meaningless to me 
once, now prove to be a jewel of the rarest beauty and value. I 
cannot help thinking how blind the churches are; even the educated 
will not believe. I thank God for the light he has granted to me. I 
now see the truth of the expression, "God so loved the world," &c. I 
would be very much pleased to read your "Food for Thinking 
Christians," and I think that if it is equal to your WATCH TOWER 
it will prove a power to convince very many that are now in the 
wilderness of error. 

Yours in hope of eternal life. 

Moulton, Iowa, March 1, 1884. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I was buying some notions of a peddler, 
the other day, and they were wrapped with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER. Wife and I took a liking to the wrapper— it has the right 
ring. Enclosed you will find our subscription. Please send the 
WATCH TOWER. From an old soldier -both spiritual and 
temporal, and if the TOWER don't slack its hold on the truth, you 
will hear from me again. 

Yours in Christ. 



Crawford Co., Kansas. 

DEAR BROTHER:— We have the privilege of sending you a little 
mite for the Lord's work, hoping that God will bless it to the 
feeding of other hungry souls as we have been fed. The question 
has been asked, How much will you give? For our part we can give 
but little, only ourselves to the Lord, and then one another, but if 
the question were reversed- What would you take? it would be 
unanswerable. We would not exchange what we have learned for 
the world. We are not public speakers, but we tell the glad tidings 
to those around us, if it is only to one person at a time. Though we 
meet with persecution on the right hand and on the left, the Lord 
gives us more strength and boldness to stand up for his Word. I 
think we could use some extra papers, will you please send us 
some. Yours truly in Christ, . 



Glasgow, Scotland, May 21, 1884. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL :-I send along with this letter my 
subscription for Z.W.T. The brethren and sisters in Glasgow met in 
my house on the evening of April 8th to celebrate the Passover; 
there were present altogether seven, and we had an evening 
precious to me, and I think they all could say the same. We thought 
of the upper room in Jerusalem, where our Lord met with his 
disciples, and the words he spoke to them. We also read the 
TOWER'S comments on the supper, and sang a hymn altogether. I 
have two new subscribers for the TOWER, to send along with 
mine. Yours in Christ, . 



Harper, C. Palmas, Liberia, 
April 29, 1884. 

DEAR B ROTHER : -Having accidentally met with the little 
pamphlet published by you, entitled "Food for Thinking 
Christians," and having carefully read it more than once, I am 
deeply interested in it, believing I get through it a clearer and more 
correct knowledge of the teaching of God's holy word than I ever 
had before. I am constrained to avail myself of your very liberal 
offer, and ask you to send to my address some copies for 
distribution among some of my friends and neighbors, who I think 
will make a judicious and profitable use of them. I should be also 
very thankful for a few of the tracts, entitled "The Tabernacle and 
Its Teachings." Wishing you abundant success in your efforts for 
the good of mankind, I beg to remain, with assurance of high 
esteem, yours very respectfully, 

Washington Co., Ark., May 28, 1884. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL :-It is with pleasure I write you these 
lines, to let you know how much I appreciate the new (?) teaching. I 
have read several copies of the Z.W.T. , the Tabernacle Teachings 
and the Food for Thinking Christians, and I am glad to say that they 
are the best expositions of the Teachings of the Spirit I ever met 
with. Surely, the Lord is with you, for this is the Lord's doings, and 
it is marvelous in our eyes. Thanks be to God for this unspeakable 
gift. I am a teacher in the Christian Church at present, but a sincere 
lover of Bible truth, and am willing to forsake all for it. And for this 
purpose I write you these few lines: I want to know the truth, and 
nothing but the truth. I am an invalid, and as for this world's goods 
is concerned may not be able to compensate you, but will endeavor 
to make the best use of myself for the Master. I am, your brother in 
the one hope, 

A Brother writing from Kentucky, says: 

Your sample copies of Z.W.T. have come to hand, and I like it well, 
so far. You will please find enclosed my subscription. 



I have shown your paper; some like it and some don't; some say 
Infidel and some say Universalist, but I want to try it one year, if no 
more. I have been asked what denomination you belong to, and I 
tell them I can't tell by reading your paper; they must read and 
judge for themselves. I want you to send me your articles of faith, 
so they can all see who you are. As for myself, I think the TOWER 
explains the Scriptures more fully than any thing I ever read before. 

Yours very truly, 



Such testimony as the above has brought joy and comfort many 
times, when other circumstances conspired to discourage our 
efforts. And we thank God that human imperfection can stand 
unseen behind his truth and hold it up for the comfort and blessing 
of his dear children. 

These words of our brother remind us of the words of another under 
similar circumstances. "Whether this man be a sinner or no I know 
not, but one thing I know, that whereas once I was blind, now I 
see. " Our articles of faith are found in the Word of God. If you 
would know them, we invite you to study it with us. Whatever we 
can find taught therein we believe. 



ADVERSITY is the trial of principle. Without it a man can hardly 
know whether he is honest or not. 



R623 : page 3 

THE SECRET OF THE SAINTS. 

To play through life a perfect part, 
Unnoticed and unknown; 
To seek no rest in any heart 
Save only God's alone; 

In little things to own no will, 
To have no share in great, 
To find the labor ready still, 
And for the crown to wait. 

Upon the brow to bear no trace 
Of more than common care, 
To write no secret in the face 
For men to read it there. 

The daily cross to clasp and bless, 
With such familiar zeal, 
As hides from all that not the less 
The daily weight you feel. 



In toils that praise will never pay, 
To see your life go past, 
To meet in every coming day 
Twin sister of the last; 

To hear of high, heroic things, 
And yield them reverence due, 
But feel life's daily offerings 
Are far more fit for you. 

To woo no secret soft disguise 
To which self-love is prone, 
Unnoticed by all other eyes, 
Unworthy in your own; 

To yield with such a happy art, 
That no one thinks you care, 
And say to your poor bleeding heart, 
"How little you can bear." 

Oh! 'tis a pathway hard to choose, 
A struggle hard to share, 
For human pride would still refuse 
The nameless trials there; 

But since we know the gate is low 
That leads to heavenly bliss, 
What higher life could God bestow 
Than such a life as this? 

-Selected. 



R623 : page 3 

THE DOCTRINE OF ELECTION. 

It is well known that for years past I have opposed the popular, or 
Calvinistic view, of election. That view is essentially this: "God 
did, from all eternity, unconditionally, elect a certain number of 
persons to be saved, and these cannot be lost; and, at the same time, 
did pass by all the rest of the human family and left them to eternal 
damnation"; i.e., He reprobated them to eternal torments, or death, 
leaving them in a helpless and hopeless condition. 

Such an idea of election I have opposed for fifty years past, and 
shall probably oppose it to the end of life, as unharmonious with the 
character of God and his professions of "love to the world," and the 
fact that Christ "tasted death for every man," and "gave himself a 
ransom for all," and that "God will have all men to be saved [to 
live] and come to the knowledge of the truth" (1 Tim. 2:4-6; Heb. 
2:9). 



With this statement before my readers, I trust they will not mistake 
nor misconstrue what I am about to say on election. That there is a 



Scripture doctrine of election it is useless to deny; and that it is a 
"Sovereign" one must also be admitted. God, of his own sovereign 
pleasure, elected the first Adam before he was created to be the 
head and representative of the human race in its animal nature. The 
same Sovereign will elected, "before the foundation of the world" 
(Eph. 1:4), the second Adam— the Christ— to be the head and 
representative of a spiritual race, to be developed in due time. 

SCRIPTURAL ELECTION HARMLESS. 

These elections are necessarily followed by a harmless 
reprobation, i.e., no other man can take either the first or second 
Adam's place in the plan of God relating to our race. Neither of 
these elections are designed to exclude any of the race from the 
favor or love of God, but both are ordained for the benefit of the 
non-elected, to bring life and well-being to the entire race. The first 
Adam was elected to the office or work of multiplying and 
replenishing the earth, by filling it with inhabitants and subduing it 
(Gen. 1:28). The second Adam was elected to the office or work of 
bringing out a spiritual element in men and subjecting them to the 
will of God, so that they should find their happiness and joy in 
"communion and fellowship with the Father and Jesus Christ," the 
second or spiritual Adam (1 John 1:1-3).* 

These two heads (the first and second Adam) were each elected, in 
distinction from all others, for these special offices or works; but it 
was for the benefit of others in both cases, though all others were 
reprobated in the sense these were elected. 

THE CREATOR'S RIGHT TO ELECT 

The sovereign right of the Creator to elect whom he will to certain 
offices, or to perform a particular work, is undeniable. To deny this 
would be to deny that he is God, the MAKER of all things; and to 
such the language of Paul is applicable —"Nay, but, O man, who art 
thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him 
that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?" (Rom. 9:20). 
Without variety in the human family, what would society be, even 
in this life? If all were rulers, who would be the subjects? If all 
were subjects, who would be the rulers? It is evident to all that 
some men by nature are endowed with five talents, some with two, 
and some with only one; and each was thus endowed, not by his 
own choice or will, but by the will of the Creator. Each was elected, 
before he was born, to this capacity found in him by nature; 
improvement may increase this capacity in them all; but I speak 
now only of the election which gives them their place, at first, in 
the race— all ordered in infinite wisdom for the highest good, 
improvement and happiness of the whole race. 

Men claim the right to elect their own rulers; and the act of doing it 
is called "Election"— that is, certain persons are elected to fill 
particular offices, not for their own benefit or aggrandizement, but 



for the good of the whole community. From the offices thus filled 
all others, for the time being, are reprobated or rejected; but the 
reprobation is a harmless one; the election was designed to benefit 
all the reprobated; to watch over their interests and see that all were 
protected in their lawful pursuits, and to punish the disturbers of the 
peace. The elect rulers are armed with authority to enforce law and 
order, and under such a well-ordered administration the greatest 
amount of good will be possessed by all well disposed, both of 
rulers and the ruled. In this view election is stripped of its hateful 
aspects. 

A CALM LOOK AT THE SUBJECT 

Let us now see if we can look calmly on the Scripture doctrine of 
election. In the first place, suppose it is an election of individuals, 
though that view may be modified as the investigation proceeds. 
For what are they elected, or to what? Is it to be saved, while all 
others are to be damned? Preposterous assumption! as unfounded in 
the Word of God as it is blasphemous. They are "chosen in Christ" 
and for Christ, to aid him in his work of blessing the race of Adam, 
for whom Christ "tasted death;" that is, "every man"— "every 
creature"— the "all" for whom Christ "gave himself a ransom," 
which will "be testified in due time" (Mark 16:15; 1 Tim. 2:6; Heb. 
2:9). The elect are to become the "Bride of the LAMB "-his "joint- 
heirs" -to reign with him (Rev. 19:7,8; Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12); 
and will sit with Christ on his throne in the regeneration (Rev. 
3:21). Shall He not have the right to select his own Bride? May not 
He and His Father elect whom they will for the Bride of Christ? 
How can that be doubted? Her office is not to exalt herself, nor for 
herself. It is to exalt the Bridegroom and be workers together with 
him in blessing the race and carrying out God's great purpose of 
blessing "the world"— the whole human family. 

Viewed in this light, what Christian's heart can object to the 
doctrine of election? No one is harmed by it; no one 

R624 : page 3 

is excluded from salvation or eternal life by it; but their ultimate 
possession of those blessings is more likely to be secured by it. 
There is greater hope for those who are not of this elect Bride than 
there would have been but for her being thus elected and prepared 
to bless the others of the human race. This election need not and 
should not cause any jealousy in the minds of the non-elect; for, 
first, it is for the benefit of the non-elect that this election has been 
made; and, second, these elected ones have, in this life, to "drink of 
Christ's cup, and be baptized with his baptism" of sufferings, 
sorrows and reproach, be despised, reviled, have their names cast 
out as evil, their motives misconstrued, endure persecution in some 
form; many of them even unto death, having "had trial of cruel 
mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds and 
imprisonment: they were stoned, sawn asunder, were tempted, were 
slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheep-skins and goat- 



skins, being destitute, afflicted, harrassed, maltreated, (of whom the 
world was not worthy): they wandered in deserts and in mountains, 
and in dens and caves of the earth" (Heb. 1 1:36-38). Such, in some 
sort or some measure, is the lot of the Elect Church of Christ, who, 
having been made partakers of His sufferings, will be sharers in his 
glory, having been fitted therefor by being perfected by sufferings 
like their Elect Head, Christ Jesus. They do not and cannot live as 
other men do in this present life. They are called out from the 
world, and live not for this world, but live above it, looking for a 
"kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world" 
(Matt. 25:34). Christ is not only their Redeemer, but their great 
Exemplar: to be Christ-like is the grand ruling motive; and this 
makes them separate from all other men in this life. They have 
taken Christ's yoke upon them, and are now learning of him who 
was "meek and lowly in heart." 

These remarks lead to another branch of the subject. That the elect I 
have spoken of are a definite number, which can neither be 
increased nor diminished, is highly probable. But I shall not argue 
that point at this time, another question being of more importance— 
that is— 

IS THE ELECTION ABSOLUTE AS TO PARTICULAR PERSONS? 

Or, Is it an Unconditional Election of certain individuals to fill the 
position of Bride to the Lamb? That the offer of this honor is 
confined to a portion only of the human family is a self-evident 
truth; for only a few of the race have ever heard the proclamation of 
the grace of God in Christ. It seems to follow that only those to 
whom the good news has been preached are candidates for this high 
and holy calling. That this election is not absolute, i.e., irrevocable, 
seems clear both from the Old and New Testaments. Peter calls 
upon believers to make their "calling and election sure" (2 Pet. 
1:10). Paul tells us, "I keep under my body and bring it into 
subjection, lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, 
I myself should be a castaway" (1 Cor. 9:27): and again he says, "I 
have suffered the loss of all things. ..that I may win Christ.. .that I 
may know him and the power of his resurrection ...if by any means 
I might attain unto the resurrection (exanastasin) out from the 
dead," or out from among the dead" (Phil. 3:11); which language 
shows that Paul did not consider his election to that honor was 
absolute; hence, his laborings and sufferings to "make sure" that 
result. 

Thus it appears that election, though it may be of individuals, is not 
absolute; it may be forfeited by "transgression." Paul is clear on this 
point when he says, "It is impossible for those who were once 
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made 
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, 
and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to 
renew them again to repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves 
the Son of God afresh and put him to an open shame" (Heb. 6:4-6). 



Again Paul says, "If we sin wilfully after we have received the 
knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, 
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation 
which shall devour the adversaries" (Heb. 10:26,27). Such 
testimonies go to show that individuals may be elected to run in the 
race for the offices of "kings and priests" unto God and the Lamb, 
and yet may "come short of" a confirmation or inauguration into 
those offices by failing to obtain that maturity and perfectness 
which God calls them to, and by non-improvement of the grace 
bestowed on them; hence, the apostle exhorts on this wise, "We 
then, as workers together with him, beseech you also that ye receive 
not the grace of God in vain" (2 Cor. 6:6). 

The Scriptures are full of cautions against carelessness in the use of 
God's grace, and against quenching the Spirit, and admonitions not 
to grieve the Holy Spirit of God, all of which go to show that there 
is a danger, at least a possibility, of failing to "make our calling and 
election sure. " Too many persons, while writing or speaking of 
election, fail to make the distinction between being elected to run a 
race, and being elected to receive the prize. All who believe in 
Jesus have been elected (from the foundation of the world, if you 
please,) to run in the race for the kingly and priestly offices of the 
Kingdom of God; but none have been absolutely elected to the 
possession of those offices; this last election is suspended on 
conditions to be performed; hence, says the apostle, "So run that ye 
may obtain" (1 Cor. 9:24): obtain what? "An incorruptible crown." 
This belongs "to him that overcometh" (Rev. 3:21). 

GOD'S DESIGN BY AN ELECTION. 

This view of election, while it acknowledges the sovereignty of 
God and his right to bestow his gifts according to his will, shows 
that all is done with the design to benefit the race of men, as a 
whole; so that while some are exalted to rule and teach, the others 
are blessed under and by their rule and instruction, thus uniting the 
whole family of man in a perfect harmony, diffusing perfect 
happiness and joy: "every man," ultimately, sitting "under his own 
vine and fig-tree," having none to molest or make them afraid, "for 
the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it" (Micah 4:4). 

Such an election as here set forth, is a most powerful stimulus to 
holy living, deadness to the world, self-denial, patience in 
tribulation, watchfulness, constant reliance on God for help and 
support in all the conflicts to which we are exposed in this life: in 
short, it leads to that spirit of consecration to God and the Lamb 
which few professed Christians seem to have any idea of in these 
days, for most of them appear to be tolerably satisfied to be saved 
from hell or death; and a deep communion with the Father, and 
with his Son, Jesus Christ, seems of no great importance to them if 
they can only be saved. Saved they may be; but never gain a part in 
the company composing the Bride of Christ: they have not made 
that "calling and election sure," and hence, fail of being kings and 



priests unto God and the Lamb; though saved with an inferior 
salvation through the abounding love of God, they may be subjects 
but not rulers in the Kingdom of God; they are not heirs of the 
Kingdom, but they may share in the blessings which flow from the 
reign of Christ and his Bride in the Kingdom, when that reign is 
established over all the earth. How great their gain or loss will be, 
by their neglect to make "sure" their election, is a matter at present 
impossible to tell. Let each believer in Jesus see and feel that he or 
she is called, yea, elected to something more than to be saved; they 
are chosen to put on Christ; i.e., to become Christ-like, so as to be 
of his Bride, and occupy the place of kings and priests to God and 
the Lamb. Not to live for this end and office; to be satisfied with the 
idea of merely being saved somehow, is to undervalue their high 
calling and lightly esteem the exalted honor of being joint-heirs to 
Christ's throne, and possessing the intimate relation of Bride of the 
Lamb. It is too much like despising the birth-right, like Esau; or 
selling it for a mess of pottage. What are all the charms of this 
present age— its honors, its luxuries, its wealth and grandeur- 
compared with the eternal honor and pleasure of being of the 
number that "follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth" (Rev. 14:4), 
and associated with him in all the wondrous works and glories of 
the "ages to come?" 

Let all believers in Jesus "strive to enter in at the strait gate," and 
walk in "the narrow way," if they would make "sure" their "calling 
and election," and 

R624 : page 4 

not rest in the bare idea of being saved. The prize is before us: let us 
"so run that we may obtain" it.-Geo. Storrs. 



*Some of our readers will recognize the writer of the above as a 
former soldier of the cross who laid aside the earthly armor some 
years since. The above, from the pen of our esteemed fellow- 
laborer, was written probably ten years ago, and before we had 
come to see that the election of the church, now in progress, is to a 
change of nature, from human to spiritual: hence, in the fourth 
paragraph, the writer speaks of Christ selecting a spiritual element 
in man, instead of saying, as we now would, that the Second Adam 
becomes the head of a new or spiritual race, and the restorer of the 
human race. 

In the sixth paragraph also, under the light of further unfoldings of 
the same truth, we, instead of saying each was endowed with many 
or few talents "by the will of the Creator— each elected before birth 
to the capacity found in him by nature," we would say: Originally, 
the race in its perfect representative, Adam, was fully and perfectly 
endowed with a full range of talent; but, by reason of sin, and the 
degradation and imperfection consequent to the fall, the original 
range and scope of talents has been more or less interfered with and 
destroyed. 



It affords us great satisfaction to recall how clearly our Brother 
Storrs, in the above and other writings, presented the conditions 
which we were elected to fulfill if we would be joint-heirs of 
Christ's glory— that we must suffer with Him if we would be also 
glorified together.— EDITOR. 



R624 : page 4 

SONS OF GOD AND DAUGHTERS OF MEN. 

"The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, 
and they took them wives of all, which they chose... And they bare 
children to them, the same became mighty men, which were of old 
men of renown." (Gen. 6:2,4.) 

The Scriptures not only point us to the future age and call the 
spiritual government of Christ which shall then exist a "new 
heavens," and earthly society and institutions under it a "new 
earth;" but the present spiritual rulership [under Satan, "the prince 
of this world,"] and earthly institutions under it are termed "The 
present evil world," dispensation or epoch. Moreover, we are 
informed that the present dominion of evil has not lasted forever, 
but that it was preceded by a still different dispensation or epoch 
spoken of as "the world that was before the flood," which also had a 
heavens or spiritual ruling power, and an earth, or condition of men 
subject to that spiritual dominion. 

These three worlds mentioned by Peter (2 Pet. 3:6,7,13) designate 
these three great epochs of time, in each of which, God's plan with 
reference to men has a distinct and separate outline, yet each is but 
a part of the one great plan which, when complete, will exhibit the 
divine wisdom, though considered separately these parts would fail 
to show their deep design. 

Since that first "world" (heavens and earth," or that order of things) 
passed away at the time of the flood, it follows that it must have 
been a different order from the present, and hence the prince of this 
present evil world was not the prince of that which preceded this— 
not the prince of the world or dispensation before the flood. 

Just what was God's plan and method under that first dispensation 
has not hitherto been so clearly understood. Recently, however, 
several scriptures have been brought to our attention which seem to 
throw light on God's dealings during that time, and we think give a 
further and clearer insight into his plan and purpose as a whole. The 
thought suggested by these is that the first world (the dispensation 
before the flood) was under the supervision and special ministration 
of the angels; that these were man's governors and overseers 
commissioned to communicate God's will and to rule over the 
fallen and degenerating race, which, because of sin needed this 
government. 



That angels were the rulers of that epoch is not only indicated by all 
references to that period, but may be reasonably inferred from the 
Apostle's remark when contrasting the present dispensation with the 
past and the future. He endeavors to show both the righteous and 
the enduring character of the future rulership of the world, saying, 
"The world to come hath He not put in subjection to the angels"- 
no, it is put under the control of Jesus and his joint heirs, and hence 
it shall not only be more righteous than the present, but it shall be 
more successful than that of the angels was. (See Heb. 2:2,5.) 

In their original estate all the angels seemed to possess the ability to 
appear in earthly forms-Satan appeared to Eve as a serpent, other 
angels frequently appeared as men, thus performing their ministry, 
appearing or disappearing as the work demanded. 

It was at this time, we believe, that the fall of some of the angels 
occurred. It is a common supposition, though we think without 
foundation, that the fall of Satan and his angels occurred before 
man's creation. We are told that Satan was a murderer [man killer] 
from the beginning (Jno. 8:44.) Certainly not from the beginning of 
his own existence, for every creation coming from God's hand is 
perfect, nor can we think any other beginning referred to than man's 
beginning in Eden. 

The ambition of Satan to become a ruler seems to have developed 
as he beheld the first human pair with their procreative powers. He 
probably reasoned that if he could obtain the control of this man he 
should have the dominion over all his offspring, and be in power 
and influence above others, a rival of Jehovah, and his growing 
ambition said, "I will be like the Most High." (Isa. 14:14.) 

Measurably successful, Satan gained a great influence over the 
race, but not complete, for in competition with him was the great 
company of angels who as guardians, instructed and ruled mankind 
for a time in harmony with the will of God. But presently came a 
great degeneracy among those rulers of men. Man's corruption was 
contagious, and some of the angels left their own habitation or 
condition as spiritual beings, keeping not their first or original 
estate. They misused the powers which they possessed of assuming 
a human form and became of a reprobate and licentious mind, 
copying after the degenerate man, and according to our text started 
a new race of men in the world. 

Some have endeavored to apply the Scripture at the beginning of 
this article to two classes of men— one class more righteous than the 
other, called "Sons of God," but such a position is utterly untenable, 
for why should it be considered a grievous sin for one man to take 
for a wife another man's daughter. Marriage among men is never 
condemned as sinful in the Scriptures. Again, if it were merely a 
union of two classes of the same race why should the offspring be 
"GIANTS" and specially "MEN OF RENOWN." If the righteous 
and the wicked marry to-day are their children therefore giants or 
renowned men? 



Through the deterioration of several hundred years, mankind had 
lost much of its original vigor and perfection of mind and body, but 
with the angels it is different. Their powers were still perfect and 
unimpaired, hence it is clear that their children would partake of 
that vitality and much more resemble the first perfect man than 
those around them, among whom they would be giants both in 
physical and mental strength. 

Those angels which kept not their first condition but sought the 
level of sinful men and left their own habitation or spiritual 
condition God placed in age-lasting chains. That is, God restrained 
or limited their powers, taking from them the power and privilege 
of appearing in any earthly form, human or brute. Hence, though 
we know that they did thus appear before the flood, there is not one 
instance recorded in which they have been able to free themselves 
from this restraint or chain since. On the contrary, the angels who 
left not their first estate are not so restrained, and have appeared 
frequently as men, as a flame of fire and as a pillar of cloud, etc., as 
recorded in both the old and new testament Scriptures. 

Having become depraved in their tastes and given over to a 
reprobate mind, and being debarred from all association with God 
and his works and plans, these fallen angels have no longer any 
pleasure in things on the spiritual plane, but crave association with 
depraved mankind and a participation with him in every form of 
evil. How wise and kind the Almighty hand which has restrained 
their power and influence over men by preventing their personal 
intercourse! Now they may indeed enter and act through any who 
invite their companionship, but no more can they do. Thus far shalt 
thou go, saith the Almighty, but no farther. 

Some of this class, possessed by devils, Jesus and his disciples met 
in their ministry. Out of one he cast a legion of devils (Mark 5:1- 
15). Anxious in some manner to be associated with humanity, yet 
unable to assume human form because of their restraints, (chains), 
when they found a man willing to have such company, a legion 
crowded into him, making him thereby a maniac. Even when they 
perceived that Jesus would release the man from their possession, 
they in despair requested as a favor that they might be permitted to 
inhabit and use the bodies of a herd of swine near by. But the swine 
were crazed thereby, and madly rushed into the sea. 

But our subject would be incomplete if we should omit the 
testimony of Jude (vs. 6,7.) After mentioning the angels who 
sinned, he says, Even as Sodom and Gomorrah.... IN LIKE 
MANNER giving themselves over to fornication and going after 
strange flesh. " Is not this conclusive evidence on the subject? 

That God deprecates any mixture or blending of human and 
spiritual natures, and designs that each should keep its own original 
or first estate, we need scarcely remark is clearly taught here. (See 
also Lev. 18:23, and 20:15,16.) And that our race as it exists to-day, 
coming through Noah, is purely Adamic stock, and contains no 



mixture, is shown by the expression— "These are the generations of 
Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generation, i.e., not 
contaminated in the manner before described (Gen. 6:9.) 

Glancing back then we see the first epoch under angelic control, 
and the result, man's continued degradation, and its degrading 
influence upon some of the angels. The angels were utterly unable 
to accomplish the great work of man's recovery. Doubtless they 
were anxious to do it, for they sang and shouted for joy at his 
creation. And God let them try it, but sadly they failed. Some joined 
the ranks of evil and the rest stood by and witnessed the terrible 
course of sin. Later we find them still interested and desiring to 
look into the plan which God has since been working out, and ever 
ready to do his bidding in our service. (1 Peter 1:12.) Thus was 
proven both to men and angels the futility of angelic power to save 
men. 

In the beginning of this present evil world, notwithstanding Noah's 
endeavor to serve God and to teach his posterity to follow his 
example, and the exhibition of God's anger at the deluge, the 
tendency was still downward, and soon the wickedness of a Sodom 
brought its destruction. Mankind was bent on an evil course, and 
God permitted them to take it. Then the ministration of angels, 
except to the few of God's children, was withdrawn. In this second 
dispensation God permits the world to select and obey the prince of 
its own choosing, to feel his galling yoke and to realize the real 
character of evil while he is selecting from among them a little 
flock, whose desire to do the will of God has led them to sacrifice 
the human interests and present things to share as joint heirs with 
Christ, the glories and honors of the new ruling power (new 
heavens). And when the prince of this world is cast out, and he 
whose right it is shall take his power and reign, then in him shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed. 

God has now demonstrated to all his creatures that his plan was the 
only one which could accomplish the great work; and his plan has 
ever since the fall been gradually and quietly developing, and in 
due time will bear abundant fruit unto eternal life. 

If, then, we are candidates for so high an honor, is it not fitting that 
the Gospel church must be carefully tried and tested now to insure 
their fitness for the new dominion? Let us then with the Apostles 
rejoice that we are accounted worthy of being tested and tried, and 
laying aside every weight and every besetment, let us run with joy 
and patience the race set before us, looking unto Jesus our 
forerunner, the author and finisher of our faith. 



R626 : page 4 



TRANSFORMED. 



"Be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the 
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and 
acceptable, and perfect will of God."— Rom. 12:2. 

It should be noticed here that these words of the Apostle are not 
addressed to the unbelieving world, but to those whom he 
recognizes as brethren, as shown by the preceding verse— "I beseech 
you therefore, brethren,. ..that ye present your bodies living 
sacrifices, holy and acceptable unto God." 

It is the prevailing idea among Christians that when a man is 
converted or turned from sin to righteousness, and from unbelief 
and opposition to God to faith, obedience and reliance upon him, 
that is the transforming Paul meant. Truly it is a great change— a 
transformation, but not the transformation that Paul here refers to. 
That is a transformation of character; but Paul refers to a 
transformation of nature promised to believers during the Gospel 
Age, on certain conditions, and was urging believers to fulfill those 
conditions. Had such a transformation of character not already 
taken place in those whom he addressed, he could not have termed 
them brethren— brethren, too, who had something "holy and 
acceptable unto God" to offer in sacrifice. Only those who are 
justified by faith in the ransom are reckoned of God as holy and 
acceptable. 

This transformation of nature will result to those who during the 
Gospel Age present their justified humanity a living sacrifice, as 
Jesus presented his perfect humanity a sacrifice— laying down all 
right and claim to future human existence, as well as ignoring 
present human gratification. 

The first thing to be sacrificed is our human will; and henceforth we 
may not be guided either by our own or by any other human will, 
but only by the divine will. Gradually then the divine will becomes 
our will, and we reckon the human will as not ours, but as the will 
of another, to be ignored and sacrificed. The divine will now having 
become our will, we begin to reason, to judge, to think, from the 
divine standpoint: God's plan is our plan, and God's purposes and 
ways are ours. 

None can understand this transformation who have not in good faith 
presented themselves as sacrifices, and in consequence come to 
experience it. Hitherto we might enjoy anything that was not sinful, 
for the world and all its good things were made for man's 
enjoyment; the only difficulty was to subdue the sinful propensities. 
But the consecrated, in addition to the effort to subdue sin, must 
sacrifice the present good things and devote all their energies to the 
service of God. As through sacrifice we daily realize that this is not 
our rest, that here we have no continuing city, our hearts and hopes 
are turned to that "rest that remaineth for the people of God." And 
that blessed hope in turn quickens and inspires to continued 
sacrifice. 



Thus through a sanctified will the mind is renewed, transformed; 
and the desires, hopes and aims begin to gravitate toward the 
spiritual and unseen things promised, while the human hopes, etc., 
die. Those thus transformed are reckoned as "new creatures," 
begotten of God and partakers to that extent of the divine nature. 

Mark well the difference between these new creatures and those 
who are only justified. The latter class is still of the earth earthy, 
and their hopes, ambitions and aims are such as will be fully 
gratified in the promised restitution of all things. But the former 
class is not of this world, even as Christ is not of this world, and 
their hopes center in the things unseen, where Christ sitteth on the 
right hand of God. The prospect 

R626 : page 5 

of earthly glory, so enchanting to the natural man, would not now 
be a satisfying portion to those begotten of this heavenly hope— to 
those who are now sharers of the divine mind. 

We see, then, that it is a mistaken idea, though a common one, that 
all good men, such as Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, were 
begotten of the spirit. 

This new divine mind is now the earnest of our inheritance of the 
complete divine nature-mind and body. Some may be a little 
startled by this expression, a divine body; but we are told that Jesus 
is the express image of his Father's person, and that the overcomers 
shall be made like unto his glorious body. "There is a natural 
[human] body, and there is a spiritual body," and we have no idea 
that either our divine Father or our Lord Jesus are only great minds 
without bodies. They are glorious spiritual bodies, though it doth 
not yet appear how great the glory, and shall not until we also shall 
share the divine likeness. 

While this transforming of the mind from human to spiritual is a 
gradual work, the change from a human to a spiritual body will not 
be gradual, but instantaneous. (1 Cor. 15:52.) 

It may be difficult for some to see in this change of mind the 
beginning of a change of nature; but a little consideration, we think, 
makes it very clear. That there is a change of nature for the church 
is scriptural truth; and it is also as clearly taught that the change of 
this class begins here and is completed in the resurrection. (2 Cor. 
1:20-22; 1 Cor. 15:52.) 

Now, as Paul says, we have this treasure (the divine mind) in 
earthen vessels, but in due time the treasure shall be in a glorious 
vessel, the spiritual body. 

The Scriptures show us that the human nature is a likeness of the 
spiritual (Gen. 5:1). For instance, man has will, so have God and 
angels; man has reason, so have they; man has memory, so have 
they. The character of the mental operations of each is the same. 
With the same data for reasoning, and under the same 



circumstances these different natures are able to arrive at the same 
conclusions: hence God can say to men, "Come, let us reason 
together. " 

Though the mental faculties of both natures are similar, yet we 
know that the spiritual nature has powers beyond and above the 
human— powers, we think, which result, not from different faculties, 
but from the wider range of the same faculties, and the different 
circumstances under which they operate. 

From all that we can gather, we conclude that the human nature is a 
perfect earthly image of the spiritual nature, with the same faculties, 
only confined to the earthly sphere, with ability and disposition to 
discern only so much beyond it as God sees fit to reveal for man's 
benefit and happiness. 

The divine is the highest order of the spiritual nature; and how 
immeasurable is the distance between God and his creatures ! We 
are only able to catch a glimpse of the glory of the divine wisdom, 
power and goodness as in panoramic view he causes some of his 
mighty works to pass before us. But we can measure and 
comprehend the glory of perfect humanity. Truly there is a vast 
difference between the divine and the human nature; but, as the 
Scriptures teach, there is a likeness, else God and man could have 
no communion, no fellowship. It is because there is not a likeness 
of God in the lower animals that they cannot know or commune 
with him. 

With these thoughts clearly in mind, we are able to more fully 
understand how the change from the human to the spiritual nature is 
effected-viz., by carrying the same mental powers over to higher 
conditions. When clothed with the heavenly body we shall have the 
heavenly powers which belong to that glorious body. We shall also 
have the range of thought and scope of power which belongs to it. 
The change of mind from human to spiritual which we experience 
here we see is the beginning of that change of nature. True it is but 
a very small beginning, but the begetting, as this is termed, is 
always but a faint, a small beginning; yet it is the earnest or 
assurance of the finished work. (Eph. 1:13,14.) 

Some have said, How shall we know ourselves when changed? 
How shall we then know that we are the same beings that lived and 
suffered and sacrificed that we might be partakers of this glory? 
Will we be the same conscious beings? Yes, most assuredly. The 
Scriptures declare that if WE be dead with Christ, WE shall also 
live with him. (Rom. 6:8.) 

Changes which daily occur to our human bodies do not cause us to 
forget the past nor to lose our identity, so the promised change from 
human to spiritual bodies will not destroy either memory or 
identity, but will increase their power and range. The same divine 
mind that now is ours, with the same memory, the same reasoning 
powers, etc., will then find its powers expanded to immeasurable 
heights and depths, in harmony with its new immortal or 



incorruptible body, and memory will trace all its career from 
earliest human infancy, and we will be able by contrast to fully 
realize the glorious reward of our sacrifice. But this could not be 
the case if the human were not a likeness of the spiritual. 

These thoughts may help us also to understand how Jesus, when 
changed from spiritual to human conditions, viz., a human body 
and earthly limitations, was a man; and though it was the same 
being in both cases, under the first conditions it was spiritual; under 
the second condition it was human. 

Because the two natures are separate and distinct, yet the one is a 
likeness of the other, therefore the same mental faculties (memory, 
etc.) being common to both, Jesus could remember his former glory 
which he had before becoming a man, but which he had not when 
he had become a man, as his words prove— 

R627 : page 5 

"Father, glorify me with the glory I HAD with thee before the 
world was" (John 17:5), the glory of the spiritual nature. And that 
prayer is more than answered in his present exaltation to the highest 
form of the spiritual, viz., the divine nature. 

Referring again to the words of our text, we notice that Paul does 
not say, Do not conform yourselves to this world, but transform 
yourselves into the divine likeness; but he says, "Be not 
conformed... but be transformed." That is well expressed, for we do 
not either conform or transform ourselves; but we do submit 
ourselves either to be conformed to the world by the worldly 
influences around us, or else we submit ourselves to the will of 
God, to be transformed by the heavenly influences exercised 
through his word and his spirit. 

You that are consecrated, what influence are you submitting to? 
The transforming influences lead to present sacrifice and suffering, 
but the end is glorious. If you are developing under these 
transforming influences, you are proving daily what is that good 
and acceptable and perfect will of God. To such the will of God is 
made plain. May grace divine enable us to walk according to the 
will of God through suffering, until ushered into the promised 
glory— until fully transformed into his glorious image! 



R627 : page 5 

"SEE THAT YE WALK CIRCUMSPECTLY." 

Not long since, many who are now rejoicing in the light of present 
truth were under the cover of darkness, uneasily seeking rest in the 
short bed and narrow covering of Babylon's creeds. Some loved the 
darkness, but a few anxiously longed for the dawn of day. 

To such a voice has come, saying: "Arise, shine; for thy light is 
come and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. " This light that 



has come is none other than the glorious light of our Lord's 
presence, for the long-promised second advent is due. At his first 
advent Jesus said, "I am the light of the world," and the early 
disciples were bidden to arise and shine, their light having come. 
But since he has come in the glory of power the Church is now 
bidden to arise and shine with increasing glory, her glorious light 
having come. 

Few at our Lord's first advent discerned his light because the 
majority preferred darkness; the few gladly received the light, and 
through them it has been reflected all through the gospel age. Thus 
they in turn became light-bearers as Jesus said-"Ye are the light of 
the world.. ..Let your light shine." (Matt. 5:14-16.) Had not the 
mystery of iniquity begun to work that light would long since have 
flooded the world with its glory. But it was a part of the plan of 
God to let the mystery of iniquity work, interposing its clouds of 
error and superstition, thus obscuring the light, that the world might 
not see until the "due time" had come for binding Satan and 
ushering in the reign of righteousness. (Rev. 20:2.) 

So great has been the deception and darkness brought about through 
this agency of Satan, that but feebly have even the children of light 
been able to discern and follow it. In fact, as the mystery of iniquity 
increased in power, the whole heavens have been overspread with 
clouds and thick darkness, and nearly all of God's children have 
submitted more or less to the drowsy influence. But to the few who, 
feeling the discomfort and longing for the day have escaped from 
the short beds, the message, Let your light shine has increasing 
significance now that the great light, the glorious head of the 
Church, has come. 

Yes, we have seen the light; we have felt its blessed influence; our 
drowsy sensibilities have been quickened into new life, and our 
hearts leap for joy as we recognize present truth and by faith 
discern the glory of the coming day. 

Well, say some, If the Lord were indeed present would not the 
whole earth be filled with his glory? Yes, in due time it will be, but 
we remember that he comes as a thief, and for a time is unobserved 
by the world. The world will not see his light, neither will 
unfaithful, sleeping children of God discern it. The gross darkness 
of ignorance and unbelief will everywhere prevail and only the 
faithful few will discern Christ's second advent, until the day of the 
Lord is well advanced and the Sun of righteousness and truth shall 
have scattered the vail of gross darkness which now covers the 
earth. And to this the prophet's words agree— "Behold the darkness 
shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people; but the Lord 
shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee." 
Seeing, then, that these things are so, what manner of persons ought 
we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? 

Paul exhorted those who enjoyed the light of our Lord's first advent 
to be followers of God as dear children... "to walk circumspectly, 



not as fools but as wise, redeeming the time [securing the 
opportunity] because the days are evil." With still greater emphasis 
would the Apostle's words apply to those now enjoying the light of 
his second presence. 

To walk circumspectly is to walk cautiously, with watchfulness 
every way, with attention to guard against surprise or danger, and 
not as fools or those destitute of understanding. In this evil day it is 
important that, having escaped from the former darkness, we be not 
again deceived and led back. Once started on the backward track, it 
is only a question of time how soon we reach the former, or a worse 
darkness. 

We have for some time noticed, and called attention to the 
destructive tendency of the errors advanced in this day of the 
Church's final trial, as well as to the superior light which should 
enable her to contend against it. Every departure from the straight 
course of truth seems now to lead with unerring certainty and haste 
to a denial of the whole system of truth, even to its very centre. 

There is special need now to heed Paul's warning to walk 
cautiously, with a constant guard against surprise or danger, and not 
as those destitute of understanding, or as those who have never 
been enlightened. To some, under the delusive snares of the 
adversary, we have noticed that the most unreasonable and most 
unscriptural assertions were received and held to with a tenacity 
which baffled all efforts for their rescue, while that which they once 
hailed with delight as the truth of God, seemed but an idle tale. To 
such we would again repeat Paul's exhortation, "Be not unwise, but 
understanding what the will of the Lord is." The glory of the Lord 
has risen upon thee; arise, and let it shine through thee! That is not 
truth, by whatsoever route it may lead, if its course leads away from 
the very center of our hope-redemption through the precious blood 
of Christ. 

This blessed truth, on which hangs all our hope, has, like a well- 
grounded anchor, held God's children all through the gospel age. 
Other truths have been either mutilated or destroyed, but God has 
not permitted the devil in his wrath to throw away the Christian's 
anchor. Once let go your anchor and you find yourself drifting on 
an unknown sea. Thank God the anchor will never be destroyed, 
but you may lose your hold on it. Above the stormy billows of a 
tempestuous sea let our brother's words be heard-"Cast not away 
therefore your confidence which hath great recompense of reward." 
Hold fast to the anchor. 

See that ye walk circumspectly, securing, or making sure, the 
present opportunity because the present evil day makes increased 
vigilance and steadfastness necessary. 

R. W. 



R627 : page 5 



"ONE SOWETH AND ANOTHER REAPETH." 

JOHN 4:37. 

"Order," it is said, "is heaven's first law." Certain it is that the 
great designer and framer of all things had regard to order in all his 
works. "He spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood 
fast." How sublime the utterance: how worthy its divine source. Not 
less sublime the progressive steps in creation, extending, perhaps, 
through thousands and tens of thousands of years, until the 
completed universe in all its perfection appeared. 

Notice the order observed in the various organizations endowed 
with life. Whatever department in nature we select, we pursue the 
same intricate pathway through various gradations, till we reach the 
highest order in the class. The variety and perfection in both the 
vegetable and animal kingdoms excite our wonder and admiration. 
But, however great may be the interest in the lower orders, man, the 
crowning act of creation: man, made only a little lower than the 
angels, endowed with reason, privileged with communion with his 
Maker, absorbs all our attention. 

Not less real, though possibly less conspicuous, is the order shown 
in the work of man's recovery from the withering blight of sin. 

God having foreseen all that would befall his creature, devised a 
plan of redemption 

R628 : page 5 

which could by no possibility fail to accomplish the purposes 
intended. Just here is where many well meaning people are at fault. 
It seems to be a common belief among Christians that God's plans 
are not only liable to defeat, but that they usually are defeated. 

Such belief, however, is dishonoring to God, and comes from a 
faulty interpretation of the Scriptures. 

In the light that now shines on the sacred page, God's children are 
enabled to more fully comprehend his wonderful plan than was 
formerly their privilege. The faith of the just is as the shining light 
that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. (Prov. 4:18.) This 
light shining on the Word discovers in God's method a well-defined 
plan, embracing various steps or stages. It has been termed by some 
the "plan of the ages," because it embraces within its scope several 
different ages or dispensations, in each of which a special work was 
accomplished. We notice the patriarchal in which the knowledge of 
God was confined principally to one man at a time. The Jewish age 
during which this knowledge was confined principally to the Jewish 
nation; and the gospel age during which Christ is selecting a 
Church or bride to be associated with him finally in the work of 
blessing all the families of the earth. (Gen. 12:3.) 

Scripture also mentions "ages to come," in which God will show 
the exceeding riches of his grace. (Eph. 2:7.) 



R628 : page 6 

These ages each have a definite time appointed them, and a definite 
work to perform. In each there is a seed time and a harvest. Christ 
came to harvest the fruit of the Jewish age. He sent his disciples 
forth, not to preach to the Gentiles, but only to "the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel." In this harvest he burned the chaff, but the wheat 
he gathered into the garner. As many as received him, to them gave 
he the power to become sons of God. (Jno. 1:12.) 

The disciples were sent forth to reap where others had sown. The 
prophets were God's messengers to the people; they sowed the seed. 
When a sufficient time had elapsed, the reapers came to do their 
part of the work. 

The gospel age, Christ informs us, is also to have a seed time and a 
harvest. After the resurrection he sent his disciples into all the 
world to preach the gospel of the kingdom. At the end of the world 
(age, dispensation), the Son of man will send the reapers, who will 
gather the wheat into his barn. (Matt. 13:30.) 

Many laborers, though very anxious to be at work, seem not to 
know whether they are to sow or to reap. Perhaps we should rather 
say, they want to sow and reap at the same time. Failing to 
comprehend God's plan, or, more likely, failing to discover any 
plan at all, they work hap-hazard as they suppose God is doing. 

Wheat and tares have been growing together in the field. To the 
casual observer it promised an abundant harvest, but to him who 
needs not that any should testify of man, because he knows what it 
is in man, it presented a very different view. The harvest is now in 
progress, and to all appearances the tares far outnumber the wheat. 

As stated above, many who seem anxious to labor for the Master, 
have no conception of God's plan. They work on human plans, and 
as a consequence those whom they endeavor to instruct are 
confused rather than enlightened. 

"If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch." It seems 
to be true of this harvest, as of that of which Jesus spake, "The 
harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few: pray ye, therefore, 
the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his 
harvest." 

S. T. TACKABURY. 



R628 : page 6 

LOVEST THOU ME MORE THAN THESE? 

Of the company called to be the Bride of Christ, but one 
requirement is made, and that is, supreme love for the Lord which 
will recognize no rival. 



You may have inherited a disposition which more or less 
continually wars against your efforts to please God, but that need 
not interfere with your acceptableness. The Apostle Peter was 
afflicted with two perverse elements of character, which doubtless 
often led to great discouragement and almost to doubt of his 
acceptance. He was naturally very desirous of the approval of men, 
and also very impulsive. 

That Peter loved the Lord, is evident from the fact that he so far 
overcame these tendencies as to become an open and constant 
follower, thus sharing the reproach of Christ. But when the dreadful 
hour came that to the popular mind proved Jesus an imposter, and 
his disciples despised and blinded fanatics, that was too much for 
Peter, and pride and impulse, coupled with fear, led to an emphatic 
denial that he ever knew the Lord. Just a little before this, the same 
impulsiveness had led Peter to draw the sword in the Lord's 
defence. 

Notwithstanding Peter's denial of the Lord when under severe trial, 
he sadly remembered Jesus' words and repented, as his actions 
show. He still kept in company with the other disciples, all of 
whom were greatly perplexed and disappointed. Love still 
cherished the blessed memory of the past, though sadly they said, 
"We trusted that it had been he who should have redeemed Israel." 

When Mary learned that the Lord had risen, she ran at once to tell 
Peter, knowing it would be welcome tidings to him; and his 
impulsive love now bounded with joyful hope to find his risen 
Master. 

When the Lord had met the few disciples and Peter, after 
ministering to their temporal wants in the old familiar way, which 
led all to recognize him, he addressed Peter, saying, "Simon, son of 
Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, 
Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my 
lambs. " A second and a third repetition of the Lord's question 
brought a second and a third assurance and emphasis of Peter's love 
and a second and a third repetition of the commission to feed the 
Lord's children-to preach the Gospel. 

It should be noticed, however, that though Peter was thus 
commissioned to preach the Gospel, he and all the disciples were 
told to tarry first at Jerusalem until endued with power from on 
high. And in due time-on the day of Pentecost, they received the 
anointing which was the earnest of their inheritance of the divine 
nature and the pledge of their acceptance as members of the 
prospective Bride of Christ. 

There is much encouragement for weak, yet earnest and loving, 
saints in the Lord's dealings with Peter. His impetuous, ardent 
temperament, while it yet overflowed with love for the Master, and 
could truthfully say, "Thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I 
love," was yet constantly a great disadvantage to him, even after he 
had received the spirit of adoption into the divine family. 



The one most praiseworthy trait in Peter's character was his 
perseverance inspired by his ardent love. If he made a misstep, he 
was just as quick to realize it and to retrace it. He never deliberately 
and entirely turned away from the Lord or admitted another as a 
sharer of that supreme affection. If asked, "Lovest thou me more 
than these"? could you say with Peter, "Yea, Lord, thou knowest all 
things; thou knowest that I love thee"? Then, to the best of your 
ability, show your love by your works. Then, though you may fall 
or stumble, you shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord 
upholdeth with his hand, (Psa. 37:24,) and in due time, by constant 
effort, you will be able at least measurably, to overcome the 
weaknesses of your nature. 

But, lest we should become so discouraged with our repeated 
failures or only partial victories over old tendencies, we should ever 
bear in mind that all this imperfection of our old (Adamic) natures 
was imputed to Jesus Christ, and that his death canceled it, and that 
now his righteousness is imputed to us; and, therefore, through faith 
in him, and not in our own actual righteousness, we are acceptable 
and may have a well grounded hope of acceptance. 

To him that overcometh is the blessed promise of eternal union 
with Christ- but not to him that overcometh every perverted 
tendency of his human nature, and is able to present himself 
actually perfect. If that were the requirement, not one of us could 
meet it. But "this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our 
faith." (1 John 5:4.) If we have that love for the Lord which leads us 
to persevere in our efforts to show ourselves approved unto him, 
even though we persevere through great difficulty, and if our 
unwavering confidence abides in his finished work of our 
redemption, then we are overcoming, and in the end will be 
reckoned of God as having overcome, even though we and those 
about us will realize our human imperfection. 

Courage, then, disheartened one! Go feed my sheep. I would not 
send thee on such important mission did I not know thy love 
supreme for me and mine. And all thus sent I will endue with power 
from on high— the spirit of adoption, which is the pledge of your 
great inheritance with me. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R634 : page 6 

THE only perfect friendship subsists among those who resemble 
each other in virtue, because those who love their friends for their 
virtue, love them for what is not a temporary appendage, but a 
permanent essential in their character. 



R629 : page 6 



OUR LORD'S PRESENCE. 

"Art thou he that should come, or look we for another?" Matt. 
11:3. 

John the Baptist was a brave, devoted, faithful servant of God. He 
counted no privation or suffering too great if thereby he might serve 
and honor God. And the experience of John was very much like the 
experience of very many of God's children. 

When he first started out on his mission full of zeal and enthusiasm, 
doubtless he had high hopes of great success —not success as it is 
often measured today, by popularity and fame for oratory, or a great 
salary, for he was content to live on locusts and wild honey and he 
wore no soft clothing. No, his great anxiety was to have men repent 
of sin and to be ready to recognize and receive the promised 
Messiah of whom he was the forerunner. To know that he was 
chosen of God to actually introduce to the world the Messiah, the 
great deliverer promised away back in Eden and expected for four 
thousand years must indeed have inspired him with deepest 
enthusiasm and zeal. 

For a time John met with great success and great multitudes 
repented of sin and were baptized. And after six months of such 
effort John was permitted to point his disciples to the Lamb of God 
that taketh away the sin of the world. But it proved to be only Jesus 
of Nazareth, John's cousin. And many said, "Is this not Jesus the 
son of Joseph the carpenter, whose father and mother we know? 
and others said, "What good thing can come out of Nazareth?" 
Jewish expectation was indeed greatly disappointed. 

John was not so popular after that; his influence began to wane and 
his bold faithful course soon led to prison. This was a severe test of 
faith. Doubtless John in common with other Jews had failed to 
comprehend the object of Christ's first advent, and began to think 
how strange it seemed that his own cousin, of humble birth and 
without worldly honor should be pointed out as the Messiah in 
whom the hope of the world should center. 

In his discouragement and loneliness John's faith began to waver— 
had he indeed been deceived in this matter? Instead of this prison 
and this reproach among men, he might have been enjoying the 
honors and comforts of the world: had he in his enthusiasm made a 
great mistake? 

Thus disturbed by doubts John sent two of his disciples to Jesus 
saying, "Art thou he that should come, or look we for another?" 

At this time Jesus was publicly preaching and calling attention to 
the fact that according to the prophets the time was fulfilled and the 
kingdom of heaven was at hand. Mark 1:14,15. But in answer to 
John's question Jesus did not say, Go and tell John that we are now 
living in the beginning of the 70th week of Daniel's prophecy, 
(Dan. 9:24-27,) though that was true; nor did he furnish all the other 
prophetic evidence that pointed to him for fulfillment: But Jesus 



said, "Go and show John again, those things which ye do hear and 
see: The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are 
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up and the poor 
have the gospel preached to them. And blessed is he whosoever 
shall not be offended in me." (Matt. 11:3-6.) 

Notice that the things they could plainly see and hear were evidence 
sufficient that this was indeed the Christ. When God would make 
known to us any great truth he does not confine himself to any one 
method of proving it, but gives evidence in various ways. 

Just so it is that the great fact of our Lord's second presence is now 
made known. To those saints who now like John inquire, "Art thou 
he that should come, or look we for another?" our Lord sends 
answer, saying, "Go tell them again the things which ye do see and 
hear. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me." 

At his first advent the people not only heard the proclamation, "The 
time is fulfilled," but they could see the actual fulfillment of those 
prophecies concerning Christ which were then due. The Prophet 
had said, referring to Christ, "The spirit of the Lord God is upon 
me, because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings to 
the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to 
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to 
them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord." 
(Isa. 61:1). 

It was to the fulfillment of this prophecy of his mission that Jesus 
called John's attention. He could not then say, This day is all 
prophecy concerning me fulfilled; but he could and did call 
attention to certain marked features of prophecy then being fulfilled 
which afforded sufficient evidence that he was indeed the Messiah: 
For instance— his preaching was especially to the meek, the poor. 
Unlike the professed teachers of the day, he did not court the favor 
and flattery of the rich and neglect the poor, but the very reverse. 
The poor had the good news preached to them, and if the rich 
desired to hear they had the privilege of coming on the same 
conditions and on the same footing, which would certainly incur the 
reproach of their rich neighbors and of popular religious sentiment. 

Jesus also began to proclaim liberty to the captives of death, to 
teach that a time was coming when death should be no more, and to 
illustrate his power to liberate all by loosing a few from the bands 
of death: "These things did Jesus and manifested forth [before] his 
glory." (John 2:11.) Go and tell John again these things, said Jesus. 
He knows them, but needs to be reminded of them again. This was 
but a small part of the long line of prophetic evidence since made 
manifest to the Church, but it was evidence sufficient for strong, 
unwavering faith. 

The same thing is true to-day. While all that is prophesied 
concerning the second coming of Christ is not yet due to transpire, 
yet we see that those things due in the beginning of his day are 
actually coming to pass before our eyes. Nominal Zion now, as at 



the time of the first advent, is proud, popular and corrupt, and it is 
only those who have come to realize this— those who mourn in 
Zion— who are comforted by the good tidings now brought by the 
great Head of the Church, whose promised presence was to bring 
new light. Now, as then, it is the poor— the meek, who receive him 
gladly and to whom his special attention is directed; these are 
receiving the exceeding beauty and glory of God's unfolding plan 
for the ashes of old human traditions, the oil of joy for mourning 
and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. 

The prophecy of Isa. 61:1-3 was only due to have a partial 
fulfilment at our Lord's first advent; its complete fulfillment is due 
in this, his day. But we should not expect all of its fulfillment in the 
first dawn of the day. The opening of the prison doors of death to 
those that are bound by it is not yet due, but will follow in its order. 
The "day of vengeance" foretold is now due, and every student of 
the signs of the times is able to recognize the gathering storm. As 
Jesus said, "Ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not 
discern the signs of the times?" (Matt. 16:3.) 

Doubtless the principal cause of John's doubts was the 
disappointment of his Jewish expectations as to the manner of 
Christ's coming, and this, we see, is a cause of stumbling to many 
to-day. Let us ever bear in mind Jesus' words- "The kingdom of 
God comes not with outward show, nor shall they say, Behold here 
or there, for behold God's royal majesty is among you"— unseen by 
the natural eye, and at first undiscovered by the world. (Luke 17:20. 
Diaglott.) 

"If anyone should say to you then, Behold here is Messiah, or there, 
believe it not.. ..If they say to you, Behold he is in the desert! go not 
forth; or, Behold he is in secret apartments! believe it not. For as 
the lightning emerges from the east and shines to the west, so will 
be the presence of the Son of man. (Matt. 24:23,26-28.) The 
evidence of the kingdom being come is the fulfillment of the last 
part of this 

R629 : page 7 

prophecy of Isaiah, the former part of which Jesus gave as evidence 
of the first presence. (Luke 3:18-20.) The day of vengeance upon 
every form of evil, oppression, and sin, is here, and the evidences 
are ever thickening. We recognize his presence by these very 
evidences -the lightning flashes of truth. And where the truth-the 
food— is found there the eagle-eyed, far-seeing, hungry saints are 
gathering and are being fed and enlightened, (v. 28.) Yes, we see 
the flashes of light which attend and attest our Master's presence, 
and we are being richly fed at his table (Luke 12:37); but though 
Christ has been seen and known in the flesh, we expect to see him 
so no more, (2 Cor. 5:16), but we shall see him as he is when made 
like him. 



R630 : page 7 



HUMANITY'S TRUE SUPPORT. 

Father, thou knowest best, 
This thought is all my stay; 
I see but just the step ahead, 
Thou knowest all the way. 

To me, as on I walk, 

The way seems all obscure, 

But thou wilt guide my trembling feet, 

And make my footsteps sure. 

E'en though the darkness falls, 
And hides the path from view, 
Thy rod and staff direct me still, 
And will my strength renew. 

Father, the way seems long, 
My strength is very weak, 
Support me still by Thy right hand, 
And words of comfort speak." 



R630 : page 7 

THE WILL OF GOD. 

"Who will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge 
of the truth."- 1 Tim. 2:4. 

The term "saved," in general signifies to deliver. What the nature 
of the deliverance is must be determined by the circumstances. It 
may be from dangers of any kind; it may be from enemies temporal 
or spiritual; from sin; from temptations; from death, temporal, 
spiritual, or eternal; it may be from ignorance, or a helpless state 
that prevents our attainment of good that our Creator has prepared 
for His creatures. In this case it is the removal of these disabilities, 
etc. These uses of the terms save, saved, and salvation, it is 
presumed will not be questioned by any one. 

Two facts are stated in the text above: 1. God "will have all men to 
be saved," 2. God will have all men come to the knowledge of the 
truth. " On these two facts rest the sum of the gospel. Without 
controverting the truth that the terms save, saved, etc., are used 
often in a restricted sense, or are applied to a deliverance which is 
conditional, I proceed to notice the first fact stated in the text: 

1. "God our Saviour, who will have all men to be saved." Here is a 
salvation which is clearly unconditional, and depends alone on the 
will of God. It is equally clear that an ultimate or final salvation is 
conditional, based on the "belief of the truth" as well as through 



"sanctification of the Spirit," (2 Thes. 2:13). Texts need not be 
multiplied on this point. The salvation in the text under 
consideration admits of no conditions, as we shall see; it depends 
entirely on the "will" of "God our Saviour; who will have all men to 
be saved;" not desires them to be saved: but has willed or 
determined they shall be saved. 

The question then is, What is the nature of this salvation which is 
unconditional and certain? Paul answers: "As by the offense of one, 
judgment came upon all men to condemnation" [to death]; "even so, 
by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto 
the justification of life: for as by one man's disobedience the many 
[all men] were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall the 
many be made righteous" (Rom. 5:18,19). That is, as all men die by 
one man's sin —Adam's— so by one man's righteousness —Christ's— 
shall all men be made alive from the dead. This revival from the 
dead is to all men unconditional: but a revival to immortality and 
eternal life is conditional. The universal revival restores all men 
from the death that came upon them as the result of Adam's sin. In 
this respect, Christ has "abolished death"— annulled it; made it void, 
or powerless to hold one of Adam's race. This is the salvation "God 
will have all men" receive, irrespective of any will of their own. 
This will further appear as the examination of the second fact in the 
text proceeds. 

2. "God our Saviour, who will have all men.. .come to the 
knowledge of the truth. " This second fact shows why God will have 
all men revived from the dead. How else can innumerable millions 
ever come to the knowledge of the truth? They have died without 
such knowledge; but Paul, who received his commission and his 
message directly from the Saviour's personal manifestation, 
declares, "God our Saviour, will have all men come to the 
knowledge of the truth;" and in order to this, He "will have all men 
to be saved." Observe, the salvation is placed before coming to the 
knowledge of the truth, and in order that they shall have that 
knowledge; for, no man's final state is fixed till he has first had it. 
When I say "the salvation is placed before coming to the knowledge 
of the truth," I do not mean that in the order of the work all men 
must actually be saved or made alive from the dead before they 
receive that knowledge; but, that God's will to revive all men is 
based on the fact that in no other way can the mass of the race ever 
come to the knowledge of the truth, the reception or rejection of 
which is to determine their final state: and God's impartial "love of 
the world" is a pledge that "every man" shall come to the 
knowledge of that love in the gift of "His only begotten Son" to 
bestow life eternal on all who will receive him when made known 
to them. 

It is a fact the gospel is to be preached "to every creature"; the 
gospel of God's love to the world, and of Christ as the LIFE- 
GIVER for all men: and until it is proclaimed to "every man," or, to 
each individual, that individual has not the proper probation and his 



final state cannot be fixed according to the gospel preached to 
Abraham and confirmed in Christ. Then, saith Paul, "If we sin 
willfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, 
there remaineth no more sacrifice for sin" (Heb. 10:26). Thus the 
Apostle keeps the two facts of the text in view, and shows that 
death must be abolished and all men saved from it or God's will 
would be defeated, and all men could not have the knowledge of 
the truth. But God's will shall be accomplished, and death cannot 
prevent it; he has taken care to see that that "last enemy shall be 
destroyed" (1 Cor. 15:26), so that no man who has died in 
ignorance of God's love and his provisions for their ultimate 
redemption from sin and all its final consequences, shall fail of 
eternal life except by a wilful rejection of the truth, when, or after, 
he has come to the knowledge of it. 

Such is "God our Saviour's will"; and who or what can defeat his 
counsel so as to make his word void? Has he not said, "My counsel 
shall stand, and I will do my pleasure" (Isa. 46:10)? 

That I have taken the correct view of the text the context shows. 
The Apostle says: "I exhort that first of all supplications, prayers, 
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men ...for this is 
good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour, who will have 
all men to be saved," etc.; "for there is one God, and one Mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:1-6). Hence 
the absolute necessity that all men be saved from death, else God's 
will, that they shall "come to the knowledge of the truth," is 
defeated, and his "due time" will never be reached. The death by 
Adam is annulled, so that no man can be held by it. If held in death 
at all, it is because he has sinned "willfully after that" he has 
received the knowledge of the truth. Such exceptions no more 
affect the general truth of the salvation of all men from death, than 
the general truth that "death passed upon all men" is affected by the 
translation of Enoch and Elijah, or that of saints alive at Christ's 
return from heaven. The word all embraces the mass of the race; the 
exceptions are the few. Some may never be released from death, 
because, personally they have involved themselves in its dominion 
by a wilful rejection of the DELIVERER after he was made known 
to them.— Geo. Storrs. 



R63 1 : page 7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Question. Your explanation as to how death is to be destroyed in 
the next age seems most reasonable, but there has ever seemed to 
be one scripture in the way, viz., "The child shall die a hundred 
years old." (Isa. 65:20.) This child must be one in process of 
restoration; how, then, can it die? 



Answer. By reading the entire verse, especially as given in Leeser's 
translation, the thought will be more clearly understood. Verse 17 
shows that the time referred to is under the new heavens (new 
ruling powers) and the new earth (mankind regenerated or brought 
to life again). Verse 20 reads: "There shall no more come thence an 
infant of few days, nor an old man that shall not have the full length 
of his days; for as a lad shall one die a hundred years old; and as a 
sinner shall be accursed he who dieth at a hundred years old." 

The inference is plain. No infant shall be born to die in a few days, 
as many now do, but every one born in that time shall come to 
years of maturity. Now they die because the fathers have eaten the 
sour grape of sin, but if any die in that age it will be on account of 
their own sins, and not of their father's sins. (Jer. 31:29,30.) If he 
dies at all in that age, it will not be until he has reached the age of 
one hundred years; but he need not die if he will comply with the 
conditions for retaining life. If he dies at a hundred years, it will be 
because he is a sinner, because he will not submit to the easy yoke 
and light burden which is necessary for his development and 
perfecting. It will be his own fault, and cannot be attributed to any 
other. He dies for his own sin, not Adam's, and as Adamic sin has 
been cancelled so has Adamic death, and when he dies it is not 
Adamic death, but the Second death from which there is no 
redemption promised. 

The shortest period of probation in the next age will be one hundred 
years. And such as refuse to make progress under those favorable 
conditions, will be cut off from life after one hundred years trial, 
but even then he would be but a lad comparatively. 

But some might inquire, How will it be with those born in this age 
and regenerated or brought to life again in the age to come? Would 
the time they lived here count as part of their probation there? No, 
for the Prophet says, Neither shall there be an old man that shall not 
have the full length of his days, i.e., the full length of his days of 
probation, a hundred years. The old man who died, and who will be 
brought to life again, will have just the same chance as the infant in 
that age. He shall have the full length of his probation, and all who 
improve it may have everlasting life. 

"True and righteous are thy ways, Lord God Almighty." 

Q. Is it anywhere stated how long a time will intervene between the 
coming of Christ for his saints, and his coming with them to judge 
the world; and what will be the moral aspect of the Church and 
world during this period? 

A. We have learned, as heretofore shown, that the coming of Christ 
for his saints was in the fall of 1 874, and that the first work before 
him was the glorifying of the saints. There, the harvest time began- 
the separation of wheat from tares, etc. Since the fall of 1881 we 
learn that "Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from 
henceforth" -blessed because they would not have to sleep, for to 
them the instant of death is the instant of change. 



At that time we believe that the resurrection of the dead saints was 
due, because the living were not to be changed until first the dead 
are raised. (1 Thes. 4:16.) Rev. 14:13 (Diaglott) also informs us that 
those who thus find it blessed to die, "rest from their labors, and 
their works follow with them." That is, the labor and toil incident to 
the work here will cease, and they will continue their work 
untrammeled by earthly hindrances. 

Of course, as soon as they are changed they are with the Lord, and 
like him are present but unseen, and engaged with him in the 
present work. This being true those engaged in the work on the 
earthly plane are co-workers together with them. The condition of 
the Church and world during this period, observation will show. 
"Behold," even now "the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his 
saints." (Jude 14.) Just how long it will be before the whole body of 
Christ is changed is wisely hidden from us to prove our 
faithfulness. It may be a very brief time, or it may be some years 
yet. Blessed is he that endureth to the end. 

The theory that Jesus would divide the second advent into two 
parts, first to gather his saints and afterward to with them judge the 
world in righteousness, is a misleading theory which has gained 
some prominence of late years, being advanced by some people 
called PLYMOUTH BRETHREN. It seemed to them a necessary 
theory because of one truth and one error which they attempted to 
unite. They saw from Scripture that the Lord's coming would be as 
a thief unobservedly. They saw, too, that a separation of the true 
from the lukewarm and cold in the Church must take place, and the 
little flock be exalted to power before the world's trial commenced. 
These considerations and others led them to the correct thought, 
that Jesus would be present and accomplish a work for and in the 
Church before it would be glorified. 

But we think that in holding to a visible fleshly coming of Jesus 
they erred, and to have a place for both thoughts they concluded 
that Jesus would go away with his Church all unseen to the world, 
and then all come together in the flesh visible to human sight-with 
observation or demonstration to establish a visible dominion in 
some spot of earth— probably Palestine. (Luke 17:20.) 

To our understanding there is only one second coming. He comes to 
do a variety of work, and shall not leave it nor return until he hath 
accomplished to put down all power and authority. "He shall not 
fail nor be discouraged till he hath set judgment in the earth" (Isa. 
42:4), having first selected and glorified his saints. 

Q. Will infants come up infants in the age to come? 

A. Since "there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom 
in the grave whither thou goest" (Eccl. 9:10), we believe that 
infants and all will be raised just as they went down, excepting 
infirmity and disease. 



R630 : page 7 



DUTIES OF DAILY LIFE. 

Life is not entirely made up of great evils or heavy trials; but the 
perpetual recurrence of petty evils and small trials is the ordinary 
and appointed exercise of the Christian graces. To bear with the 
failings of those about us— with their infirmities, their bad 
judgment, their ill-breeding, their perverse tempers —to endure 
neglect when we feel we deserve attention, and ingratitude where 
we expected thanks; to bear with the company of disagreeable 
people whom Providence has placed in our way and whom he has 
provided on purpose for the trial of our virtue, these are the best 
exercises of patience and self-denial, and the better because not 
chosen by ourselves. To bear with vexation in business, with 
disappointment in our expectations, with interruptions of our 
retirement, with folly, intrusions, disturbance— in short, with 
whatever opposes our will or contradicts our humor— this habitual 
acquiescence appears to be more of the essence of self-denial than 
any little rigors or afflictions of our own imposing. These constant, 
inevitable, but inferior evils properly improved, furnish a good 
moral discipline.— Selected. 



R631 : page 8 

WORDS AND DEEDS. 

They do the least 
Who talk the most: 
Whose good designs 
Are all their boast! 
For words are dew. 

They do the most 
Whose lives possess 
The sterling stamp 
Of righteousness; 
For deeds are true. 

And if the heart 
Be pure and good, 
The life will be 
Just what it should— 
Not dew, but true. 

—Selected. 



R631 : page 8 



LET NOT YOUR HEARTS BE TROUBLED. 



"Let not your hearts be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in 
me. In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I 
would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you." (Jno. 14:1,2.) 

Emboldened by his success in Eden, Satan attempted again to 
thwart the benevolent designs of God, by deceiving the second 
Adam. 

He, therefore, boldly presented himself, and proposed a 
compromise, which would avoid the necessity of suffering and 
death on the part of Jesus, and enable him in another way to 
accomplish the purpose for which God sent him into the world, 
viz.: "that the world through him might be saved" (Jno. 3:17.) 

Jesus, however, had the necessary knowledge to enable him to see 
that this suggestion was only to oppose the plan of God. He knew 
that as all human life had been forfeited by Adam's transgression, to 
purchase back— redeem that life— his own must be given, as written 
by the prophet (Isa. 53:1 1.) "By his knowledge shall my righteous 
servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities." In harmony 
with this, Peter says, (1 Pet. 2:24,) "Who his own self bear our sins 
in his own body on the tree." 

Jesus, knowing the Father's plan, and his own will being in entire 
harmony with that of the Father, went steadily forward to 
accomplish that will, even unto death. 

There is no evidence that the adversary ever renewed the encounter 
of the wilderness. The "Forerunner" had given evidence that all 
Satan's arts were exercised on him in vain. But there was still hope; 
for the "followers" could be met one by one, and might he not be 
more successful with them? 

Jesus knew what the plan of Satan would be, for God had given him 
a revelation of the things that must shortly come to pass "to his 
servants." Jesus foreknew that taking a new departure, the wily foe 
of God and man would henceforth seek to turn the "followers" 

R632 : page 8 

aside from the path-way, by transforming himself into an angel of 
light, and causing errors to be substituted for truth. 

To acquaint the disciples with these "wiles of the devil," Jesus 
uttered the parable recorded in Matt. 13:24-43. He knew the 
enemy's subtle power, and that he would "deceive the very elect if 
possible." He foresaw the "falling away" foretold by Paul, (2 Thes. 
2:3), and that man of sin revealed, and knew the artifice by which it 
would be accomplished. 

He, therefore, affectionately warned his followers against giving 
heed to doctrines of devils, (so termed by Paul, 1 Tim. 4:1), 
assuring them that error could lead only into trouble and darkness. 



The more effectually to fortify their minds against doctrines of 
seducing spirits, he explains that part of God's plan necessary to 
refute them, and says in the words quoted at the head of this article, 
"Let not your hearts be troubled." We now inquire briefly, what are 
these errors that were so surely to cause trouble to such as should 
be deceived thereby, and how a belief in Jesus could save from this 
trouble? 

The first we name is that which Satan found so effectual in Eden- 
"Thou shalt not surely die. " Out of this falsehood Satan has made 
more capital, seemingly, than out of all others combined. On it he 
has founded all those horrible systems of religion among heathen 
nations, the bare mention of which shocks the sensibilities of every 
human being. By this he has kept his seat firmly as the ruler of this 
world, and relentlessly caused his cruel mandates to be obeyed. 

In Christian communities, with an open Bible where it is written, 
"Only God hath immortality," (1 Tim. 6:16,) this has been scarcely 
less prevalent; and may we not add, hardly less baneful in its 
effects. On it has been built the awful and God-dishonoring dogma 
of eternal torment, which teaches that the wicked are assigned, 
immediately at death, to endless torture, without a ray of hope that 
the wrath of God will ever permit them to relent. Strangely enough, 
those who teach this doctrine fix a day somewhere in the dim 
future, in which these millions of beings, with those who also, at 
the moment of death, entered the bliss of heaven, shall be 
summoned forth to judgment, to be rewarded or condemned to the 
very condition in which they have existed, some of them for 
thousands of years. 

We can now see how necessary to Jesus' followers the many 
assurances of word, that all rule and all authority opposed to his 
will shall finally be subdued. Into what trouble, what anguish of 
heart, has a contrary belief cast multitudes of God's children. 

To the mother who looks for the last time on the lifeless form of her 
wayward boy, believing him already enduring the torment of a 
world of woe, how like mockery seem Jesus' words, "Let not your 
heart be troubled." 

Ask her to be joyful when one she loves better than life, is doomed 
to endless despair! It is impossible, and all the sophistry which 
theologians have made use of to reconcile Orthodoxy (so called) 
with the teachings of Jesus has signally failed. Happy they, who 
"come to Jesus" and find rest. Happy they, who so fully believe in 
Him as to be able to cast on Him every burden and every care. 

But how can a belief in Jesus save from these errors? 

We answer, a belief in Jesus comprehends a belief in Him as 
sufficient to accomplish the purpose of God, in sending Him into 
the world. A belief that He is stronger than the "strong man armed," 
and competent to bind and destroy him. (Matt. 12:29; Heb. 2:14.) 



That "He gave His life a ransom for all to be testified (to them) in 
due time." (1 Tim. 2:6.) 

Finally, to believe the words quoted at the head of this article, that 
in his Father's house (Kingdom) are many mansions (conditions of 
being) and that what he was going to prepare for his church was not 
all that is to be attained by God's creatures. 

On the contrary, a kingdom had been prepared from the foundation 
of the world (Matt. 25:34) for the human sons, and though forfeited 
by man on account of disobedience, is to be restored as taught by 
all God's prophets, (Acts, 3:21) and all mankind brought back to 
life, (Jno. 5:28), and given an opportunity to come into harmony 
with God's laws and need no more. 

Thus, as God's children come to a knowledge of his glorious plan, 
and are enabled to realize that his work is surely going forward to 
success, doubts and fears give way, rejoicing takes the place of 
despondency, and with the angelic choir they sing, "Glory to God in 
the highest, and on earth peace and good will to men."— (Luke 
2:14.) 

S. T. T. 



R632 : page 8 

"FEAR HATH TORMENT." 

So saith the Apostle. Some Christians are paralyzed for life by the 
monomania of fear. They fear to pray in public. They fear to be 
singular for right. They are afraid to give to the Lord's cause lest 
they come to want. They fear to rebuke a brother for his fault. They 
fear to confess Christ before men. They are afraid to leave an old 
church or party that has left the truth. They are afraid to espouse a 
good cause where it is not popular. They fear shadows and fail to 
secure the substance. They are like the invalid afflicted with the 
delusion that he was made of brittle clay and if struck would snap 
into fragments. He was cured by a friend deliberately upsetting him 
from his carriage, when he arose from the ground sound in mind as 
well as body. The cure for a foolish fear is faith and a forced 
obedience of duty. Just as there is one cure for selfishness —self- 
sacrifice; as there is one cure for spiritual laziness— work, there is 
one cure for timidity and that is to plunge into a disagreeable duty 
before the ague shiver has time to come on. Whatsoever thy hand 
findeth to do, do it with thy might.— Selected. 



R632 : page 8 



A BEAUTIFUL THOUGHT. 



Our Lord says, "I will guide thee with mine eye." The eye is very 
expressive of every emotion of pleasure or pain, and a loving 
nature, whose delight is in the favor of another, will carefully note 
the look of approval or disapproval, before a word of 
commendation or reproof is uttered. Thus our Lord would guide us, 
but only those whose DELIGHT is in the law of the Lord can be so 
led. To such loving ones reproof and exhortation are scarcely 
necessary; they may walk from day to day in delightful communion 
with God, and even while their human nature is being crucified 
daily, the new nature may rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory. 



R632 : page 8 

THE COMING CONFLICT. 

That there is to be a struggle, and a hard one, for the control in our 
Republic between the people constituting the State, and the 
ecclesiastics who represent the Romish Church, no rational man 
who understands the situation can for a moment doubt. In the light 
of history and reason it seems equally clear, either that the struggle 
is now to be decided by maintaining against the opposition the 
supremacy of the State in its right of educator, intellectual and 
moral, in its administration of justice, in the safety of elections from 
priestly control, and in every other legitimate exercise of 
sovereignty— or that if these be yielded through treachery or 
indifference, the struggle will sooner or later be transferred to the 
battle-field, and decided in the most terrible of conflicts, a religious 
war.— Hon. John Jay. 



R635 : page 8 

"Another indication of the conscious weakness and apprehension 
of danger in the nominal church, is seen in the effort of the High 
Church section of the Established Church of England to ingratiate 
itself with the leading disciples of British Socialism— doubtless 
desiring to hold the guiding reins of what it astutely imagines to be 
the force of the future. To this end a series of meetings has been 
organized in London, under the auspices of the "English Church 
Union," for the purpose of public discussion and advocacy of what 
it terms "Christian Socialism." The term is misleading, for the only 
true Christian Socialism is that union of Christian Believers in love 
and good works, and natural help and sympathy, taught and 
enforced by the Word of God, upon the basis of union with Christ. 
This, however, is very different from what is meant by the two 
parties it seeks to bring into alliance."— Bible Standard. 



R652 : page 8 



"BIGNESS is not greatness; and he who judges of value by bulk 
will find himself seriously mistaken. A boulder is larger than a 
diamond, but is it as valuable? The passion for bigness is found in 
connection with public assemblies for divine worship. Meetings are 
held, and a great effort is made to increase their size. Men go for 
the "big meeting." They publish accounts of crowds which attend, 
until at last religious interest deteriorates, being overwhelmed by 
the tide of worldliness. A man who prefers to drink out of a big 
horse-pond rather than a little spring, might be pleased with such 
results, but spiritual and discerning Christians have very different 
thoughts. "--Selected. 



R632 : page 8 

AN EXCHANGE says: A man crossed the Mississippi river on the 
ice, and fearing it was too thin, began to crawl over on his hands 
and knees in great terror, but just as he gained the opposite shore, 
all tired out, another man drove past him gayly sitting upon a sled 
loaded with pig-iron. And for all the world that is just the way most 
of Christians go to the heavenly Canaan, trembling at every step, 
lest the promises shall break under our feet, when really they are 
secure enough for us to hold up our heads and sing with confidence 
as we march to the better land. 



R632 : page 8 

THE STOUTEST TIMBER stands on Norwegian rocks, where 
tempests rage, and long hard winters reign. The muscles are seen 
most fully developed in the brawny arm that plies the blacksmith's 
hammer. Even so the most vigorous and healthy piety is that which 
is the busiest, which has difficulties to battle with, which has its 
hands full of good works, which has neither time nor room for evil, 
but, aiming at great things both for God and man, promptly and 
summarily dismisses temptations with Nehemiah's answer, "I have 
a great work to do, therefore I cannot come down. "-Selected. 



R633 : page 1 

VOL. V. 
PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY, 1884. 
NO. 11. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 44 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 



TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



page 1 

ORDER as many sample copies of the TOWER as you can 
judiciously use— FREE. 



WALL CHARTS.-We still have some of these on hand FREE for 
all who will pay the Express charges on them. See description in 
last issue. 



R633 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"Thus saith the Lord eternal, Behold, I will be against the 
shepherds, and I will require [take] my flock from their hand, and I 
will stop them from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds 
feed themselves any more. And I will deliver my flock out of their 
mouth that they may not serve them for food. 

For thus saith the Lord Eternal, Behold, I AM HERE, and I will 
both inquire for my flocks and search for them. 

As a shepherd searcheth for his flock on THE DAY THAT HE IS 
AMONG his flocks that are scattered, so will I search for my 
flocks, and I will deliver them out of all places whither they have 
been scattered, on THE DAY OF CLOUDS and tempestuous 
darkness." (Ezek. 34:10,12)— Leeser's Trans. 

The Good Shepherd who gave his life for the sheep has various 
flocks as intimated above, and by His own words: "Other sheep I 
have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they 
shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold and one shepherd." 
(John 10:16.) 

The above scripture not only relates to "Israel after the flesh," one 
of the flocks to be gathered and fed by the Shepherd, but it has 
special reference to the spiritual flock, the saints of the Gospel Age. 
As represented in Matt. 13:52, the under-shepherds whose duty it 
was to "feed the flock," bringing forth to them things new and old, 



have sadly neglected their office and devoted much of their time to 
feeding themselves upon the husks of science and man-made 
theology, and in honoring each other with the titles Rabbi, Master, 
Reverend, and Doctor, seeking not rather the feeding and 
strengthening of the flock in the knowledge of the truth, and that 
honor which cometh from God only. 

As prophetically foretold in the preceding verses of this chapter: 
"The fat ye [shepherds] eat, and with the wool ye clothe yourselves; 
those that are well fed [that despite the neglect of the shepherds find 
pastures of truth, and feed, these] ye slaughter [not now, as a 
century or more ago literally slaughter, but slaughter their 
influence, casting out their names as evil]. But the flock ye feed 
not. Ver. 3. 

"My sheep have to wander about on all the mountains, and upon 
every high hill; yea, over all the face of the land is my flock 
scattered." Ver. 6. The Lord's sheep are intermixed with various 
nations (mountains) and in various high hills (societies of earth- 
churches) "there is none that inquireth, none seeketh after them." 
The shepherds sanction the scattered and divided condition of the 
Lord's sheep, even claiming that it is the Chief-Shepherd's will that 
they should be separated in various sects. 

But the words at the head of this article assert that at a certain time 
the Lord comes to the rescue of his sheep, and casts aside the 
unfaithful shepherds. Mark well that this will be when he is present 
"here" and "among his flocks that are scattered." Notice also that 
his presence "among his flocks" is in the "day of clouds and 
darkness"-in the day of trouble. Trouble on the nations and upon 
the unfaithful shepherds. 

Surely we have evidence that we are now in this cloudy day— that 
the Chief Shepherd is present. If not, whence comes the food upon 
which we are feeding, and the refreshing rest of faith which we now 
enjoy. Is it not in fulfillment of what was written— "And I will feed 
my flock, and I will cause them to lie down. Ver. 15. 

The same lesson is expressed through Jeremiah (23:1,4) and Isaiah 
touchingly refers to the Lord's care for even the weakest of the 
flock in the day of His presence, saying: "Like a shepherd will he 
feed his flock: with his arm will he gather the lambs, and in his 
bosom will he carry them." Isa. 40:11. 

The Shepherd has been feeding us wonderfully during the past few 
years, and all who are being strengthened thereby should be aware 
that he is collecting his sheep, and though scattered over the hills of 
sectarianism, he calls His own sheep together into one fold— one 
church— as it was at first. 

How strange it seems that some cannot realize this; but when they 
hear His call, "Come," "Come out of her, [Babylon-confusion,] 
they seem loath to leave, and unused to the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free, they inquire, If we come out, into what shall we go? 



They are so used to bondage to systems and forms and rules of 
men, that they cannot realize the strength of the fold which has no 
other bars than the Word of God; they cannot realize the 
ONENESS of that flock which is kept together simply and only by 
bonds of love one for another and for the Shepherd. 

Looking from the TOWER it seems that there are many such sheep 
now, who, because of weakness of faith in the words of the 
Shepherd, and holding to the traditions of men, may lose the high 
honor of membership in the chief flock— a place among the 
overcomers. Let us take heed. 

But the work of the Shepherd will be first directed to the assistance, 
feeding and gathering of the first or special flock, yet we thank God 
that this Shepherd will leave none who truly belong to his flocks to 
starve. "With his arm [power] he will gather the lambs," and lead 
them and feed them. Yes, when the arm of the Lord is revealed— 
when his power is manifest in the overturning of all false systems, 
then some will SEE, and hear, and obey, who have not the 
overcoming strength now. 

It is of this class we read, "These are they which came out of great 
tribulation," and "The Lamb which is in the midst of the throne 
[then in exalted power] shall feed them and shall LEAD them." 
(Rev. 7: 14,17.) They will then be ready to be led out of false 
systems to follow the Shepherd's leading. 

Meantime, "Israel after the flesh" will not be neglected; for though 
of another flock, they are under the same Shepherd. Liberty and 
restoration to national union and favor will be granted to them, that 
in due time they may be fitting channels through which the truth of 
God may pass to refresh, revive and bless all the families of the 
earth. 



page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Mich., June 21, 1884. 

FRIEND RUSSELL:-The June number of the TOWER is received; 
it is a friend anxiously expected and most heartily received. It 
seems to me like news from home. Since I first saw the "Food for 
Thinking Christians," I have gained more information from it and 
WATCH TOWER than from all the works I ever read. I have been 
quite a Bible reader, and have attempted to teach its doctrines 
heretofore, but all passages outside of a certain line of doctrine 
were unintelligible to me. I preached what I supposed to be the 
Word of God, and I was quite successful, but I became dissatisfied 
with myself and quit preaching, because I was not sure that I was 
right; and now I know that I taught the doctrines of men for the 
commandments of God. I have began to introduce some of the ideas 



gained from recent reading, and they have produced quite an effect, 
and some ask, What new doctrine have you got now? I made a chart 
of the ages, and lectured from that, I am astonished at the result. 
And now please send me a Wall Chart; I think it is just what I want. 
I intended to get one painted. Please find the amount enclosed for 

the Z.W.T. one year, for , my friend, he has been a 

Disciple preacher for 25 years. He mourns to think he has stumbled 
so long. Please send him a Chart also. May God bless you 
abundantly now and hereafter. Yours, in hope of eternal life, 

Bristol, Fla., June 12, 1884. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I received the "Concordance" and the 
"Emphatic Diaglott" in good condition. Please accept many thanks. 
I would not be without them for twice the cost of them. It is a real 
blessing to be able to obtain books of such value at so small a price. 
By the help of the Concordance, the Diaglott and your own 
publications, "Food for Thinking Christians," "The Tabernacle and 
its Teachings," and the WATCH TOWER, the Bible seems almost 
like a new book. 

I would like very much to see the April number of the TOWER for 
1883, as I did not have the pleasure of reading your article on the 
Lord's Supper. Two of us, myself and wife, took the bread and wine 
in remembrance of the death of our Saviour, but we missed the 
time, as we did not celebrate it until the evening of the 13th of 
April, "Easter Sunday"; but I hope the Lord will accept it, as in 
memory of Him who died for us. I remain yours, very truly, 

Graves Co., Ky., April 25, 1884. 

DEAR BRO.:— Through a good brother I have been permitted to 
read three numbers of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. I am so much 
edified I cannot think of doing without it. I am nearly 55 years of 
age, and have been in the service of our blessed Master nearly 25 
years, and through misfortune I am one of the Lord's poor; but I 
rejoice that you have made me welcome to light and truth through 
the WATCH TOWER. I cannot pay you now, but will at my 
earliest convenience. Please send me right away ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER. I am praying for further knowledge of the truth, and it 
seems my prayer is about to be answered. I must have your 
valuable paper. I humbly pray God to bless your labors. Yours, in 
hope of immortality, 

Louisiana, June 19th, 1884. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I have received a copy of the WATCH 
TOWER of October, 1883. If it can be had, I want the preceding 
number.. ..If still published, I desire to become a subscriber to the 
WATCH TOWER. Acquaintance with the paper through the 



number I have makes me long for all the back numbers, which I 
will order if they can be had. I thank God for the providence that 
has put the number I have into my hands. Yours fraternally, 

Pastor Baptist Church. 
Newark, N.J. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: -Accept of my heartfelt thanks for the 
"TOWER." It is a most welcome guest in my family. Although 
poor in the things of this world, the blessed prospect of immortality, 
as taught in your paper, enables me much more cheerfully to 
"endure hardship as a good soldier of Christ." I find the exposition 
of Scripture so clear and logical in the "TOWER," that strong faith 
has taken the place of doubt and instability. May the Lord 
abundantly bless you in your work and labor of love, and may you 
be permitted for many years to continue in the blessed service of 
enlightening the minds of those who are groping in moral darkness. 
Yours affectionately, 

Antelope Co., Nebraska. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -It is with great joy that I write 
these lines. To say that my Saviour is blessing me is a poor way to 
express the joy and peace that he gives me, but I know of no other 
way. He is very near to me now, though the eyes of my flesh cannot 
behold him, but with the eyes of faith I can see him and hold sweet 
communion with him. I feel sure you understand this, but if I speak 
of this even to those who profess to know and love him they would 
think I was foolish and very peculiar. They keep trying to get me to 

page 2 

join the church and be one with them, but I tell them I do not want 
any church or creed but the one church whose names are written in 
heaven. I have lent or given away all the books and papers you sent 
me. Some say they are very good, and others say they cannot 
understand them. One old man to whom I gave a Food for Thinking 
Christians says he cannot part with it, it is so good. He came over 
from Scotland about a year ago, and is about 87 years of age; his 
daughter says he will sit and read Food for hours. May the Lord 
bless this reading to his soul is my prayer. His daughter gave me 
fifty cents to send for the WATCH TOWER for him and herself. 
The other mite please add to the Tract Fund. I wish with all my 
heart it were a hundred dollars, but my Heavenly Father knows all 
about it. May the Lord continue to bless you and make you a 
blessing to others is my daily prayer for you and dear Sister 
Russell, for I never can tell you how much good the paper does me. 
I am looking forward to the time, which I hope will not be long, 
when, if we are faithful, we shall meet in our Father's Kingdom, 
when we can tell one another of all the way the Saviour led us, and 



when we shall know one another even as we are known. Blessed 
thought to be ever with the Lord. Your sister, 



R633 : page 2 

WORKING WITH GOD. 

In an article in June ZION'S WATCH TOWER, page 6, by Bro. 
Tackabury, showing the advantages of understanding God's plan of 
the ages, and the importance of knowing the seasons— as seed time 
and harvest— that we may work in harmony with God's plan, we 
find this paragraph: "Many laborers, though very anxious to be at 
work, seem not to know whether they are to sow or reap. Perhaps 
we should rather say, they want to sow and reap at the same time. 
Failing to comprehend God's plan, or, more likely, failing to 
discover any plan at all, they work hap-hazard, as they suppose God 
is doing." 

How true the picture— hap-hazard just expresses it— and the reason, 
"As they suppose God is doing." As I read, the picture Jesus gave 
us of these times came up, and the stupid and falsifying answer of 
the slothful servant: "Lord, I knew thee that thou art a hard man, 
reaping where thou didst not sow, and gathering where thou didst 
not scatter: and I was afraid, and went away and hid thy talent in 
the earth," etc. (Matt. 25.) Instead of developing the talent confided 
to his care by the Lord, he buried it. Why? He was ignorant of his 
Lord's character and will. He imagined that the Lord was selfish 
and exacting, claiming more than he had any right to. Is it strange 
that the nominal Church should have the same spirit? Greedy, 
intolerant, haughty and boastful, she wants to reap without sowing, 
to gather where she has no right. She would rather fill the Church 
with the devil's children, (especially if they were rich,) that she 
might boast of her numbers and influence, than to have a few who 
are consecrated. In fact, the truly converted are not what she wants 
at all; they would, by their "old fogy" notions, keep out the very 
class she wants to have in. 

Among her favorite songs are, "Gather them in," and "Whosoever 
will may come." 

She seeks to reap without sowing. The plough and spade are not 
suited to her dainty hands. But she has reaping machines, and 
patent binding machines, and combined threshers and winnowers, 
that cast out the wheat and save the chaff; and recently she has 
borrowed from the politicians an elevating machine to store her 
treasures in the coveted places in her barns. 

Seriously, the Churches have plenty of machinery, good facilities 
and well systemized work by many workers. Why, then, do not the 
nations fall before her? Some of their blind leaders, looking with 
pride upon their facilities, boast that it will take but a few years 
more to convert the world. 



Looking from their standpoint, it is not unreasonable that they 
should think so. Surely such a vast amount of machinery and 
organized effort ought to accomplish wonders. Think of the Young 
Men's Christian Association, with its myriads of workers 
everywhere; the Women's Christian Temperance Union, rapidly 
spreading its numbers and influence; the Home Missionary 
enterprises of various kind; the International S.S. 

R634 : page 2 

system; the sermons, lectures, inquiry meetings, etc., etc. 

Why is it that in the presence of this vast army of zealous, tireless 
workers so little is being accomplished? The accessions to the 
Church do not keep pace with the population, so that, instead of 
conquering the world, the Church is actually falling behind, and 
that rapidly. Secret skepticism and blatant blasphemy are steadily 
increasing; crime and corruption fill the newspapers, which, in 
many cases, are eagerly bought for the sake of their filthy record. 

Why cannot some see that something must be radically wrong in 
this matter? Is God unable to give this army the victory? What of 
Gideon, and Samson, and David, and Nehemiah, and many others 
who fought the Lord's battles? If a handful working in harmony 
with God could do so much, what should be done through these 
millions? 

There can be but one answer: their zeal is not according to a 
knowledge of God's plans— they are not working with God? 

Jesus said: "He that is not with me is against me: he that gathereth 
not with me scattereth." (Matt. 12:30; Isa. 26:17,18.) 

W. I. M. 



R634 : page 2 

THE SALT OF THE EARTH. 

"Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the salt have lost its savor, 
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but 
to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men." Matt. 5:13. 

Salt is permeating in its character, and is a well known 
preservative against decay, and is therefore a fitting symbol of the 
principles of Christianity and those in whose life those principles 
are exemplified. The character of a child of God is known and read 
by those of the world who never think of reading God's written 
revelation, and it is emphatically true, that these living 
representatives of the principles of Christianity, are the salt of the 
earth. 

If we would see the effect of this salt we have only to consider the 
difference between the so-called Christian and heathen nations of 
the world to-day. The superstition and ignorance of the latter 



impede progress in every direction. Take, for instance, China. In 
morality her standard is exceedingly low, and the mass of that vast 
nation seem to have lost those manly traits of character which 
distinguish the human from the lower orders of being; its system of 
education is a mere memorizing and inculcating of the old fables 
and superstitions of the past. These superstitions forbid any 
advancement in science, philosophy, art, and what is generally 
called civilization. Railroads and telegraphs can scarcely be 
constructed because they come in conflict with these old 
superstitions. Just so it is in India and in every heathen country. 

"Yes," we hear many voices say, "this great progress in civilization 
in Christian nations is due to the influence of the Church;" and by 
the Church they mean that great organization, or rather union of 
diverse organizations which the Scriptures term "Babylon," (Rev. 
17:18)-- the great development of the "Mystery of Iniquity." But 
this is a great mistake: Jesus never said, Babylon, or the Mystery of 
Iniquity is the salt of the earth; but "ye"-the true children of God- 
"are the salt of the earth." 

Let us notice, then, how this salt of the earth has been working. But 
first, we object to the expression "Christian nations," for there is not 
a Christian NATION on the face of the earth. If such a nation did 
exist, it would indeed be the salt of the earth. 

What is termed civilization is nothing more than the arrest of those 
elements of decay which are at work in the human family, and a 
preservation or salting of the good qualities which have not yet 
become extinct. And this, in so far as it has progressed, we claim 
has been done solely through the agency of the children of God, 
though hindered, not helped, by the great "Mystery of Iniquity." 
Every truth and principle that has been brought to light from the 
Divine Revelation, and exemplified in the faith and life of the 
saints, has made its influence felt to some extent on the world, and 
the aggregate of that influence is seen in the present development of 
civilization. Every martyred saint, and every persecuted, despised 
and rejected faithful one, who bravely defended the truths and 
principles of Christianity, has done his part in thus salting the earth, 
although the false or ignorant professors who persecuted them, did 
so in the name of the Lord, saying, "Let the Lord be glorified." Isa. 
66:5. 

As thus through the suffering, sacrifice and toil of the faithful few, 
sufficient truth has dawned upon the world to liberate them from 
the thraldom of superstition, they have enjoyed a greater degree of 
liberty. And in that blessed liberty and just to the extent that they 
have received it, has heart and mind expanded; morality has 
increased; philanthropic enterprises have been undertaken; and art, 
science, invention, and every branch of education has flourished. 
And yet the nations thus favored are not Christian nations; no, they 
have only been salted a little with the truths and principles of 
Christianity, though they do not realize from whence they received 



them, and generally consider these things as the result of their own 
wisdom. 

This salt has, at least to some extent, penetrated all nations with 
results corresponding to the amount received. Since these who have 
been the salt of the earth, have grown up largely under the shadow 
of the Mystery of Iniquity, that great system has not only 
persecuted them, but it has claimed as the result of its own working, 
all the benefits which have accrued to the world as the result of 
their effort. But the real character of the great Babylon system has 
ever been to becloud the truth, advance error, promote superstition, 
fetter thought, and retard progress. Whatever progress the saints 
have made in gaining a knowledge of the truth has ever been 
against her strong opposition. Yet God permitted the true and the 
false, the wheat and the tares to grow together until the harvest. 
(Matt. 13:28-30.) And now, in the harvest time, the saints, the real 
salt of the earth, are being separated from the false ones in the 
Church, and shall soon be exalted to power, and through that power 
they will be enabled to thoroughly salt all nations. The blessed 
truths and principles of Christianity shall then permeate not only all 
nations, but all hearts. "The earth shall be full of the knowledge of 
the Lord as the waters cover the sea." Isa. 11:9. 

But there is another important thought in the text under 
consideration. Jesus inquires: If the salt have lost its savor, 
wherewith shall it be salted? and answers, "It is thenceforth good 
for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot of men." 
Here is a solemn fact that we should all lay well to heart. That 
which constitutes the saints, the salt of the earth, is the fact that they 
have been salted with the truth, and that truth received permeates 
their being, affecting their actions, thoughts and words. 

But if these who are the salt of the earth lose their savor, (saltness,) 
that is if they lose those truths and principles of the gospel 
wherewith they were salted, wherewith shall they be salted again? 
There is no other gospel that can salt them, or preserve them from 
decay, putrefaction and ultimate death. There is no better gospel; 
there is no grander plan of salvation than that we have learned, and 
no better teacher and guide into truth than the Comforter we have 
received, and who has led us in plain paths since first we submitted 
implicitly to his leading. 

Tell us then, if you can, "If the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith 
shall it be salted? Jesus said, "It is good for nothing." O, can that be 
the sad condition of any who once were enlightened and who 
rejoiced in and were sanctified by the truth? Were such a 
circumstance not possible, then surely the Master would not have 
warned of such danger. Let us, therefore, consider well, and 
beware, and be not too hasty to decide that the solemn warning is 
unnecessary and called attention to by the mere caprice of a brother 
who for some selfish end would put the breaks on the wheels of 
progress. 



"It is thenceforth good for nothing. " Lord, will it then be worthy of 
eternal life? Will God perpetuate the existence that is "good for 
nothing"? NO, it is to be "cast out and trodden under foot" — 
destroyed. Once esteemed of God as the salt of the earth, afterward 
"a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction." But while it is possible thus 
to fall, let us rejoice in the blessed assurance that none can pluck us 
out of our Father's hand, (John 10:29;) and "He that keepeth Israel 
shall not slumber" (Ps. 121:4). If the salt loses its savor it will be 
because we abandon the truth and turn unto fables, and not because 
God fails to supply it to his saints with abundant and convincing 
proof. 

R. W. 



R635 : page 2 

FELLOWSHIP WITH THE FATHER. 

There is a story of a young man who, having some financial 
scheme which required a large amount of capital, called on a very 
wealthy banker to interest him in the enterprise. He declined to 
advance the funds that were needed for the undertaking, but 
promised to put him in a way to get them; and so, taking his arm 
they walked once or twice up and down the Exchange, conversing 
with him as they went. When they returned, he told him he could go 
among the bankers and get what he wanted. The young man found 
that the statement was true. The very fact of his being seen with that 
wealthy man gave him all the credit he wanted. 

It is thus when men walk with men. The world is quick to see and 
draw inferences from our associations. But what must it be for a 
man to walk with God? 

What do angels say when they see a weak, helpless, sinful, fallen, 
mortal taken into fellowship with their Master, and walking with 
him along earth's desert way? So Enoch walked with God many 
hundred years ago. Men knew him as one who lived a hidden, 
secret life, whose mystery they could not penetrate; the demons of 
darkness knew him as one clothed in armor which they could not 
pierce, and defended by One into whose presence they dared not 
intrude; but the angels knew him as a man who walked with God, 
and were not surprised when at last "he was not, for God took him." 

To such fellowship and intimacy as this, Christians are called. We 
are invited to draw nigh to God, and have fellowship with him, to 
maintain such intimacy that the world shall know that we have been 
with Jesus.— Selected. 



R635 : page 2 

THE times are critical, not here alone, but all over the world. 
Prospering in purely material interests, as I fully believe the people 



at large have never done before, the elements to bring on the 
gravest moral changes are simultaneously at work everywhere. The 
problems now lavishly presented for agitation touch the very 
foundation of religious faith, of moral philosophy, of civil 
government, and even of human society. New forms of power are 
developing themselves, seriously menacing the solidity of all 
established institutions. Even that great conviction, ever cherished 
as the apple of your eye, and which really is the rock upon which 
our political edifice rests, the durability of representative 
government, bids fair to be, sooner or later, drawn into question on 
solid grounds. The collision between the forces of associated capital 
and those of associated labor is likely to make itself felt throughout 
the wide extent of human civilization.— Charles Francis Adams. 



page 2 

"WE would laugh at a man who should suppose his field of grain 
to be cut simply because he had whetted his scythe. No less absurd 
is it for a man to think that he can do his whole duty by merely 
praying." 



R635 : page 3 

ST. JOHN, THE AGED. 

I'm growing very old. This weary head That hath so often leaned on 
Jesus' breast, In days long past that seem almost a dream, Is bent 
and hoary with its weight of years. These limbs that followed Him— 
my Master— oft From Galilee to Judea! yea, that stood Beneath the 
cross and trembled with His groans, Refuse to bear me even 
through the streets To preach unto my children. E'en my lips Refuse 
to form the words my heart sends forth. My ears are dull, they 
scarcely hear the sobs Of my dear children gathered round my 
couch: God lays His hand upon me— yea, His hand, And not His 
rod— the gentle hand that I Felt those three years, so often pressed in 
mine, In friendship, such as passeth woman's love. I'm old; so old I 
cannot recollect The faces of my friends; and I forget The words 
and deeds that make up daily life; But that dear face, and every 
word He spoke, Grow more distinct as others fade away, So that I 
live with Him and holy dead More than with living. 

Some seventy years ago I was a fisher by the sacred sea. It was at 
sunset. How the tranquil tide Bathed dreamily the pebbles! How the 
light Crept up the distant hills, and in its wake Soft purple shadows 
wrapped the dewy fields ! And then He came and called me. Then I 
gazed For the first time, on that sweet face. These eyes From out of 
which, as from a window, shone Divinity, looked on my inmost 
soul, And lighted it forever. Then his words Broke on the silence of 
my heart, and made The whole world musical. Incarnate love Took 



hold of me and claimed me for its own. I followed in the twilight, 
holding fast His mantle. 

O, what holy walks we had Through harvest fields, and desolate, 
dreary wastes ! And oftentimes He leaned upon my arm, Wearied 
and wayworn, I was young and strong, And so upbore Him. Lord, 
now I am weak And old, and feeble! Let me rest on Thee! So, put 
thine arm around me. Closer still! How strong Thou art! The 
twilight draws space Come let us leave these noisy streets and take 
The path to Bethany; for Mary's smile Awaits us at the gate, and 
Martha's hands Have long prepared the cheerful evening meal. 
Come, James, the Master waits; and Peter, see Has gone some steps 
before. 

What say you, friends? That this is Ephesus, and Christ has gone 
Back to the heavenly kingdom! Ay, 'tis so, 'tis so, I know it all; and 
yet, just now, I seemed To stand once more upon my native hills, 
And touch my Master. O, how oft I've seen The touching of His 
garments bring back strength To palsied limbs ! I feel it has to mine. 
Up! bear me once more to my flock! Once more There let me tell 
them of the Saviour's love; For, by the sweetness of my Master's 
voice Just now, I think He must be very near. Coming, I trust, to 
break the vail, which time Has worn so thin that I can see beyond, 
And watch His footsteps. 

So, raise up my head, How dark it is ! I cannot seem to see The 
faces of my flock. Is that the sea That murmurs so, or is it weeping? 
Hush, My little children. God so loved the world He gave His Son: 
So, love ye one another. Love God and man. Amen. Now bear me 
back My legacy unto an angry world is this. I feel my work is 
finished. Are the streets so full? What, call the folk my name? The 
holy John; Nay, write me rather, Jesus Christ's beloved, And lover 
of my children. 

Lay me down Once more upon my couch, and open wide The 
eastern window. See, there comes a light Like that which broke 
upon my soul at eve, When in the dreary isle of Patmos, Gabriel 
came And touched me. See, it grows! And hark! It is the song the 
ransomed sang Of glory to the Lamb! How loud it sounds! And that 
unwritten one ! Methinks my soul Can join it now. But who are 
those who crowd The shining way? Say! -joy! 'tis the eleven, With 
Peter first! How eagerly he looks! How bright the smile on James' 
face! I am the last. Once more we are complete To gather round the 
paschal feast. My place Is next my Master. O, my Lord, my Lord! 
How bright Thou art! and yet the very same I loved in Galilee. 'Tis 
worth the hundred years To feel this bliss! So, lift me up, dear Lord, 
Unto Thy bosom. There shall I abide. -Sel. 



R636 : page 3 



THE SPIRITUAL LAW. 



The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin.— ROM. 7:14. 

The ideas associated with the words carnal, natural and spiritual 
are various and generally confused. And before defining the above 
Scripture let us glance briefly at the meaning and scope of these 
words. 

Natural signifies according to nature. Nature has two principal 
definitions— "The sum of qualities and attributes which make a 
thing what it is as distinct from others"; also, "the regular course of 
things, the usual order of events."— Webster. The first of these is 
the primary or strict meaning of the word, but from custom the 
latter is generally understood and used. 

Using the word natural in connection with mankind in its primary 
sense, the strict meaning of the expression, the natural man, would 
be a man possessed of the sum of qualities and attributes which 
belong to human nature, i.e., a perfect man. According to this strict 
definition, there is not a natural man living in the world to-day; for 
there is not one who possesses in perfect measure all the qualities 
and attributes which belong to human nature. But the general use of 
the word natural, would define the expression, "the natural man," 
thus: a man in harmony with the regular, course of things, and after 
the usual order of mankind as it exists at present, which Scripture 
asserts is a fallen or depraved condition, and not the condition 
which belonged to, and was enjoyed by, the first of the race. 

The word spiritual is used in two ways also. The strict or primary 
meaning is, "Consisting of spirit— a spiritual substance or being." A 
secondary meaning, and the one generally used, is, "Pertaining to 
the intellectual and higher endowments of the mind— as influenced 
by the spirit, controlled and inspired by the Divine Spirit." 
According to the primary meaning of the word, to become spiritual 
would be to become a spiritual substance or being. According to the 
second definition, it would be to have the intellect under the 
guidance of God's spirit. 

The expression, "the law is spiritual," cannot be understood 
according to the first definition— the law is not a spiritual being— but 
according to the second. The Law appeals to the intellectual or 
higher endowments of men and represents the Divine mind or 
spirit. 

In answer, then, to the question: "Can a natural man keep a spiritual 
law?" we answer, It depends upon what you mean by a natural man. 
If you use natural according to the second definition, your question 
would in substance be, "Can a man after the usual order of men 
[fallen and imperfect] as we see them about us to-day, keep the 
Law of God which is spiritual and represents his perfect will? And 
our answer to this question would be, No; the race has become 
imperfect in mind and body, and has lost the original likeness to 
such an extent that it is impossible for them either to fully 



appreciate that law, or to keep it. "There is none righteous; no, not 
one." 

But if the question be changed so as to give the word natural its 
primary meaning, it in substance would be: "Could a man 
possessing all the qualities and attributes which BELONG to the 
human nature keep a spiritual law?" To this question we would say, 
Yes: God made man in his own image [endowed with like mental 
and moral qualities, though of less scope] for the very purpose of 
having him able to appreciate his law— which is spiritual, or which 
represents his mind. It is in this particular that man differs from, 
and is superior to the lower animals. He was made capable of 
appreciating fully the will of his Creator. 

Sin and its consequences have warped and twisted man's intellect 
and judgment by which he was intended to apprehend God's 
dealings and laws, to such an extent, that now, with somewhat 
perverted judgment, he, in his present fallen state, is unable often to 
discern the righteousness of God's rulings, and cannot ever fully 
keep the requirements of His perfect law. 

This agrees with Paul's argument in the connection in which this 
text occurs. He reasons that the Law was just and good-in fact, was 
spiritual, or represented the mind or judgment of the perfect 
Creator, hence, could not be wrong; and since he and others by 
nature (second meaning, i.e., in the condition usual or common to 
all) were out of harmony with that Law, and were condemned by it, 
it proved that they were imperfect and sinful. He then explains how 
it comes that man is out of harmony with the perfect law, saying: "I 
am carnal, [have a fleshly mind, or a mind conformed to the 
ordinary or depraved course of this world], sold under sin"— sold by 
the first Adam, for a momentary gratification, into slavery to sin 
and its train of consequent evils, terminating in death. 

This is the reason that a variance exists between the perfect law and 
man as he is-under sin. Not that man, as originally created in the 
image of God, was at variance with the law of God and unable to 
keep it, but that, having lost much of God's image in the fall, and 
having become depraved through sin, he is unable to keep the Law 
now, because he is carnal-sold under sin. 

The perfect man of God's creation— Adam— had the full range of 
mental and moral faculties which constituted him God's image, but 
of practical knowledge he of course had none, the design of the 
Creator being that His (God's) knowledge should be accessible to 
the man. And so long as Adam was content to follow his Maker's 
instructions perfectly, that is, to be controlled by God's spirit, or 
mind, or will, so long he prospered and was happy. The fall was 
occasioned by his leaning to his own understanding or judgment, 
which, from lack of experience, was defective. 

Losing the mind or spirit of God, he not only was condemned by 
the Law of God, which represents or expresses God's mind, but 
the race soon began to lose even that perfection of organism and 



mental balance, which at first enabled Adam to see and 
appreciate things from the standpoint of the Creator. Hence it is 
said that the mind which men now have is carnal— made up 
according to their earthly circumstances and surroundings— and 
not the mind of God. 



OUR NEW MIND. 

Believers in Christ, who realize through his sacrifice the 
forgiveness of sins, are exhorted to make a full surrender of their 
will (which in all, is carnal) to the will of God: that is, to cease to 
look at matters from the depraved standpoint, and to use every 
effort to look at things from God's standpoint. This is a much more 
difficult matter for us now, than it was for Adam, because of the 
bent which sin has given us constitutionally, which is offset to some 
extent by our knowledge of the circumstances as revealed in God's 
Word. 

As we may become acquainted with the mind or spirit of our fellow 
creatures by attention to their words, so God has given us His Word 
that thereby those who desire to do so, may ascertain his mind or 
spirit. If we consecrate ourselves fully, and ignore our own will, to 
accept of God's will, then we are said to be spiritually minded. 
Then we stand in precisely the position which Adam occupied 
before disobedience —controlled by the mind of God. "To be 
carnally minded is death, [to be controlled by any other will than 
God's will, brings distress, misery, trouble, and eventually death, 
according to the perfect and unalterable law of God] ; but to be 
spiritually minded is life and peace." (Rom. 8:6.) To have a mind in 
perfect harmony with that which is perfect and which is working all 
things according to the counsel of his own will, is the way not only 
to insure peace and happiness, but the only way to insure 
everlasting life; for God declares that all who will not be subject to 
his perfect will or law, may not live forever, since such lives would 
be an injury, both to themselves and others. 



THE SPIRITUAL MIND TO BE RESTORED TO MANKIND. 

Since this condition of spiritual mindedness was one of the things 
lost by mankind in the fall, it would surely be one of the things 
restored to men by the Redeemer and Restorer in the times of 
restitution of all things. Mankind may again come into God's 
likeness, and being freed from sin by the Redeemer, will in due 
time be freed from the carnal mind, (of opposition to God,) which is 
the result of sin. 

This is expressed forcibly by the prophet, who says of the work of 
the Times of Restitution: "I will take away the stony heart out of 
your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh." That is: I will 
remove the caloused and depraved elements of disposition— your 
carnal mind— and give you a mind such as you should have as men, 
such as belongs to perfect manhood, a heart of flesh. Again: "I will 
put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and 



ye shall keep my judgments and do them." "After those days, saith 
the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in 
their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people." 
(Ezek. 36:26,27, and Jer. 3 1:33,34.) 

Again it is stated: 

"It shall come to pass AFTERWARD, that I will pour out my spirit 
upon all flesh. " [After the Gospel age is ended, the spiritual mind is 
to be restored to all flesh, during the Millennial reign.] "And in 
those days I will pour out my spirit upon the servants and upon the 
handmaidens." (Joel 2:28,29.) [During the Gospel age none can 
receive God's spirit except they first become his servants by 
consecration, while in the next age, the carnal mind being removed 
by the process of restoration, the acquirement of the mind of the 
spirit will be without difficulty.] 

R637 : page 3 

THE SAME SPIRIT PRODUCES DIFFERENT 
RESULTS UNDER DIFFERENT CIRCUMSTANCES. 

Since, then, the Spirit of God is one Spirit, and is to be in the 
world in the next age, as it is in the Church in this age, the question 
arises, Will it not produce the same effects in them (the world) that 
it now produces in the Church, and will not the results be the same? 
if the possession of the Spirit by the world gives evidence as with 
Adam, of perfect MANHOOD, does it not indicate that the highest 
aspirations of the Church under the same Spirit should be perfect 
MANHOOD? or, on the other hand, if the hope is well founded that 
the Church through the possession of the Spirit and as a result of it, 
becomes changed from human to SPIRITUAL NATURE (a 
spiritual body as well as mind), does it not prove that if the world 
comes under the influence of the same Spirit the result will be the 
same to them? 

From a surface view one might answer, Yes. But we think we can 
give the best of logical, as well as Scriptural reasons for answering, 
No, the possession of the same Spirit or mind will not lead to 
exactly the same results because of the difference of circumstances 
during the two ages. The same Spirit, or mind of God, under the 
same circumstances, would produce the same results, but under 
opposite circumstances would produce different results. 

The mind of God is always in harmony with justice and love, hence 
if we possess that Spirit now, during "this present evil world," 
while in contact with sorrow, trouble, pain, injustice, etc., we must 
of necessity oppose them, and use our influence against them, and 
this Spirit of God will lead us not only to sympathize, but to 
sacrifice, in our endeavor to bless and alleviate. As the apostles saw 
the dreary darkness of those about them, and knew the joy and 
comfort and peace of heart it would give them to know of a 
Ransom by Jesus and a coming blessing upon all through him, they 
sacrificed much to 



"Tell the whole world the blessed tidings," Because led of the same 
Spirit or mind of God which prompted the Father to send the only 
begotten that the world through him might live, and which inspired 
our Lord when he "gave himself a ransom for all," therefore the 
apostle could exclaim even in the midst of tribulation, "Woe is unto 
me if I preach not the gospel." (1 Cor. 9:16.) Under the influence of 
that Spirit he could take pleasure in nothing else. Possessed of that 
Spirit, his own comfort, ease, pleasure, honor or wealth appeared as 
loss and dross, to be gladly abandoned for the privilege of being a 
co-worker with God, and joining his life in sacrifice to the Master's. 
And in proportion as WE possess the Spirit or mind of God, we will 
so view matters and so act, so long as ignorance, blindness, trouble 
and sin exist. 

If the miseries, etc., of the present should continue during the 
coming age, the Spirit of God would ever prompt in the same way 
to its alleviation, and the results would still be sacrifice among all 
possessing the Spirit: but it will not be so. With the end of this age 
the predominance of evil will cease; and with it the 

R637 : page 4 

necessity and opportunity of suffering by opposing it, will cease. 
The time of suffering will have given place to the time of rejoicing 
and glory. Glory to God in the highest, glory to Christ and the 
Church, and on earth peace and good will toward men, with naught 
to molest or make them afraid. The Scripture will be fulfilled: "In 
His day the righteous [right-doer— those possessing God's Spirit] 
shall flourish." Whereas, now, "Whosoever will live Godly 
[according to the Spirit of God] shall suffer persecution." 

Thus we easily and quickly show that the possession of the Spirit of 
God would have different effects according to the circumstances- 
one time necessitating and producing suffering, sacrifice and 
dishonor, and at another the very reverse, blessing and honor. 

It only remains for us to show from Scripture, that different rewards 
result from the possession of and obedience to the Spirit of God, 
which we now proceed to do briefly. 

When the difference of circumstances is kept in mind— the 
favorable circumstances of those in the coming age, when Satan 
and evil is bound, and blindness, ignorance, and depravity, are 
being removed, and when the full knowledge of the Lord is 
flooding the earth as the waters cover the sea, and the unfavorable 
circumstances of the present age, when Satan uses his blinding arts 
and ensnarements, when we must walk by faith and not by sight, 
when to have and exercise the Spirit of God demands self- 
crucifixion, self-denial, dishonor and adversity, are kept in mind, 
who can wonder that God has provided "some better thing for us" 
than for the world in general. (Heb. 1 1 :40.) Not that the world's 
portion will not be good, yea PERFECT, but that our portion will 
be better inasmuch as it will be a perfection on a higher plane of 
existence than the human, even a partaking of the divine nature. (2 



Pet. 1:4.) Do you question how both could be PERFECT yet one 
better than the other? Let us illustrate: When Jesus was "made so 
much BETTER than the angels," think you that it implies that they 
are degraded or imperfect? Nay every creation of God in its 
perfection is very good, though there are various orders or kinds, 
and the perfection of each differs from the other. So with the 
perfect man RESTORED to God's image and controlled by his 
Spirit, he will still be "a little lower than the angels" in comparison, 
(Ps. 8:5,) while the glorified Church like her Head and Lord will be 
"so much better than the angels," inasmuch as with her Lord she 
becomes partaker of the divine nature, which, though no more 
perfect than angelic nature, both being perfect, is nevertheless 
superior as a higher order of nature— above all. 

The proof of a different reward for those who during this Gospel 
Age suffer with Christ is briefly stated thus: All the promises to 
Israel according to the flesh, and the world, which they in figure 
represented (the priesthood excepted, who represented the Church,) 
are earthly promises, adapted to perfect human beings, viz.: the 
land, fruitful fields, abundance of peace, restoration, etc. (Gen. 
13:14,15; Exod. 20:12; Micah 4:4.) 

The promises to the Church are the reverse— on earth suffering, 
poverty, affliction, persecution, self-denial, and in the future, 
heavenly glory, honor, power and association with and likeness to 
Christ Jesus. They have the privilege of not only suffering with 
him, but of sharing with him in the restoration of mankind. 

"Rejoice and be exceeding glad for great is your reward in heaven." 



R637 : page 4 

IS IT A CONTRADICTION? 

"Ye shall see.. .all the prophets in the kingdom of God." (Luke 
13:28.) 

"But what went ye out for to see! A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, 
and more than a prophet.... Verily, I say unto you, Among them that 
are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the 
Baptist: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is 
greater than he. " (Matt. 11:9-11.) 

In the above Scripture we have what might appear to many candid 
students a contradiction in Jesus' teachings. The Jews regarded John 
as a prophet, and Jesus agreed with them, ("Yea,") showing that he 
was not only a prophet, but the greatest of them, in that he was the 
immediate forerunner of the Messiah. And notwithstanding his 
teaching on another occasion, that all the prophets, (which of course 
would include John,) would be in the kingdom of God, he now 
states that the least one in the kingdom would be greater than this 



greatest prophet. And this statement excludes John, as well as the 
other prophets, entirely from the kingdom. 

One of two things is certainly true- either this is a contradiction, or 
else Jesus was speaking of the kingdom of God in two different 
senses. The latter we find to be the case, and so these statements 
prove to be harmonious. As there was a fleshly house of Israel 
developed during the Jewish age, so a spiritual Israel has been 
developing during the Gospel age. (1 Cor. 10:18; Gal. 6:16.) The 
promises to the former were of an earthly character, while the 
promises to the latter were "exceeding great" and "better promises" 
of a heavenly or spiritual character. So the kingdom of God which 
is to rule the earth in the age to come, is to consist of an earthly, 
visible phase, and a spiritual phase which is higher and invisible to 
men. And Jesus affirms that the least one in this higher phase, shall 
be greater than the greatest in the visible, earthly phase of the 
kingdom. 

Paul shows us further that those who shall have part in the earthly 
kingdom, shall partake of the earthly or human nature, while those 
who have part in the heavenly or spiritual kingdom shall partake of 
the spiritual nature:- 

"Some will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body 
do they come?.. .God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to 
every seed his own body.. ..There is a natural [human] body, and 
there is a spiritual body. ...As is the earthy, such are they also that 
are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are 
heavenly." (1 Cor. 15:35-48.) 

This exceeding great and precious promise, the spiritual kingdom, 
was 

R638 : page 4 

never made known until Jesus brought it to light, (2 Tim. 1:10,) and 
he as the head of that spiritual kingdom, was the forerunner of all 
that "little flock" who shall inherit it. It will be seen also that this 
high exaltation of the few, is for the blessing of the many subjects 
of the kingdom. 

Upon the recognition of the two natures, human and spiritual, and 
the two corresponding phases of the kingdom of God, depends to a 
very great extent our ability to rightly divide the word of truth. If 
we fail to discern this distinction so clearly set forth in the 
Scriptures, we fail entirely to discern the high calling of the saints 
of the Gospel age, and all necessity for this age, as distinguished 
from the next. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R638 : page 4 



"THE MAN OF SIN." 

A. J. GORDON. 

In a recent lecture on the "man of sin" mentioned in 2 Thess. 2:3, 
we took the ground that the mysterious power there foretold is that 
of the Papacy, springing up and holding sway in the Christian 
Church, alleging that this was the view strongly held by the 
Reformers, and by the best expositors from their time onward. 

An honored brother, the editor of The Truth, who is strongly 
wedded to another view— viz., that the words refer to a future 
infidel, Antichrist, sitting in the rebuilt Temple at Jerusalem— heard 
with astonishment that we used the following language, and 
wondered how any one laying claim to accurate scholarship could 
make such an assertion: viz., "The Greek for 'the temple of God' in 
2 Thessalonians never, in a single instance elsewhere, means the 
literal Temple, but is always applied to the Church of God, which 
temple believers are. We used precisely these words, and are most 
glad to be called upon to reiterate and substantiate them. 

Let us say at the outset, that in interpreting difficult passages of 
Scripture, we know of no sure method of finding their meaning 
except to give attention to the exact words and phrases employed, 
and then to collate these with the same expressions in other parts of 
Scripture; and so, by "comparing spiritual things with spiritual," to 
find out the teaching of God. Those who hold loose views of 
inspiration, say that the thought is the main thing; and that this 
phrase is equivalent to that phrase, provided it contains the same 
general idea. We do not admit this. We believe that the Bible is 
written "not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which 
the Holy Spirit teacheth;" and that the Spirit is infinitely accurate in 
the use of language. Holding this in view, the interpreter can move 
forward with confidence; to him the words of Holy Scripture are 
"nails fastened by the master of assemblies," and he can hang his 
expositions upon them without fear of their giving away. 

Now, in seeking to determine the character and seat of this 
mysterious "man of sin" predicted in Thessalonians, we use just this 
method, comparing the words here employed to describe him with 
the same words used in other parts of Scripture. And we have the 
uttermost confidence that this will give us the true solution of the 
secret. Let us seek to determine them, 

l.-THE SEAT OF THE "MAN OF SIN. " 

"He, as God, sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he 
is God." The Greek phrase here employed for "temple of God," is 
"ton naon tou Theou." Now, from Matthew to Revelation this 
expression occurs seven times only. The following are all the 
instances: 

1. "This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to 
build it in three days." (Matt. 26:61.) 



2. "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of 
God dwelleth in you." (1 Cor. 3:16). 

3. "If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy." (1 
Cor. 3:17). 

4. "For the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are." (1 Cor. 
3:17). 

5. "And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols?" (2 
Cor. 6:16). 

6. "For ye are the temple of God, the living one." (2 Cor. 2:6). 

7. "So that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself 
that he is God." (2 Thess. 2:4). 

Of the first six of these passages, not one refers to the Jewish 
Temple, and, therefore, we believe that the seventh cannot. Our 
critic quotes the first, indeed, as so referring; but remembering that 
this was the language which Christ's enemies imputed to him, we 
have only to turn to his own words as recorded in John 2:19, to find 
the real meaning of what he uttered. It is there said, "But this he 
spake of the temple of his body." Thus we see that Christ's meaning 
corresponds exactly with that of Paul in his letter to the 
Corinthians-the temple of God being the body of believers, 
individually and corporately, as "the habitation of God through the 
Spirit," or, in other words, the Church of God, including the Head 
and the members, as indwelt by the Holy Spirit. This is the primary 
and literal usage of the phrase, thus far employed in the New 
Testament. And can we believe it possible that in this passage in 
Thessalonians the Holy Spirit uses the expression "the temple of 
God," with a totally different meaning from that which it bears in 
every other instance in the Gospels and Epistles? Is it credible that 
Paul in this place signifies the Jewish temple, when in every other 
use his language clearly means the body of the believer, or the 
Church of Christ? And this inquiry is especially pertinent when we 
remember that Paul, in the same Epistle to the Corinthians, wherein 
he five times calls the Church, individually and collectively, "the 
temple of God," has one clear reference to the Jewish Temple (1 
Cor. 9:13), but in alluding to it employs a totally different term, 
simply to heiron, the word constantly used by Christ and his 
disciples of the Temple in Jerusalem. 

If, now, we turn to the Revelation, we find this term three times 
employed: "Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple 
of my God," (3:12); "And the temple of God was opened in 
heaven," (11:19). By general consent, these texts refer to the 
Church glorified, or the heavenly Jerusalem, and there need be no 
controversy about them. The other passage is the eleventh chapter, 
first verse: "Rise, measure the temple of God," etc. This, our critic 
considers, plainly points to the literal Temple at Jerusalem. But 
Alford holds that the naos tou Theou is here to be taken 
symbolically, and that so taken the words "can only bear one 



meaning, viz., the Church of the elect servants of God." With him 
agree the most eminent expositors of the Apocalypse, ancient and 
modern, from Mede to Elliot. 

These citations exhaust the list of texts in which this inspired phrase 
occurs. Admit, if need be, that the last one is doubtful, and can, 
therefore, throw no certain light upon the significance of the others; 
then, excepting this as uncertain, the case would stand thus: First, 
that in applying the phrase naos tou Theou in 2 Thessalonians to the 
Jewish Temple, we give a name to that Temple which, in every 
other determinable instance in the New Testament, belongs to the 
Church of Christ, individual or corporate, on earth or in heaven; 
and, secondly in so applying language we give a name to the 
Temple at Jerusalem which the inspired writers of the New 
Testament, while making scores of allusions to that Temple, never 
in a single instance, apply to it. Undoubtedly the Jerusalem Temple 
was and is called "the temple of God," in popular phraseology; but 
we must interpret by the Spirit's language, not by the peoples 
language. And so interpreting, we contend that to apply this 
inspired phrase as our critic and those of his school do to the 
Hebrew Temple, is an instance of exegetical violence exactly like 
that of which they complain in those who take the Greek word for 
"leaven" uniformly meaning corruption in the New Testament, and 
make it signify, as used in the parable of Matthew 12:33, the gospel 
in its diffusion through society. 

Thus we have measured "the temple" exegetically, as it stands 
before us in this Epistle to the Thessalonians, and it will be seen 
that we have not measured it "according to the measure of a man;" 
that we have not brought the passage to the test of current 
phraseology, but have tried it by the rule and the plummet of the 
Spirit's own words— words which are employed, we believe, with 
more than human accuracy. 

IL-THE ORIGIN OF THE "MAN OF SIN " 

Led by our investigation thus far to look for the Evil One in the 
Church of God, we find all the other language of the prophecy 
pointing in the same direction. 

The first stage in the predicted development of the wicked one is 
that of apostasy. Speaking of the return of Christ, Paul says, "For 
the day will not come except there come a falling away first." The 
Greek word for falling away is He apostasia— the apostasy. The 
word is very clear in its meaning, and, as used in Scripture, 
invariably signifies a spiritual defection. The exact noun is 
employed once in the New Testament, Acts 21:21, where Paul is 
charged with teaching the Jews apostasy from Moses by 
abandoning circumcision. It would 

R639 : page 4 

be impossible to find a word to describe more accurately the 
beginnings of the Papacy, which consisted in a forsaking of the 



simple faith and worship of primitive Christianity for Jewish rites 
and Pagan ceremonies. In 1 Tim. 4:1 we have the same words in its 
verb form: "But the Spirit saith expressly, that in later times some 
shall fall away from the faith" (R.V.) This refers not to the very last 
times, but "to the times subsequent to those in which the Apostle 
was writing." (See Alford.) 

And when we note the salient features of this predicted falling 
away— "giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons; 
speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a 
hot iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from 
meats," etc.— 

R639 : page 5 

it requires no stretch of ingenuity to discover in them the great 
outlines of the Roman apostasy. And remembering that "the 
apostasy" is antecedent to the revelation of the "man of sin," 
preparing his way, and furnishing the condition out of which he 
emerges, we feel sure that we are on the right trail in finding the 
realization of this in the early corruption of the Apostolic faith. No 
blatant infidelity assailing the Church from without, no 
development of Jewish Antichristianism, can at all answer to the 
language. It is evidently a spiritual defection, the germs of which 
were already planting in secret, and which in later times were to 
appear in a manifest lapse from the faith. Thus, as a rigid verbal 
examination of the prophecy gives us the Church of Christ as the 
seat of the "man of sin," so the same method points, we believe, 
unerringly, to the Church of Christ as the place of his origin and 
development. Let us consider further:— 

lll.-THE PERSON OF THE "MAN OF SIN " 

He is called the "man of sin," and this expression is qualified by 
another, "the son of perdition." 

As before, we search the Scriptures to learn what use the Spirit has 
elsewhere made of this phrase, and we find it employed in only a 
single other instance— John 17:12, where it is applied to Judas 
Iscariot. But how suggestive again of the character of an apostate, 
for which we have already been led to look! Judas was a minister of 
Christ before he became revealed as the "son of perdition." He was 
not an infidel, denying Christ, but an apostle confessing Christ, to 
the very end. He communed at his table while meditating his 
betrayal; he saluted him with "Hail, Master," just at the moment he 
gave him the traitorous kiss. It is not atheism, but hypocrisy, not the 
open iniquity that reviles the Lord, but the mystery of iniquity that 
confesses him while betraying him, which we find in this typical 
person, whom the Holy Spirit sets before us to describe the 
predicted "man of sin." We said that he was an apostle; we may 
add— what may startle the English reader of the New Testament— 
that he was a bishop. For not only does Peter say in the first chapter 
of the Acts, that "he was numbered with us, and had obtained part 



in this ministry," and that one must be chosen "to take part in this 
ministry and apostleship from which Judas fell," but he quotes the 
words, "which the Holy Spirit by the mouth of David spake 
concerning Judas"— "His bishopric let another take." Now, here is 
wisdom in a mystery. For who does not know that the apostasy— the 
one before which all others in the history of the Church pale into 
insignificance-appeared when the Bishop of Rome and his 
successors began to betray Christ while professing to serve him, 
perverting his doctrines and ordinances by mixing them with Pagan 
and Jewish corruptions, while yet formulating and defending much 
of pure orthodoxy. It was not the apostasy of open denial, but of 
false profession— exactly that which Paul warns against when 
setting forth the duties of a bishop, in his epistle to Titus, 
admonishing him of such as "give heed to Jewish fables, and 
commandments of men that turn from the truth, who profess that 
they know God, but in their works deny him." 

Was Judas grasping for the temporal power of Christ in delivering 
him up, as so many have conjectured in explaining his conduct? 
Did he hope thus to bring on a crisis, and force the Lord to assert 
his kingship, and set up those thrones which he has promised to his 
disciples, as sharers with him in his reign? Here we have no 
intimation of Scripture, and can therefore express no opinion. But 
remembering that Satan has now entered into Judas, and that he was 
acting under his inspiration, this would not be an improbable 
conjecture: for this was exactly the temptation which the Devil set 
before Christ as he was entering upon his public ministry— the 
temptation to prematurely grasp his temporal power. "The Devil 
taketh Him into an exceeding high mountain, and showeth Him all 
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and he said unto 
Him, All these things will I give thee if thou wilt fall down and 
worship me." These kingdoms were Christ's by the Father's 
promise, but not yet. There must first be the cross, and the rejection 
by the world. 

"The sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow," is the 
divine order both for the Lord and for his mystical body. "Fear not, 
little flock," he says; "it is your Father's good pleasure to give you 
the kingdom." But to be content to be a little flock in this 
dispensation, waiting the Father's good pleasure to give us the 
kingdom in the next, to accept our present calling of preaching the 
gospel, in order to gather out "a people for his name," and patiently 
to wait till the Millennium for the universal conquest of the gospel— 
this has ever been the severest test of the Church's faith. And the 
constant problem has been to find some way of breaking over the 
bounds of this divine election. The Ritualist, by his sacrament, 
would bring all into the Church, without regard to a regenerated 
heart; the Broad Churchman, by a godless catholicity, would 
include the Greek and Roman apostacies, the Rationalistic schools, 
and the Brahma Somaj in one comprehensive Church; and the 
Evangelical, by his sincere assurance of "the conversion of the 
world," would prove by his computations that only a brief time is 



required before every one will become Christian under the 
preaching of the Gospel. What are all these theories but an 
unconscious grasping after a present universal dominion and glory 
for the Church? 

Now, when "the Prince of this world" offered all the kingdoms of 
the earth to Christ, he declined the gift. Instead of receiving a 
present throne by yielding to the Evil One, He accepted a present 
cross and a present rejection, by yielding to his Father. But what the 
son of man refused, the Roman bishop, a few centuries after, 
accepted from the "princes of this world" and from "the Prince of 
this world. " At the price of the spiritual chastity of the Church, he 
received the temporal power of the kings of the earth, and that 
shout of triumph, which belongs only to the Redeemer in his 
millennial glory, was taken by the apostate Bishop of Rome as early 
as the third century— "The kingdoms of this world are become the 
kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ." This we believe to be the 
wicked one of whom Judas was the prototype —a bishop who, while 
communing with Christ, is consorting with the rulers of this world, 
enriching himself with their silver and gold at the price of 
crucifying the Son of God afresh, and putting him to an open 
shame.— The Watchword. 



R639 : page 5 

THOSE SIX QUESTIONS. 

It is now eighteen months since we proposed six pointed doctrinal 
questions to three contemporaries who were teaching that Jesus was 
not our substitute in his death. We claimed that they used the 
scriptural words, "Ransom," "Redeem," "Bought with a price," etc., 
unfairly, and put upon them a private interpretation calculated to 
mislead some who were not well acquainted with the true meaning 
of these English words, or the Greek words which they translate. 
We suggested then that the full answer of these six questions would 
show to all just what our contemporaries did believe on the subject. 

One of these journals stated that the questions would be answered 
in due time, but has not yet answered them. Another (The 
Millenarian) proposed to answer in a year these questions, which a 
babe in Christ should be able to answer pointedly and scripturally at 
once and in brief space; and it has now completed the work, we 
presume, to its own satisfaction. 

The third contemporary contented itself with quoting extracts from 
the answers of the second. And from the fact that it now seldom 
uses those texts which mention Ransom, etc., and throws discredit 
upon the inspiration of all the statements of the New Testament, we 
infer that it would no longer consider it necessary to answer, or to 
attempt to harmonize any of these with other New Testament 
statements. This we certainly think the more reasonable method of 



dealing with the subject. Either give words their proper import, or 
deny that they are inspired, and thereby take from them all weight 
by claiming that the writers of these scriptures had mistaken ideas 
on the value of Jesus' death. 

We make some quotations from "The Millenarian's" answers to 
these questions. 

R640 : page 5 

In answer to the question, "Why did Jesus die?" it says: 

"When this question is viewed from a physical standpoint, and we 
see Jesus exposed to crucifixion upon the cross, we are ready to 
decide at once that his [physical] system was not such as could long 
survive— death was inevitable. This evidently was the case with 
Jesus; as much so as it would have been by any other human being, 
or as it was the case with those crucified with him." 

"It is claimed that Jesus had a life free from the penalty of 

death;. ..that he could have resisted death with success, but gave his 

life for his brethren in this sense." [All italics are ours.] 

This shows that the writer appreciated the question at issue. It also 
shows that he was "ready at once to decide" with the Jews on the 
outward appearances and AGAINST the testimony of Jesus' words; 
for Jesus declared: "I lay down my life;. ..No man taketh it from me, 
but I lay it down of myself." (John 10:17,18.) 

It continues: 

"The great object of our Lord's mission was to teach the doctrine of 
a resurrection.... See the necessity of his own death and resurrection 
as a proof of his doctrine." "The great object of the mission and 
death of Christ being to give the fullest PROOF OF A FUTURE 
LIFE of retribution, in order to supply the strongest motives to 
virtue." 

That Jesus' resurrection confirmed the promise of the resurrection 
of all, is true, but that the "object" of his death was to prove to 
mankind the possibility of a future life, is not true, and can find not 
one text of Scripture to support it. The incongruity of such a view 
must be apparent to all thinkers. If that was the object, does it not 
suggest a great waste of effort on God's part? That result could have 
been as fully accomplished by raising one of the Patriarchs or 
Prophets from the dead. Could not they, indeed, have served such 
an object even better, in that they would have presented the "proof" 
of a future life to millions who died before Jesus came. 

But the weakness and falsity of such an argument is made still more 
apparent by its quotations from Scripture to sustain itself, as shown 
in the following extract from the same article: 

"Hence the peculiar propriety of the Divine appointment explained 
by St. Paul (1 Cor. 15:21) That since by man came death by man 
should also come the resurrection of the dead." 



There can be no question that such a Scripture used as a proof that 
Jesus died to illustrate the resurrection doctrine is very "peculiar" ; 
so much so, that we cannot see how any reasonable mind could so 
use it. If Jesus merely gave proof of the possibility of a resurrection, 
then Paul would be made to mean that Adam merely proved the 
possibility of death. It would suit the theory of our contemporary if 
Paul had said, Since by man death was proved, by man also the 
resurrection was proved. 

What the Apostle declares, is, that by a man came death, not an 
illustration of it, and that by a man came resurrection -not an 
illustration of it, in one case more than the other. In our opinion that 
is a miserable theory which in sustaining itself, so blinds the 
intellect, that the meaning of so plain a Scripture could not be 
discerned; or else in spite of intellect and reason, would prostitute 
Scripture and distort the truth. 

Is it not very "peculiar," too, that all the sacrificial types which 
pointed to Christ's work, pointed to and illustrated his death, and in 
no way illustrated his resurrection? Truly this is "peculiar," if this 
writer's theory is correct, that the very object of Jesus' coming was 
to illustrate and "prove" a resurrection. Does this writer conclude 
that Jehovah was ignorant of the "object" and caused typical 
shadows to be made which illustrated the wrong thing? We suggest 
that he go slower, and learn from Bible statements and illustrations, 
that Jesus "made his soul an offering for sin," and "died for OUR 
SINS." 

Again we quote: 

"That Jesus did not die in the room and in the stead of humanity, or 
in his death become a substitute for humanity in any sense, appears 
to us, in the light of observation and reason, to be a self-evident 
proposition. But in the minds of some the question may arise, why 
not upon this point appeal simply to Scripture and to Scriptural 
language instead of to reason and observation? 

Our reply is that we are in doubt of the meaning of certain texts, 
and to reason and observation we must appeal to learn what they do 
signify. For instance, when it is said that "He bore our sins in his 
own body on the tree," (1 Pet. 2:24,) are we to learn that our sins 
legally and literally were transferred from us to him as is generally 
supposed? Or are we to learn that as a son and as a descendant of 
Adam he bore our sinful nature-the Adamic nature-upon the 
tree?" 

Upon the above we offer no comment, but remind our readers of an 
article in the January, '84, TOWER, under the caption, "HIMSELF 
TOOK OUR INFIRMITIES, AND BARE OUR SICKNESSES." 

In replying to the third question of the series, "How did Jesus put 
away sin by the sacrifice of himself?" (Heb. 9:26), our 
contemporary says: 



This position [of Z.W.T.] assumes that for, or on account of Adam's 
transgression, all humanity rests under death. This we consider, 
without any argument, accepting at once its claims. This position 
assumes further, which we believe to be correct, that this death is 
not the mere act of dying,. ..but the state of death, as the penalty 
upon Adam reads: "Dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou return." 
Then the text under consideration contemplates the putting away of 
this condition. But.. .how is this state of death put away, "borne 
away," or "blotted out?" and "to this work, what relation does the 
sacrifice of Jesus sustain? (Heb. 9:26). 

To the first question no other reply can be made, than that it must 
be brought about by a resurrection from the dead. To the second 
question —...The sacrifice of Jesus was not commercial, was not 
representative, but moral; therefore it was only a pattern to which 
persons or the world must conform." 

"Peter wrote of this work as the blotting out of sins. ...He did not 
here refer to the blotting out or putting away of the act of sin, or the 
fact of sin,. ..but to the penalty of sin— the death state." 

In the above, mark well how the writer mis-states the question in 
order to prepare for the answer he wishes to force upon it. After 
pointing out the consequence of sin to be death, and in this agreeing 
with us and with Scripture, he attempts to exchange in the mind of 
his reader the consequence for the sin which produced it, by saying 
as above, "Then the text under consideration contemplates the 
putting away of this condition [death.] But how is this state of death 
put away, &c?" 

This text says nothing about putting away death, not a word; it 
treats of "putting away sin." Of course, when sin is put away or 
blotted out, its consequence, death, will be removed, as shown in 
OTHER Scriptures; but to remove the consequence of sin would 
not be the putting away or removal of the sin which produced those 
consequences. To illustrate: A man condemned as guilty, is 
imprisoned. If his penalty be paid, his guilt atoned for, he may go 
free as a consequence; but the settlement of his guilt and the freeing 
in consequence are entirely distinct: for suppose he were to gain his 
freedom while still guilty, would he not be liable to 
reimprisonment? So, with the Great Judge. His "condemnation 
passed upon all men"-all are guilty, and all are under the penalty of 
that guilt— death. But should any be released from the penalty of 
sin without their guilt being canceled, they surely would be liable 
again to the penalty, if justice could reach them. However none 
could possibly escape. But "thanks be unto God for his unspeakable 
gift"— "The Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world"— 
for Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and "gave 
himself a ransom for all." Thus our release is permanent and final, 
because it is legally accomplished by the cancelling beforehand of 
our guilt. In a word, the release from death the penalty, is a 
CONSEQUENCE of the release from guilt which caused it. 



Our contemporary having wrested this Scripture to mean what it 
does not say, proceeds to use it in its distorted form, saying, "How 
is this state of death 

R640 : page 6 

put away?" "To this work what relation does the sacrifice of Jesus 
sustain?" 

But even if its misstatement of the question were considered, it 
would demolish his answer; for if the sacrifice of Jesus "was only a 
pattern" to which persons of the world MUST conform," then one 
of two conclusions must be true:-either all "persons" who lived 
before the pattern was made, are lost in death forever, or else the 
sacrifice of Jesus as a pattern was entirely unnecessary. 

We now come to the question answered last in the Millenarian, and 
with which it concludes its answer to the series. The question is 
number five in the list, viz:-In what way was Jesus "a propitiation 
for our sins"? (1 John 2:2 and 4: 10.) 

We are at a loss for fitting words whereby to express our righteous 
indignation at the shameful deception attempted 

R641 : page 6 

in the answer of this question. We say attempted, because we hope 
that at least some of the readers of that journal were sufficiently 
critical to notice it. 

The ordinary King James' version contains the word propitiation 
three times; two of these are proper translations, and one is 
improper. 

The Greek word hilasmos is correctly translated "propitiation." It 
signifies-- That which satisfies or propitiates. It occurs only twice. 
(1 John 2:2 and 4:10.) 

The Greek word hilasterion rendered "propitiation" in Rom. 3:25, 
is not a good translation. It should rather have been rendered 
Propitiatory. It signifies The COVERING on which propitiation is 
accomplished. 

This Greek word occurs but one other time (Heb. 9:5) and is there 
more correctly translated "Mercy Seat," and refers to the golden lid 
which covered the Law, in the Ark, in the Tabernacle of the 
wilderness, (Ex. 26:34,) which was the propitiatory covering, in 
type— that on which satisfaction was presented to God, and where, 
as a consequence, mercy was dispensed. Really, however, the word 
signifies no more a mercy-seat than a justice-seat; it was both. We 
here quote both the texts in which this word hilasterion occurs, 
from Rotherham's translation. 

"The ark of the covenant covered around on every side with gold, in 
which was a golden jar holding the manna, and the rod of Aaron 
that sprouted, and the tables of the covenant [Law]; but over-above 



it the cherubim of glory overshadowing the propitiatory." (Heb. 
9:5.) 

"Whom [Jesus] God set forth as a propitiatory— covering through 
faith in his BLOOD." (Rom. 3:25.) 

In a foot-note to the last quotation of Scripture, Rotherham says: 
"This complex idea we get partly from the word hilasterion itself, 
partly (as used in the Septuagint) from its association in Hebrew 
legislation. The mind of an Israelite would be carried back to the 
central word Kopher: the living, covered, shielded, saved by the 
dying. Substitution is there [i.e., suggested in the word]; 
appropriation also, and acquittal -all emanating from the 
propitiousness of Jehovah." 

Hoping that all can clearly see the distinctness and difference of 
these two Greek words, and yet their relationship, it becomes our 
duty to point out the deception attempted by our contemporary. 

Our question contained words from 1 John 2:2 and 4:10, which 
were in quotation marks. "A propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins," 
and our contemporary started out with the correct words. But after a 
roundabout reference to popular opinions, he befogs his readers by 
saying of propitiation: 

"It occurs in the apostolic writings three times. We shall call 
attention to the first occurrence, and then from this one to the 
others." 

Thus in a manner well calculated to mislead the unsuspecting, the 
writer starts out to discuss Rom. 3:25, saying:- 

"The word propitiation as it occurs here [our italics] is from the 
Greek word "hilisterion." 

And does the writer omit entirely the statement of the different 
Greek words in the two other places that the word "propitiation" 
occurs— the very text which he pretends to be answering? He does; 
and the only reference to them is at the close of the article, where 
he says: 

"All this prepares us for an easy comprehension of the other 
occurrences [of the word propitiation], so much so that it is hardly 
necessary for us to write of them at all." 

And he does not write of THEM at all. What perfidy is this, what 
deception and misleading, to attempt to confuse the English reader 
who has no knowledge of the Greek, by AN explanation of one 
word as a sample of a totally different one, and then, to make the 
deception complete, adding, "this prepares us for an easy 
comprehension of the other occurrences." Such treatment of 
Scripture is worthy of the Church of Rome. All should be on their 
guard against a theory which needs to resort to such false 
statements for support. 

It is truly wonderful-the lengths to which men will go in support of 
this false doctrine-denying that the Lord bought them (2 Pet. 2:1.) 



From what we have above shown of the real meaning of these two 
words hilasmos and hilasterion, we trust that all may clearly see 
that Jesus was our "hilasterion" or propitiatory covering (Rom. 
3:25); that is to say, he is set forth by Jehovah as the expression of 
his propitiousness (his favor) in the forgiveness or covering of sins 
through faith in his blood— faith in his sin-offering. 

And in order to be thus set forth as the one through which Jehovah's 
propitiousness is shown, it was necessary that he should first 
become our "hilasmos," our substitute, the satisfaction for our sins; 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 

In a word, then, "hilasmos" refers to that part of Jesus' work which 
is finished, (the sacrifice of himself,) while "hilasterion" refers to 
that work which results from the sacrifice. He now and ever will be 
the personal center through and from whom, Jehovah's favor will be 
obtainable, because he became the [hilasmos] propitiation or 
satisfaction for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world. 

R641 : page 6 



WE ANSWER FOR THEM. 

It will be remembered that when two months after our questions 
were suggested, no answers were offered by our contemporaries, 
we answered them for them, from what we believed to be their 
standpoint. It was then, however, thought by some that we did not 
fairly represent their views. So now we repeat our answers FOR 
THEM, putting them side by side with our gleanings from the only 
one of the number which even attempted an answer. We hope you 
will carefully compare. We believe in a few words we did fully and 
fairly represent their ideas on this subject. We quote from our issue 
of April, 1883: 

(1) Why did Jesus die? 

Their answer: Because he was an imperfect man, and hence as 
liable to death as any other member of the Adamic race, and death 
passed upon all." (See Rom. 5:12.) 

We object and answer, that no cause of death was in him— "in him 
was life" and not death. In him was no sin, hence on him the 
punishment of sin— death— could have no power. His death was a 
free-will sacrifice as our redemption price. He could have sustained 
life as a perfect and sinless man forever, but he "gave his life a 
ransom for many." 

Paul substantiates our position, saying: "Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures" (1 Cor. 15:3.) 

(2) "How does Jesus' death affect our sins?" 

Their answer: It has no direct effect upon our sins. We die for our 
own sins and thus pay our own penalty. Jesus died for himself and 
thus paid for his imperfection (which they do not care to openly call 



sin.) The indirect effect of his death was, that he furnished us an 
example, or illustration of fortitude and endurance, etc., and thus 
his death was valuable to us only as an example of how we should 
suffer and die for truth and right. 

We object and answer, that while it is true that Jesus' life and death 
were valuable examples, yet they were more— much more than this, 
or else scores of Scriptures are meaningless and false. The prophets, 
who, because of their witness for and loyalty to truth, were sawn 
asunder, stoned to death, etc., and the Apostles, who were crucified 
and beheaded, etc., these all were valiant for truth, and full of faith, 
and are all good examples, and are so recognized in Scripture (Phil. 
3:17). But where is it claimed that by their examples they redeemed 
or ransomed or bought us with their blood? 

The penalty of our sin was death, and we could never have been 
freed from that great prison-house-we could never have had a 
resurrection to life had not some one done more than set us an 
example. The question would still be, "Oh, wretched man that I am, 
who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" And the answer 
points out only the one able to deliver from the condemnation of 
death. "Thanks be to God who giveth us the victory through our 
Lord Jesus Christ." "For to this end Christ both died, rose and 
revived that he might be Lord [Master -or have authority over] the 
living and the dead" (1 Cor. 15:57 and Rom. 14:9). We answer this 
question then: HE BARE OUR SINS in his own body on the tree" 
(1 Pet. 2:24). 

(3) How did Jesus put away sin by the sacrifice of himself? 

Their answer:-By his example and teaching he taught men to put 
away sin for themselves, and thus, in a sense, it might be said that 
he put the sin away. 

We object, that Moses and the prophets had taught men to abstain 
from sin; hence, if Jesus put away sin only by precept and example, 
he did no more than others. And, if it is true, that "In him was no 
sin," how could he be an example of how to put away what he did 
not have? But note, the question is a quotation from Paul (Heb. 
9:26), and it reads that he put away sin, not by precept and example 
of his life, but "by the sacrifice of himself." Read the connections, 
and try to view the matter from the Apostle's inspired standpoint, 
and unless you think, as one of these contemporaries does, that Paul 
often 

R642 : page 6 

made mistakes and misquotations, you should be convinced of his 
meaning when penning these words. 

Remember, too, that when Moses, as a type of Jesus, taught men to 
abstain from sin, he, too, did more— he typically made a sin 
offering-a sacrifice for sin. And the antitype not only taught purity, 
but did more-made himself a sacrifice for sin-the true sacrifice- 
"The Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world." 



(4) In what way did he give "himself a ransom (Greek, antilutron— 
an equivalent or corresponding price) for all"? 

To this question they can give no answer except by denying the 
meaning of the word, which any one may see, by reference to 
Young's concordance. The significance of the original is very 
pointed. Jesus not only gave a price for the ransom of the Adamic 
race, but Paul says he gave an equivalent price. A perfect man had 
sinned and forfeited all right to life; Jesus, another perfect man, 
bought back those forfeited rights by giving his unforfeited human 
existence a ransom-an equivalent price. Read now Paul's argument 
(Rom. 5:18,19): "Therefore, as by the offence of one, judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation; even so, by the righteousness 
of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For 
as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the 
obedience of one shall many be made righteous." 

(5) In what way was he "a propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins? 

This is another question which they cannot answer. They would 
like to declare that he was not a satisfaction in this sense, or not a 
satisfaction in that sense, or not a satisfaction in some other sense; 
but the question, "In what sense was he a "satisfaction for our 
sins?" they cannot answer. 

[See above that the Millenarian did not answer this text, but 
attempted to mislead its readers by substituting another.] 

We answer, that this text is in perfect harmony with all Scripture. 
The Law of life (obedience) was broken by Adam, and both he and 
his posterity were condemned as unfit for life. Jesus became our 
ransom by paying our death penalty, and thus justifying us to life, 
which in due time comes to all, to be again either accepted or 
rejected. Yes, we are glad that the claims of the Law upon our race 
were fully satisfied by our Redeemer. 

(6) In what sense were we "bought with a price?" 

Their answer: Bought is not a good word; it conveys too much of 
the "commercial idea"; they would say, rather, Ye were taken, etc. 

We object; by such false reasonings the Word of God would be 
robbed of all its meaning. Words are useless unless they carry some 
idea. What other meaning is there in the word "bought" than the 
"commercial idea"? It has no other meaning or idea in it. But Paul 
was a lawyer, and his teachings, more than any other Apostle's, are 
hard to twist; and in this instance he guards well his statement, by 
saying, not only that we were "bought," but he says it was with a 
price;" and then, lest some one should claim that the price was the 
ministry and teachings of Jesus, Peter is caused to guard it by 
adding- "With the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without 
blemish and without spot." (1 Cor. 6:20; 1 Pet. 1:19.) 



In conclusion, let us say in a few words, what they do think of the 
value and preciousness of the death of Christ. They believe and 



have privately expressed, and it is the covered import of their public 
teachings, which they do not yet wish to state boldly-not until they 
get false premises and conclusions engrafted first, as a basis on 
which to place it,— that Jesus' death no more paid your ransom price 
than did Paul's or than my death would; nay, put it stronger, that his 
death was of no value in redeeming us. 

As before pointed out, this denial of the ransom we believe to be 
the great rock upon which the nominal Church is even to-day being 
dashed. 

The doctrine of the substitution of Jesus, in settlement of the 
sinner's guilt and punishment, is being scoffed at among the "great 
preachers"; and the doctrine, so plainly taught by the Apostles, that 
the death of Jesus was the price of our release from death, is falling 
into discredit and disrepute among the "worldly great," and hence 
also among some who would like to be of that class. 

The reason of this is evident: it is the story of the two extremes over 
again. Satan had engrafted on the Church the doctrine of eternal 
torment, and, to be consistent, led on to the thought that Jesus bore 
eternal torment for every man. This involved eternity of suffering 
by Jesus. This evidently was untrue; so it was explained, that when 
in Gethsemane and at Calvary, Jesus suffered as much agony in a 
few hours as all humanity would have suffered in an eternity of 
torture. Now, it does not take a very smart man to see that 
something is surely wrong in such a view of Jesus' substitution. 
[Either the penalty of sin is not eternal torture, or else Jesus was not 
man's substitute. One or the other is wrong, for Jesus is not 
suffering eternal torment.] It seems to be Satan's policy now to lead 
to the opposite extreme and deny substitution entirely. 

Instead of casting away Satan's libel on our Heavenly Father's 
government— the doctrine of eternal torment— most men seem to 
hold on to it, and roll it as a sweet morsel under their tongues, and 
discard the teachings of the Apostles relative to Jesus' death being 
our ransom price— the price or substitute for our forfeited lives. 

Would that all might see the beauties and harmonies of God's 
Word. Man condemned to death-extinction; Jesus, man's substitute 
or ransom, died for our sins and thus redeemed or bought us back to 
life, which redemption will be accomplished by a resurrection to 
life. Jesus, as a man, is dead eternally; his humanity stayed in death 
as our ransom, and he arose a new creature-a spiritual 

R642 : page 7 

instead of a human being-put to death in the flesh, but quickened 
(made alive) in spirit. "Though we have known Christ after the 
flesh, yet now henceforth know we him (so) no more." 

Beloved, let us stand firm on the foundation of all hope— the 
ransom— and now, when the enemy comes in like a flood, be not 
afraid to act and speak for truth boldly if you would be recognized 
by him who lifts up a standard for the people. (Isa. 59:19.) 



We ask now the question: Did we answer correctly for them, or are 
they able to answer these questions in as few words differently? Or 
can they object to our answers, and taking each up singly, can they 
show that it is not their view plainly stated, so that all may 
understand? 

But we must remember that one of our contemporaries, "The 
World's Hope," though it has never yet answered these questions as 
it proposed to do "in due time," claimed that in the above we had 
not presented its view fairly. On that account we published an 
article in which we made extracts from its columns, and answered 
them, showing that it either used words in an improper sense, or 
else denied its own teachings. As we are repeating the answers, we 
repeat, in the article below, our criticism of its denial, that our 
answers may be seen to be entirely fair and applicable; and further, 
because the subject increases in importance as we see that in these 
closing hours of the Gospel age, our adversary is using every effort 
to remove the faith of God's children from the rock foundation— the 
only foundation upon which any faith-building can stand, without 
destruction, the storms of this Day of the Lord. 



R642 : page 7 

REPRESENTATION-SUBSTITUTION. 

The "World's Hope" is at hand, and complains that we misstated 
its teachings. It finds it easier to cry "unfair" than to answer a few 
pointed questions regarding the very fundamental principles of 
Christianity, which we presented as a test of its faith or unbelief in 
the death of Jesus as the ransom for our guilt and penalty. Our 
contemporary, if it still belongs to the household of faith, seems to 
have forgotten the exhortation of the Apostle to be able to give a 
reason for the hope that is in it, with meekness. Whether it has 
forgotten this injunction, or had no reasons to give, or was not able 
to give them, we are yet in doubt; for instead of offering even now 
an answer to the questions, which would have set at rest all "mis- 
representation," and what it terms "unfair" statement, it raises a dust 
of mixed and confusing statements, some of which we quote below. 

We are sincerely glad to note, however, that even though it be 
under great pressure, yet it seems to be getting nearer the truth on 
the subject of ransom, bought, etc., and seems reluctantly to admit 
now that Jesus was man's representative IN DEATH, which is just 
what we claim in the fullest sense. It says: "Let the full light of His 
representative relation to the race be seen, and it all becomes plain. 
If He STOOD FOR— or was reckoned to be the world of mankind — 
then the sin, all the sin of the world, must have been on Him." And 
again, "That Christ was thus made the sin-bearer is shown by many 
Scriptures; and, in order to bear the sins of the world, he had to 
become the world— the man." 



We are glad to note this approach toward a full confession of truth, 
and pray that it may go on. At the same time we must criticize a 
little, and say that the expression relative to Jesus becoming the 
world is certainly very ambiguous. We, and doubtless most of its 
readers, will understand this to mean that Jesus was a 
representative, substitute, or ransom for all the world. But if our 
contemporary meant this, why did it not state itself plainly? We 
wonder if it has anything to hide under this ambiguous expression, 
or, if it did not like to use words so nearly the expression of the 
TOWER, which it seems to regard as an enemy, which it is not. 
Like Paul, when such momentous questions are in dispute, we 
must, for the good and safety of each other, and all the flock, use 
great "plainness of speech." Let us remember, that without a 
childlike and humble spirit we are not well pleasing to our Father, 
and that the spirit of truth is to acknowledge an error if we find that 
we had fallen into one. 

Again, it says: "A most clear prophecy of this sin-bearing relation 
of Christ to us, is given in Isa. 53. "Surely he hath borne our griefs 
and carried our sorrows: ...He was wounded for our transgressions, 
He was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace 
was upon him, and by His stripes we are healed. All we (sinners, 
'every man,' Heb. 2:9) like sheep have gone astray: we have turned 
every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on Him the 
iniquity of us all." This Scripture is surely in fullest harmony with 
the thought of Jesus being our ransom, substitute or representative, 
in receiving for us the wages of our sins-death. 

But, stop! we read further: Some "may think because we believe he 
is the World's Sin-bearer, that we are virtually maintaining the 
doctrine of Substitution- the punishing of the innocent instead of 
the guilty." Why, of course, we would —who could think otherwise? 
Does it fear that its readers will draw this legitimate conclusion? It 
seems so, for it continues: "But nothing is further from our thought 
if we understand the meaning of words or have any idea of justice. 
We place Representation AGAINST Substitution." 

We must confess that we are puzzled. Our contemporary has 
evidently some private meaning for words. 

In the above quotations, we hoped we were getting at agreement, 
supposing it used the word representative the way other people use 
it; but now we are entirely lost as to its meaning, for, by its 
Dictionary, representation and substitution are opposites-or against 
each other in meaning. 

If every writer should adopt a special meaning for his words, it 
would be useless to read at all, for the reader would never know 
what the writer meant. It is for this reason that people adopt some 
general standard by which to determine the meaning of words. We 
suggest Webster's Dictionary as a standard, and here give its 
definition of the words our contemporary understands to be 
opposites, or against each other in meaning, that all may see how 



very closely the words are related in meaning, and how far from 
opposites. 

WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY. 

REPRESENTATIVE- An agent, deputy or substitute, who 
supplies the place of another. 

SUBSTITUTE-One who, or that which is substituted, or put in the 
place of another. 

SUBSTITUTION-The act of substituting or putting one person or 
thing in the place of another; as the substitution of an agent, 
attorney or representative. 

Now, we ask, what two words in the English language could more 
nearly mean the same thing? If our contemporary is so astray on 
this point, may it not be equally in error as to what constitutes a 
proper idea of Justice? Who can show that God was unjust in 
permitting Jesus to become man's substitute, ransom or 
representative, or that, in laying upon Jesus-the willing Ransom- 
the iniquity of us all, there was anything cruel, unkind or contrary 
to Justice or Love. 

Again, arguing against Substitution, it says: "If the premises were 
correct, Christ, being the substitute for man, should not have been 
raised at all. " We answer, that it is important to keep in mind the 
distinction between the man Christ Jesus who died, and the new 
creature Christ Jesus who was raised and ever lives. It was the man 
that was substituted for mankind, as Paul tells it: "Through a man 
(Adam) there is death, through a man also (Jesus) there is a 
resurrection of the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21 — Diaglott.) 

Again, our contemporary says: "We admit that Jesus was not raised 
in the same, but in a much higher condition than that in which he 
lived before; but, to say that he was a substitute for man because he 
laid down a condition, and was then raised to a higher, is to make 
the condition and not Christ himself the substitute for man." We 
reply that this is just exactly the Scripture teaching and our claim, 
viz: That the pre-existent one who was in a spiritual— mighty- 
form, took upon him the form or CONDITION of a man— became a 
man- that he, by the grace of God, should taste death for every 
man. (Phil. 2:7,8.) In due time he gave that human condition (with 
all its rights) a RANSOM for all-as the price for all-and thus a 
right to perfect human conditions, was bought for every man. Now, 
did he in the resurrection take back again the human condition- 
human nature? 

We answer, no. He was "put to death in the flesh— quickened in 
Spirit" (1 Pet. 3:18.) "Sown an animal body, raised a spiritual 
body." (1 Cor. 15:44- Diaglott.) Hence our contemporary admits 
our position exactly, if the expression last quoted conveys its real 
meaning. We do not claim, and never have claimed, that Christ 
Jesus the new creature, the spiritual being, was our substitute, but 
the reverse; it was the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom 



for all, and who, because of this work, was highly exalted by the 
Father to his present divine nature and excellent glory. (Phil. 2:8,9— 
Diaglott.) 

Does any one suggest that our last position, being true, proves that 
the leaving of the spiritual condition for the human condition was a 
death or a sacrifice also? We answer that Paul shows that the 
leaving of the previous condition and becoming a man was a part of 
the "humbling" connected with the sacrifice. But remember, that 
life was not given up or lost there, or "laid down" even for a 
moment, but was transferred to the Babe of Bethlehem; hence, that 
was not the sacrifice or death, but only an incidental preparation for 
death as a man. On the contrary, when he died— at Calvary— life was 
given up, lost, laid down completely, for he was dead three days- 
all existence was at an end-He gave "all that he had" (Matt. 13:44). 
After three days he received life as a new creature, as a "gift of 
God," as a reward of obedience; but he took it not again under 
human nature or CONDITION, and never can do so. For if he were 
to take that back, it would be taking back the price, with which he 
bought us. 

From some of the foregoing quotations it will be seen that our 
contemporary is either really, or seemingly, again approaching the 
truth on this very important doctrine, and we would not, in the 
slightest, hinder the work of reformation, but rather bid it God- 
speed, and welcome back again to the sure foundation him who, in 
times past, was a true "yoke-fellow." But, true reformation should 
be accompanied by repentance and a very plain, correct restatement 
of things misstated. 

Lest some should think that we were, as it claims, unfair, and 
misstated its teachings, on the subject of the ransom, in our last 
issue, we will below give some quotations, showing that we were 
not. 

It will be seen by the following quotations from our contemporary's 
January issue, page 59, that, referring to the sacrifice which atones 
for our sins and reconciles to God, it teaches that by the destruction 
of sin by each individual in himself, each thus RECONCILES 
himself to God by the destruction of the enmity [sin, or curse] in 
himself. Each sinner thus reaching a condition of at-one-ment with 
God, instead of, as Paul states it: We were reconciled to God by the 
death of His Son-while we were yet sinners (Rom. 5:10.) We 
quote: 

"The shedding of the blood of the beast represented the killing of 
the life principle of the lower nature-the enmity, the carnal mind, 
the will of the flesh-and was required, because nothing but the 
complete RECONCILIATION, which the destruction of the enmity 
involves, could satisfy law or justice and yet save the man." Again: 
"As the carnal mind cannot be subject to God's law, (Rom. 8:7), 
ITS destruction is a necessity to man's salvation, so this killing 
sacrifice is the RECONCILING ACT." If this does not directly 



deny, it does entirely ignore the reconciling act mentioned in 
Scripture, viz.: "While we were sinners, we were reconciled to God 
by the DEATH OF HIS SON." Again, it says: "What the Law could 
not do,— set man right— the GOSPEL of Christ accomplishes." 

Here is just the point. It claims that man's salvation is a moral 
reformation, hence, whatever leads men to reform, saves. We claim, 
on the contrary, that before reformation could be of any value to 
men, they must be redeemed, ransomed, bought. The Adamic sin 
must be canceled, and the condemnation too, and death must be 
lifted by the sacrifice of man's ransom, substitute, or representative 
—the man Christ Jesus. Then comes the gospel— the good news— that 
man is ransomed, and it is the love of God thus manifested in our 
redemption which leadeth men to repentance and reformation. Yea, 
the gospel is that which Paul preached, saying: "I delivered unto 
you first of all that which I also received [first of all], how that 
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:3.) 

These quotations, we think, can be construed only as we did 
construe them in our article- "WE ANSWER FOR THEM." 
However, we will say this: If our contemporary does attach a proper 
weight to the death of Jesus as our ransom, it is not well expressed 
in the above quotations from its columns; and we further suggest, 
that it can set at rest the entire question by clear and straightforward 
answers to the six questions. Let the truth be known. 

The boldness of this form of INFIDELITY (which we consider 
more dangerous to the saints than that of Ingersol) is strikingly 
shown by the following paragraph, which we clip from an 
exchange: 

MESSRS. PUTNAM'S SONS, of New York, have published "The 
Sacred Scriptures of the World," in which the author omits what he 
calls "objectionable" and "unnecessary" parts of the Bible, retaining 
such as are worthy of use for devotional and practical purposes. His 
alterations are bold enough. Thus, instead of "A man is not justified 
by the works of the law," he puts, "A man is not justified by 
formalistic piety." "Without shedding of blood there is no 
remission," gives place to "Without the life completely consecrated 
there is no remission." The expurgated Bible is said to be "designed 
for common use in pulpits and Sunday schools and homes," but it is 
not likely to be accepted. The author is the Rev. M. K. 
Schermerhorn. 



R644 : page 7 

READING THE BIBLE. 

The late Dr. Maitland, in an ingenious essay on impediments to 
the right understanding of the Scripture, introduces a man of 
business, who, with a sort of self-satisfaction, apologizes for his 
own shortcomings thus: "I am a plain Christian, worried with the 



cares of my business and family, and glad to catch half an hour to 
read my Bible. I must make the most of it. I must employ the little 
leisure I can match at intervals in devotional reading, and my object 
must be my own edification." 

The reply made to him is: "To be sure you must read for your 
edification, but what is the distinction which you seem to draw 
between reading for your edification and reading with a view to 
learn all that God offers to teach?" 

He answers: "Why, I mean that I must read the Scriptures with 
application to myself, to my own circumstances, to my own soul. If 
I come to a part which I do not understand, I have not time and 
learning to investigate its meaning; and when I attempt it I often 
find that the time which should have been employed in devotion 
has been wasted in turning over commentators, from whom, after 
all, I get, perhaps, no satisfaction as to the real meaning of the 
passage, though some of the more pious and practical among them 
may assist me in applying it to myself. Now, if I do not thus derive 
a personal application to myself, what use is there in my reading 
such a portion of Scripture at all?" 

"The rejoinder which follows-and it 

R644 : page 8 

expresses the one great lesson we are anxious to impress-is this: 
"To speak plainly, I do not know that with your ideas there is much 
use in your reading such a part of Scripture, because, as soon as you 
have found that you cannot understand it, or make it apply to 
yourself as it stands, you set to work to make some meaning, which 
you do not yourself believe to be the real meaning, and to fetch out 
some doctrine or precept which the text does not contain; and this 
habit is so prejudicial that I believe it would be better for you only 
to read such parts as you cannot doubt do really apply to your own 
circumstances. It is not likely that you will reap any benefit from 
reading the rest of the Scriptures sufficient to counterbalance the 
injury which must arise from the habit of setting aside all inquiry as 
to the real meaning of the Word of God, and fancying that any 
imaginations of your own are more profitable than the mind of the 
Spirit." 

If this method of treating Scripture, so graphically described, be 
common, and we fear it is, we may cease to wonder that so much of 
God's Word is unintelligible to the general reader. Any book, thus 
handled, must necessarily become so; for, the moment we allow 
ourselves to read with any other aim than to understand the 
meaning of the writer, we darken that which is before us so 
thoroughly that it is all but hopeless to expect it can ever become 
clear. 

In reading Scripture, we are bound, and that most emphatically-no 
less by reverence for its Author than by integrity of heart,— to ask 
but one question: "What does it say?" And if, to get this question 



answered, it is necessary to ascertain, not only what the precise 
words are, but when and to whom they were spoken, to observe the 
connection in which they stand, and to note the circumstances 
under which they were uttered, we must neither grudge the labor 
that may be involved, nor imagine that we can evade its necessity 
by indulging in our own fancies, however ingenious they may be, 
or by prolonging meditation, however devout. When the true 
meaning of a passage is made out, and not till then, shall we be able 
to apply it with simplicity of purpose, or receive and realize as 
living words that which has been written. 

In doing this, a thoughtful and intelligent reader will gladly avail 
himself of such helps as he can obtain. The Bible always takes for 
granted that readers are possessed of common sense— that they will 
give the same kind and amount of attention to inspired statements 
that they are in the habit of bestowing on ordinary writings; and that 
they will read its communications continuously, and as a whole. 

No one who has not tried the experiment can imagine what a flood 
of light falls upon a Pauline Epistle when it is read through at one 
sitting, with quickened attention to its scope and purpose. In no 
other way can we perceive its lights and shadows, its tone and 
perspective, or get above the one-sided interpretations which are 
continually thrust upon us. And that which is true of the Epistles is 
true also in relation to other parts of the Divine Record. 

Instead of treating Scripture in this way-supplicating the Holy 
Spirit for a right state of heart, and in harmony with that 
supplication struggling manfully against the impulses of prejudice 
and pride-too many never read the Bible at all, excepting under the 
limitations of chapter and verse; and thus, for the most part, with an 
utter disregard of the connection subsisting between that which they 
peruse and that which they omit. Prayer for Divine light seems to 
such persons all that is required in order to arrive at truth, however 
idle, or uncandid, or bigoted they may be. 

In relation to private reading of the Word, we say deliberately that, 
if we would be honest before God, if we would shrink from 
sacrificing a true thought, in order to gain thereby the use of mere 
words in favor of some doctrine or practice to which they were 
never intended to apply, we shall feel that nothing can justify the 
use of any portion of God's Word apart from the consideration of 
the context, or in a sense different from that which it bears in the 
portion of the record from which it is taken. 

It is this carelessness about Truth in the application of Scripture that 
has made "the fathers," with all their eloquence and piety, such 
untrustworthy interpreters. It is this which compels us, in perusing 
their writings, to pause and doubt, since passing events, party 
interests or the hope of polemical triumphs were to them a 
continual excuse for the most outrageous violations of the original 
meaning of the inspired volume. 



Hence it is that patristic writers so often support a great cause "in a 
spirit alien to its own," sometimes adopting arguments that are 
unchristian in their ultimate grounds; sometimes resting upon errors 
the refutation of errors; and sometimes drawing upon the armories 
of darkness for weapons that, to be durable, ought to have been of 
celestial temper; now, it may be, trespassing against affections 
which furnish to Christianity its moving powers; and now against 
truths which furnish to Christianity its guiding lights. On behalf of 
God, they often seem determined to be wiser than God; and in 
demonstration of spiritual power, they do not scruple to advance 
doctrines which the Scriptures have nowhere warranted. The issue 
of it all was-THE ROMISH APOSTACY. 

Extravagance in the use of Scripture must eventually lead either to 
ignorant credulity or to universal skepticism. 

HINDRANCES. 

Are occasioned whenever the words of Scripture are so used as to 
cloud their true meaning; when the reader, instead of being 
enlightened, is misled by biblical quotation; and when the mind of 
the Spirit, though professedly expressed, is really neglected or 
perverted. 

Such is unquestionably the case when texts intended for one 
purpose, are applied to another; when warnings of temporal 
character are silently changed into threatenings of eternal woe; 
when promises of earthly good are transformed into predictions of 
spiritual blessing; and when Christ is supposed to be referred to in 
passages which clearly indicate that no such thought was in the 
mind of the inspired writer. 

The habit of quoting passages of Scripture in ways which imply a 
meaning and application exceedingly remote from their genuine 
design, is not a trifling evil. It is pregnant with injuries to the cause 
of Scriptural knowledge and practical edification. It encourages 
among Christians a widely-prevailing practice of reading the 
Scriptures with little attention, and of applying detached passages in 
sentences entirely foreign to their proper meaning. 

R645 : page 8 

Let the object we have in view be steadily kept in mind— the 
promotion of a more intelligent reading of Holy Scripture, by 
pointing out and seeking to remove the various hindrances, and it 
will be seen at once that the "accommodations of which we 
complain, whatever may be the intention of those who make and 
defend them, do really "darken counsel," and so far tend to destroy 
the Divine testimony. Read with the impressions produced by 
careless expositions, the Bible, instead of being felt to be, as it 
really is, the most interesting book ever penned, becomes to the 
reader dull, because made dark; and hard to understand because 
treated as if it were a mere collection of disjointed fragments, to be 
interpreted by the aid of devout fancy. 



EXAGGERATIONS OF SCRIPTURE. 

By the exaggeration of Scripture we understand the use of 
passages in a sense stronger than that they were originally intended 
to bear, whether such "adding to" the Divine Testimony— for it is 
nothing less— arise from mistranslation, from the erroneous 
interpretation of imagery, or from general misconception as to the 
limits under which any given statement is to be received. 

The misfortune is that these exaggerations prevail most on subjects 
in relation to which it is of all others important that the exact line of 
Truth should not be overstepped; that they are often winked at, if 
not encouraged, from an undue anxiety to produce immediate and 
salutary impression; and that commonly all discussion in relation to 
them is deprecated, on the ground that, as men are already far too 
little affected by the evil of sin, and far too careless respecting its 
consequences, anything which seems to lessen the terribleness of 
disobedience, even though it should be by the removal of error, 
must be practically injurious. 

The result, in accordance with that great law of retribution which 
operates as surely in religion as in everything else, is that at the 
present time Infidelity plants its foot on these very exaggerations as 
the first step to confirmed unbelief; insinuates that truth, both in 
books and sermons, is commonly sacrificed to effect; that things are 
not exactly as they are represented; and that the most alarming 
appeals may be divested of much of their power by a careful 
examination of the texts by which they are enforced. So true is it 
that exaggeration, whatever may be its immediate effect, invariably 
weakens the cause it is intended to support. 

Therefore, we warn all honest students of Holy Scripture to "take 
heed how they read" ; to beware of interpretations which, however 
popular, can neither be sustained by the scholar nor justified by the 
devout; to dread especially those forms of unbelief which disguise 
themselves under the robe of earnestness, but which are really 
nothing better than expressions of that want of faith in Scripture as 
it is which is the curse of the Church. 

H. DUNN. 



R645 : page 8 

ENDURANCE. 

"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried 
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to 
them that love him."— James 1:12. 

For some years past we have been led to see by faith, with 
increasing clearness, the great reward promised to the overcoming 
Church of Christ. When first its glory began to dawn upon our 
minds, inspired by it, many of us said, Yes Lord, we will follow 



thee whithersoever thou goest. Soon we found that the way leads 
through opposition, persecution and great self-denial. But, nothing 
daunted, we said, Yes, we know it and are ready for it; esteeming 
the glory to follow as worthy of all it might cost. 

Under the inspiration of a living faith in the glorious promises, it 
was comparatively easy to strike off the fetters that bound us to the 
former customs and ideas, and to take the first steps in the race set 
before us. 

All this was well-a good start. Our hearts were light and buoyant; 
God's Word was full of a new and blessed import; our sky was all 
aglow with glorious promise, and we scarcely heeded the thorns 
that began sharply to prick our feet. But how is it to-day? Some 
have been one, two, five, or ten years in the narrow way. Has a 
reaction followed the glowing enthusiasm of your first love? As yet 
the glory does not appear, except to the eye of faith, but the way 
grows more and more narrow, the feeble flesh grows weary in the 
difficult journey, and temptations all around call us away from the 
course of sacrifice to present gratification. 

To those thus tried and weary with the burden and heat of the day 
comes the encouraging assurance of the Apostle James: "Blessed is 
the man that endureth." Everything now depends upon your power 
of endurance. Can you hold out to the end? It is not so hard to run 
well for a day, a week, a month or a year; but when the years 
lengthen and the end is indefinite, here is the test of endurance, of 
faithfulness; but O! with what joy shall that one meet his Lord who 
has for a long time patiently endured. 

These daily trials that you meet are your testing; you stand every 
moment before the judgment seat of Christ. Every little victory, as 
well as every great one, will be in your favor in the final decision, 
as to whether you are worthy or unworthy of the high position to 
which you are called. And when you are tried, when your trial is 
complete, you shall receive the promised crown of life. 

That we may be strengthened for continued endurance, the Apostle 
directs our attention to the word of truth by which we first received 
this glorious hope, (v. 18,) adding, "Be ye doers of the word, and 
not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For if any man be a 
hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding 
his natural face in a glass; for he beholdeth himself and goeth his 
way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was. But 
whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth [to do 
so], he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man 
shall be blessed in his deed." 

It is only by continual looking into God's word, and the continual 
putting in practice of that which we thus learn and keep fresh in 
mind, that we can hope to endure unto the end. If we keep 
continually looking and doing we will find that the same blessed 
hope will continually inspire fresh zeal in the way. It will strike its 
roots deep down in our hearts and its fruit will daily appear in our 



lives. "Let us run with patience the race that is set before us, 
looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the 
joy that was set before him, endured." (Heb. 12:2.) "Faithful is he 
that calleth you who also will do it." (1 Thes. 5:24.) 



MRS. C. T. R. 



R645 : page 1 

VOL. V. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1884. 
NO. 12. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 44 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 



TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

WE have no more of the Variorum Testaments. 



THE only SAFE way to send money is by P.O. MONEY 
ORDERS, REGISTERED LETTERS, or BANK DRAFTS. Please 
remember this. 



WE have many questions from correspondents which may be 
found answered in back numbers of Z.W.T. "Food" and 
"Tabernacle Teachings," which we do not therefore answer again in 
Z.W.T. Please consult these before sending questions, that the 
questions may be of fresh and general interest to all the readers. 



ADVICE TO LETTER WRITERS:-(1) Write plainly. (2) Give 
date, name and address in full. (3) Make each letter complete in 
itself, as we cannot always recall particulars of former letters. (4) 
Write orders on separate slip from the letter. (5) When desiring 
your address changed, give the old as well as the new address. 

Compliance with the above suggestions will greatly facilitate our 
office work and save much valuable time. Quite frequently parties 
forget to sign their names, and addresses must be guessed at from a 
blurred post mark, which sometimes cannot be done. 

If time would permit, we would gladly give more attention to 
private correspondence with the many whose welcome letters daily 
reach our office. We do all we can in this direction, and wherein we 
may appear to be delinquent, we trust the charity of our 
correspondents will be duly exercised. 



R645 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



Many interesting letters from various parts, both across the waters 
and in our own country, give evidence of the fact that though 
iniquity abounds and the love of many waxes cold, still the Lord 
has a people consecrated and endeavoring to carry out that 
consecration in their daily life. 

It is comforting to those who stand isolated in their own 
neighborhood to realize this. There are many such isolated ones, 
and all have much the same experience— in the world, tribulation; in 
Christ, peace. It is also a source of encouragement to learn that 
while we realize that the harvest is great the laborers are being 
multiplied, and that so far as we can learn, the saints are realizing 
their call to make known the glad tidings, and that though their 
talents be many or few they are not to be folded away in a napkin. 
We have learned that there are as many ways to preach the Gospel 
as there are talents among the saints. 

We rejoice with all these that we have been so enabled to 
comprehend the Gospel as to find that out of the abundance of the 
heart our mouth must speak; that the love of Christ and the 
knowledge of his glorious truth constraineth us. 

But while we thus rejoice together, we can but rejoice with 
trembling as we realize the secret, subtle, and persevering efforts of 
the Prince of this world to overcome the saints. No artifice or effort 
is left untried: Opposition, ridicule, rejection, flattery, false 
reasoning to disprove the truth, cares of this world, bribery with the 
good things of this world, and allurements of various kinds, are all 
used as the necessities of the individual cases may require. 

This being the case, how important that we give heed to the 
Apostle's instruction: "Take unto you the whole armor of God that 
ye may be able to withstand in the evil day." (Eph. 6:13.) Our 
prayers for ourselves and each other should be constant. To him 
that overcometh, is the glory that follows. May grace divine enable 
us to endure hardness as good soldiers. 



R646 : page 1 



EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

England. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-The enclosed has been waiting the 
opportunity of my writing for some days past. I wanted to write a 
long note, but you will at any rate be saved the trouble of reading 
and answering a lengthy epistle, as I have not time to say all or ask 
all I should like, and I should not be surprised if, among so many, I 
had by this time slipped out of your memory altogether. However 
this may be, I have been diligently studying and searching the 
Scriptures. 



I was most unwilling to give up the old belief, but I am not 
anything less than forced to do so. Every day's reading and study 
convinces me that you have the truth on your side. Indeed I am 
astonished at the amount of light shining and showing up the old 
sparkling diamonds among the accumulated rubbish of so many 
centuries. God's word is more sweet and precious now than it ever 
has been. Am doing my work in a quiet sort of way. Am no orator 
or speaker, but I can talk privately with thinking and sincere 
Christians. The real Bible students I can get along with best. The 
nominal Christian cannot argue from the Word; he can only say, 
"Well, I believe this and that," simply because others have done the 
same. Of course it is not worth while giving the time to such, but 
the more thoughtful will hear you again. I am more convinced 
every day that the time is very near when the musty dogmas must 
go down, and the truth as it is in Jesus prevail. 

Very faithfully yours, . 

page 1 

Michigan, June 29, 1884. 

DEAR BROTHER:— You may have wondered why I have not 
written you more often. It is not that I have felt no interest in the 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER and its teachings; on the contrary, I 
have been much enlightened through its instructions. Since my first 
acquaintance with the TOWER I have felt its magnetism of truth so 
powerfully that whenever it comes I can hardly lay it down until I 
have read it through and through. No paper of my life has given me 
such thirsting for Bible truth, and respect for it, as the TOWER. I 
held a connection with the Methodist Episcopal Church for over 
forty years. While there is much in it worthy of respect and 
imitation, yet I much regret the errors into which I have fallen 
through her teachings and doctrines. To-day she, in my estimation, 
sustains very much the same character as the Jewish church at 
Christ's first advent. My observations of her practice and teaching 
(though professing faith in Christ) compares with the Jewish quite 
well. True, she openly declares for Christ, but makes void much 
truth through her traditions. How millions of those who have died 
through Adamic taint are to come to a knowledge of the truth by the 
mode indicated in their teaching is what I can't comprehend. I have 
had many conversations with members of various denominations, 
nearly all expressing much surprise at what I say to them. While 
some are inclined to accept the truth, others shake the head and 
move on in ignorance. While I do not as yet feel that my knowledge 
is complete, still under the TOWER light I am able to see much 
more clearly than heretofore. Many passages with my former 
training meaningless are made plain and harmonious by the 
TOWER light. In a sense, I feel cut off from associations of 
Christians, since I find myself alone in my views, and the TOWER 
becomes my only companion and associate. I regret that I do not 



have some one to talk with personally who is in sympathy with us. I 
am fighting alone and single-handed, and thus far have met none 
sufficiently qualified to overthrow what to me seems clearly the 
truth. I see much in others good, and much that needs correction, 
and as I am subject to good and evil influences myself, and a 
partaker in common with others of their effects, my sympathies go 
to all suffering conditions of humanity. The thought that some 
powerful agency in its correction will be used, strongly impresses 
me. Since the nominal church is faulty and can exercise but a feeble 
power for good, and that she is the Image of the Beast, and the 
Babylon of Scripture, that some other agency must and will be used 
to bring about the needed reform, seems clear. How many in the 
days of Noah, before the flood, recognized the gathering storm? 
How many in the Jewish age recognized that their house was left 
desolate? How many in the Christian age realize a gathering storm? 
How many houses are now on a rock foundation? How many will 
stand the coming tempest? I see the gathering storm, and hear the 
muttering thunder. The forces are organizing for the conflict, and I 
must set my house in order. In Christian fellowship, 

Alabama, June 18, 1884. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL:— Dear Sir:— Some of your papers and a little 
book ("Food for Thinking Christians") have fallen into my hands. I 
find them decidedly interesting and instructive indeed, throwing 
light on hitherto seemingly unfathomable mysteries. I desire to 
further consult them because I have not yet seen enough of your 
views to indiscriminately endorse them, but I must say, how plain! 
how very reasonable your explanation of the Scriptures ! Calvinism 
teaches that God is a tyrant. That everything is transpiring 
according to an eternal and fixed decree. In short, it might be called 
eternal fatality, while Arminianism teaches that God is trying to 
save the world, but can't do so without our help, and can only 
partially succeed with it; that he is neither all-powerful nor allwise. 
Each seems to leave out a link in the golden chain of truth, for a 
God that is not possessed of all these attributes in connection with 
others is not fit to be worshiped. They call your doctrine a "new 
doctrine," yet I'm persuaded that it is not entirely new to non- 
sectarian Bible students. I think I can distribute a dozen or so of 
each of your tracts to advantage. Of course I could distribute many 
more, but they will do the prejudiced no good, for they have a fixed 
opinion, and you know there is no use in "casting pearls before 
swine." 

Yours, etc., DR. . 

Iowa, July 18, 1884. 

DEAR BRO.:— Please find enclosed $1, for which please continue 
to send the TOWER, by which I have been so blessed in knowledge 



of the Lord's doing. It seems to me that at the rate the clouds of 
darkness are drifting from off the pages of that great book, the 
Bible will stand clear of every questioning point. Well, I am doing 
the best I can to spread the true Gospel, and to help others to see the 
light. Must say a word of praise in regard to the article on the flood 
in the June number, showing that God had an object in the flood 
besides furnishing an example to all who would live afterwards, the 
crooks are being made straight. 

Yours resp., . 

London, England. 

DEAR SIR:-About twelve months ago your pamphlet entitled 
Food for Thinking Christians came into my possession. It has been 
rich food to me and to others to whom we explain the truths 
contained therein. There are some who accept the truth and their 
faces lighten with joy at the perfect plan of salvation which is to all 
people; others reject it and me, like a pestilence. This we can bear 
for Jesus' sake. In my estimation the little book is next to my Bible. 
It has shown the grace of God in a clearer light, and with greater 
beauty than we ever saw it before. On the last page of food, there is 
the promise of more to follow, if we ask for it. We claim the 
promise and ask. Will you please send two or three copies of the 
Tabernacle and its teachings, for which we shall wait, with great 
desire, to be fed with more food from our Master's table. Will you 
please send also another copy of Food, because the one that we 
have is getting so much worn, that we have to paste some of it 
together. If we had many copies of it we could 

page 2 

judiciously give them away. We pray that the Lord will bless you 
more abundantly. 

Though strangers in the flesh, we can say we are one in the bonds 
of the Lord Jesus. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 

Yours faithfully, . 

East Troy, Pa. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL :-I herewith send 50 cents, for which 

please send the TOWER to . This brother has been 

reading your publications the past year, and he says he has learned 
more real theology from them than he ever found before. He stands 
firm for the truth whenever opportunity offers. He and I are quietly 
working to scatter light, not without some hope of success. The 
ignorance of the masses of even the nominal church is truly 
surprising. 

Very truly your brother, 



N.Y. 



DEAR MRS. RUSSELL:~Your card is at hand. Thank you for your 
kind wishes, and remembrance of me before God, for I am sorely 
persecuted by my best friends; yet I have a sweet, deep peace 
beyond all comprehension, feeling nothing but pity for the blind 
and deaf. I am told that I am taking slow poison; that on peril of my 
soul I must burn all your papers; but I would burn my daily bread 
sooner. How much that sounds like Catholicism! I have been one of 
those who worked without ceasing in the nominal church, hence 
they are determined to try to bring me to my senses. The deacon has 
refused to take my name from the church; but I have written a 
second time telling him from henceforth I stand with you and your 
company. Since I have taken a stand for the truth, God has revealed 
to me plainer than ever that this is the way in which I should walk. I 
feel at times like a rock, and as though my life were the forfeit. I 
will not dissemble in spite of all opposition. The seed is taking root 
in Kansas, my former home. I expect to return in about one year, 
then I hope by the grace of God to be able to lead some out of 
bondage, and strengthen the weak. I must not let what talents are 
entrusted to me rust out. 

Yours in Christ, MRS. . 



R646 : page 2 

PAUL'S EXHORTATION. 

"I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ... preach the 
word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort 
with all long suffering and doctrine.. ..Be thou sober in all things; 
suffer bad treatment; perform an evangelist's work; fully 
accomplish thy service." (2 Tim. 4:1,2,5, Diaglott and Common 
Tran.) 

We have heretofore seen that the commission to preach the good 
tidings comes to all the anointed company— the body of Christ— and 
that for this very purpose we have received the anointing. That 
which was true of the Head is also true of the whole body— "The 
spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed 
me to preach." (Isa. 61:1.) 

But while we who are consecrated and anointed realize that we are 
thus called of God to preach, it is of very great importance that we 
consider well what, when, how, where, and to whom, we may 
preach. 

It is a great mistake, and yet a very common one, to go out to 
preach before being sent. Such, of course, cannot and do not preach 
the good tidings. Some presume that because Paul said, reprove, 
rebuke, and exhort, that must be the bulk and substance of their 



preaching, forgetting that he also said, "With all long-suffering 
(patience) and doctrine." Reproof or rebuke may sometimes be 
necessary, but it should never be administered merely according to 
our own whims or imaginations, but should in every instance be 
"with doctrine"— with sound and scriptural reasoning— that it may be 
recognized as a reproof from the Lord, though administered through 
the agency of a brother with brotherly patience, and not with an 
arrogance which forgets that we are subject to similar temptations. 

Exhortation may also be necessary, but should never degenerate 
into mere coaxing without sound reason or doctrine. Exhortation 
without sound reasoning and the strong support of the inspired 
Word is weak and is not lasting in its effects. This is the method of 
preaching most common at the present day, but was never indulged 
in by our Lord. Of him it was said, "He shall not cry nor call aloud, 
nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets." Isa. 42:2— Leeser. His 
preaching, and that of his disciples, was reasonable, doctrinal, and 
was delivered with the dignity and meekness becoming to Jehovah's 
ambassadors. 

Let us inquire, then, 

WHAT ARE WE CALLED TO PREACH? 

Paul answers, "Preach the Word," and Isaiah and Jesus call it 
"good tidings." Before we begin to preach, therefore, we should 
first be acquainted with the Word and have a clear, definite 
understanding of its "good tidings." Although as soon as we were 
anointed, we were called to preach, the Lord would not have us 
engage in such service until first we have received sufficient 
instruction. The first duty, then, of every one who would obey the 
call to preach is to become an earnest, faithful, diligent student of 
God's Word, that he may be able to minister grace to the hearer, 
having his speech seasoned with salt." (Eph. 4:29; Col. 4:6.) 

You may be called to preach some time before you are sent out into 
active service. Jesus was "anointed to preach" at the time of his 
baptism, but he was not sent out until after he had endured the 
wilderness temptation. The early disciples were called, but were 
told to tarry until endued with power. For a special purpose in the 
introduction of the gospel, the power came upon the early church 
suddenly and miraculously as soon as they received the anointing, 
but this has not been the case with the church since then. Power in 
presenting the truth comes now to the anointed as the reward of 
diligent study of the Word. 

To many study is distasteful; they have not been accustomed to it, 
and are not willing to give it the necessary time and labor, yet they 
want to obey the call to preach, and so they go forth to add to the 
general confusion of unintelligible preaching, and their work brings 
reproach and dishonor both upon themselves and upon the cause of 
Christ. The bearing of such reproach may be for Christ's sake, but it 
is not to Christ's glory, and the loss is the result of imprudence, and 



of not heeding the injunction, "Study to show thyself approved unto 
God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing 
the word of truth." 2 Tim. 2:15. 



Truth, rightly divided, and fairly presented, commands the respect 
even of its opponents. Its symmetry and beauty will irresistibly 
stamp itself upon the mind. Thus it was in the case of Jesus' 
preaching, when the very men that were commissioned to lay hands 
on him and deliver him to death returned, saying, "Never man 
spake like this man." (John 7:46.) So also Festus said to Paul, "Paul, 
thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad." "No," 
said Paul, with becoming dignity and due deference to the powers 
that be, "I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the 
words of truth and soberness. For the king knoweth of these things 
before whom I speak freely.... King Agrippa, belie vest thou the 
prophets? I know that thou believest. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, 
Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.' And Paul said, I 
would to God that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, 
were both almost and altogether such as I am, except these bonds." 
And the verdict of these unbelievers, in Paul's case, was, "This man 
doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds." (Acts 26:24-31.) 

Paul's eloquence was the eloquence of truth-the result of a 
thorough understanding and conviction of the truth, which carried 
force and commanded the respect of even its enemies. He was a 
diligent student as well as a preacher, and his hearers could not say, 
Paul, you don't know what you are talking about, nor turn with 
disgust from the sound of empty words. 

When Jesus our great example went out to preach-to teach-the 
people listened with astonishment, and said "Whence hath this man 
this wisdom?" (Matt. 13:54.) And thus it is to some extent with all 
who follow in his footsteps. Acts 4:13. 

Some zealous brother or sister may ask, How long must I tarry for 
preparation? and how shall I know when the Lord sends me out? To 
this we reply that when the Lord sends you out you will be sure to 
know it. You will be so filled with the knowledge of the truth, and 
so inspired by it that out of the abundance of your heart your mouth 
must speak. The good tidings will be too good to keep. You will not 
have all the truth God intends for you before you are sent out, but 
you will have a clear, definite outline at least. Just how long a time 
of preparation you will require will depend on circumstances— the 
amount of time you can devote to study, the degree of effort with 
which you undertake it, the faith and simplicity in which you 
receive it, etc. Some may be ready for active service sooner than 
others, but all require a considerable time for previous preparation. 

But even when permitted to engage in active service, we should 
bear in mind the fact that we are to be constant students. To preach 
the Word, the good tidings, is our commission, and which of us can 
yet say, we have sounded all its depths, and measured all its 
heights, and have therefore nothing more to learn? To have a 



general outline of God's plan mapped out in our minds is very good, 
but we should have its various features so clearly fixed as to be able 
to show it to another; therefore review is very necessary. 

When thus prepared and sent out to preach (and be assured you are 
not yet sent if you are not prepared,) Paul says, "Be instant in 
season" and "out of season. " Does he mean to have us pay no 
attention to fitting and appropriate times? No, for that would be 
contrary to the Lord's teaching— "Be ye wise as serpents 

R647 : page 2 

and harmless as doves"— as well as to his own example. He must 
mean, then, to have no regard to our own convenience or 
inconvenience, but to be always ready to preach when we find 
fitting opportunity. 

Injudicious breaking in upon the plans of others to teach them what 
we deem to be of importance, but which they do not yet so 
recognize, is almost sure to defeat our purpose and to engender 
prejudice and opposition which is not soon nor easily overcome. 

Paul further enjoins that we be sober in all things; that is, that we 
handle the truth with becoming reverence and humility, living as 
examples of its influence, not carried away with excitement or self- 
exaltation, and that we patiently suffer bad treatment, which we 
should expect from those who love darkness rather than light, 
although measurably they secretly recognize the light we bring. 

In view of the preparation necessary, none need be discouraged or 
despair of ever being sent out to preach. You may never be sent to 
speak to a public audience. God uses us according to the human 
talent we possess. Paul, Peter and others could preach publicly, but 
Aquila and Priscilla unable to preach in a public way to the many, 
could invite an Apollos to their home and explain to him the way of 
God more perfectly. And the devoted and eloquent Apollos, thus 
more perfectly prepared, went out to declare it publicly. (Acts 
18:2,26.) Had Aquila and Priscilla not been students of the truth, 
what an opportunity they would have lost. 

May the Lord's blessing rest upon all the preachers of the good 
tidings, whether in a wide or in a seeming narrow sphere; but let us 
not forget the fitting counsel, "Study to show thyself a workman 
approved unto God rightly dividing the word of truth." And be 
assured that when prepared, you will surely be sent to preach it to at 
least some one. 



R647 : page 2 

CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP. 

"If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship 
one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanseth 
us from all sin."— 1 John 1:7. 



True fellowship implies love, sympathy, a mutual sharing of good 
or ill, common principles, common interests, and a common aim. It 
may exist between parties on equal footing, or between those whose 
conditions are widely different. Where the latter is the case, 
benevolence on the part of the superior is shown in acts of favor 
and blessing, and on the part of the inferior, in gratitude and such 
returns in action as are possible. 

Than such fellowship there is nothing more desirable and more 
helpful to the saints in the narrow and difficult way they are called 
to tread. But while we should ever seek and cultivate such 
fellowship, we need to be very careful to see that our fellowship 
one with another, is based upon correct principles, else that which 
was designed as a blessing, will be found to our great disadvantage. 

Realizing this, the Apostle Paul admonishes us, saying: "Be ye not 
unequally yoked together with unbelievers, for what fellowship 
hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion 
hath light with darkness... or what part hath he that believeth with 
an infidel?" (2 Cor. 6:14,15.) "How can two walk together except 
they be agreed?" It is impossible. Let us see to it, then, that our 
fellowship is based upon the sure foundation referred to in this text- 
-the blood of Jesus Christ that cleanseth us from all sin-and that 
our rejoicing and communion be of the increasing light as we walk 
together. 

And this great blessing, the Apostle John tells us, it is our privilege 
to have. He says we may have fellowship with our Father, and with 
his Son, and also with other saints who are walking in the light-the 
truth. 

"This then," says John, "is the message which we have heard of 
him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no 
darkness at all." The truth is all clear and plain in God's sight, and 
he, by his Spirit, through his Word, will lead all of his children into 
light (truth) in its due season, if they are in actual fellowship with 
him. John states this very emphatically, saying, "If we say that we 
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not 
the truth." (Ver. 6.) 

Ah, John, says some brother, I think you are too severe; I know 
many very good Christians who say they are entirely consecrated to 
God, and only want to know and do his will, and truly they do 
many wonderful works, and yet they walk in darkness, knowing 
nothing of the blessed truths now made so plain to us. And not only 
so, but they refuse to hear it and do not want it. Yet they claim to 
have fellowship with God; how is it? John's answer is very plain 
and may seem to many, severe, yet we apprehend it is the severity 
of truth. He says, "They lie, and do not the truth." They don't want 
to know it, because they don't want to do it. 

God speaks to his children through his Word, and he is acquainted 
with all our circumstances and hears our prayers, but it is a great 
mistake to imagine that we have communion and fellowship with 



God, when we only speak to him in prayer, and never examine the 
Word to hear him speak to us. We may speak and then listen, but 
we need to hear much more than we say. Thus we have 
communion, interchange of thought, fellowship. None can thus 
commune with God without becoming acquainted in some measure 
with his truth, and if they are in harmony and fellowship with him, 
his plans and purposes will become theirs. If they do not desire to 
obey the truth, they will deceive themselves in an endeavor to 
disbelieve it, and to substitute something else in its place. And 
while doing this many hold to the form of sound words while 
denying their import. 

But if as children of the light we walk in the light, not only shall we 
have fellowship with our Father and our Lord, but we shall also 
have fellowship with other saints who are walking in the same 
narrow way. 

R. W. 



R656 : page 2 

"IF you are seeking the comforts of religion rather than the glory 
of our Lord, you are on the wrong track. The Comforter meets us 
unsought in the path of duty." 



R647 : page 3 

THE SECRET OF HIS PRESENCE. 

In the secret of His presence 
How my soul delights to hide: 
Oh, how precious are the lessons 
Which I learn at Jesus' side. 

Earthly cares can never vex me, 
Neither trials lay me low, 
If when Satan comes to tempt me, 
To the secret place I go. 

When my soul is faint and thirsty, 
'Neath the shadow of His wing 
There is cool and pleasant shelter, 
And a fresh and crystal spring, 

And my Saviour rests beside me, 
As we hold communion sweet; 
If I tried, I could not utter 
What he says, when thus we meet. 

Only this, I know, I tell Him 

All my doubts, and griefs, and fears; 



Oh, how patiently He listens, 
And my drooping heart he cheers. 

Do you think he ne'er reproves me? 
What a false friend He would be, 
If he never, never told me 
Of the sins which he must see. 

Do you think that I could love Him 

Half so well, or as I ought, 

If He did not plainly tell me 

Of each sinful word and thought? 

No! for He is very faithful, 
And that makes me trust Him more, 
For I know that He does love me, 
Though sometimes he wounds me sore. 

Would you like to know the sweetness, 
Of that secret of the Lord? 
Go and hide beneath His shadow, 
This shall then be your reward. 

And whene'er you leave the silence 
Of that happy meeting-place, 
You must mind and bear the image 
Of your Master in your face.— Selected. 



R648 : page 3 

IS THE SECOND DEATH A BLESSING! 

"The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

"He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death."— Rev. 
2:11. 

Many are the ingenious devices of our great adversary for 
overthrowing the faith of the saints in the foundation principles of 
the Gospel of Christ. Among them is the widely accepted notion 
that death is really part of an evolution by which mankind must 
reach perfection. The thought is clearly expressed in the following 
lines of a popular hymn: 

"Death is the angel God hath sent 
To bear us to the sky." 

Out of this theory, as a starting point, many grievous errors have 
grown. The fact that death is the penalty of sin is ignored, and the 
necessity of a ransom is denied by many; and even the second 
death, notwithstanding the plain Scriptural teachings and warnings 
with reference to it, is represented as a blessing. 

In harmony with this error is the idea now prominently advanced, 
that the first, or Adamic death, is merely a death to righteousness, 



and that the second death is a death to sin. Thus it is said, Adam 
and all mankind died to righteousness and became alive to sin; and 
that a man's conversion is the second death- a death to sin and a 
becoming alive to righteousness. 

On this unscriptural hypothesis a theory is built which, to the 
undiscerning, has an appearance of plausibility; and it is a sad fact 
that only the few search the Scriptures, and still fewer "try the 
spirits" (doctrines) by comparing scripture with scripture, and 
therefore, error has always found it expedient to quote the 
Scriptures in its support. 

In our Lord's temptation in the wilderness the same deception was 
attempted: Satan quoted, saying, "It is written..."; but Jesus 
answered, "It is also written...." So should the disciple be as his 
Lord, and endeavor to rightly divide the word of God— to apply it as 
the Spirit designed, and not as every wind of doctrine might twist it 
out of harmony with its context. 

Before proceeding to examine any theory the careful student will 
first inquire, How strong is the foundation on which it rests? for if 
the foundation of the theory be wrong, all that can be built upon it 
must be wrong. This is a short, sure, and safe test; the theory must 
stand or fall with its foundation. 

In carefully examining the foundation of this view, it will be found 
first, that it has no Scriptural basis; and secondly that it is directly 
opposed to the clearly expressed statements of the Scriptures on the 
subject. The Scripture quoted above shows that death is always the 
wages of sin; but this theory would make it sometimes the reward 
of righteousness, when it claims that to become righteous is to die 
to sin. This alone is clear proof that the theory is based upon an 
interpretation of death out of harmony with the Scriptures, and 
hence unworthy of further consideration. 

The passage relied on to prove the position, is Rom. 6:10— "In that 
he [Jesus] died, he died unto sin. " And as he was our example, 
therefore it is argued, that all mankind must likewise die unto sin 
and become alive unto God, or become righteous. But let us see if 
the harmony of the Scriptures will warrant such an interpretation of 
this passage. First we ask, Can that which is not alive be said to 
die? Certainly not. Then unless Jesus was alive to sin, that is, a 
person living in sin, he could not in that sense die unto sin. And just 
here we call to mind the question of Jesus himself, "Which of you 
convinceth me of sin?" 

If those Scriptures are true which say that Jesus was holy, harmless, 
undefiled and separate from sinners, and knew no sin, does it not 
prove that the theory which makes this passage teach that Jesus 
died unto, or ceased from sin, is a false application of the passage, 
since he could not cease from that which he never began, never 
knew, but was always separate from? 



That this is a misapplication of this Scripture is made positive by a 
glance at the preceding verse, which refers clearly and pointedly to 
the actual death of Jesus, and his actual resurrection- "Christ being 
raised from the dead, dieth no more; death hath no more dominion 
over him." 

But let us see how this text may be interpreted in harmony with the 
context. In this verse the word unto expresses the idea much less 
clearly than the word "by," as given in the Diaglott translation. The 
thought is that Jesus died by or on account of sin once. His death 
was "the wages of sin" as all death is, but not by reason of, nor on 
account of, nor as the wages of sin which he committed; but as 
elsewhere stated, "Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures" and "Jehovah hath laid upon him the iniquity of us all." 
(Isa. 53:6, and 1 Cor. 15:3.) 

The Apostles' reasoning in verse 1 1 , can only be grasped by one 
who has clearly in mind his reasoning preceding, as presented in the 
fore part of the Epistle. Chapter 1 begins the subject away back 
before the Deluge, when men knew God but glorified him not, but 
yielded to their own vain imaginings and their foolish heart became 
darkened, (ver. 21.) Chap. 2:1 shows that all men have come into 
some measure of the same darkness, and that the Jews as well as the 
Gentiles, are all worthy of condemnation, and are all condemned, 
because "There is none righteous, no not one." (Rom. 3:9,10,19,20.) 

Having thus proved that "all the world" has "become guilty before 
God," Paul introduces the work of Christ as the remedy for all this 
guilt; for though "all have sinned and come short of the glory of 
God," he has JUSTIFIED them freely by his favor, through the 
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth to be a 
propitiation through faith in his blood [the life he gave to redeem 
ours], to manifest God's righteousness in condemning to death, and 
to accomplish a remission of sins. vs. 24,26. 

In chapter 4., the Apostle continues to further emphasize the 
justification from sin and death, to life and a condition of 
righteousness, accomplished as he has shown by Jesus' death, 
saying, "Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose 
sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not 
impute sin" (vs. 7,8), and repeats his testimony that the forgiveness 
and covering of our sins was through him "who was delivered FOR 
OUR OFFENCES and raised again for our justification, (v. 25.) 
Chapter 5. carries the topic further and shows the result of 
justification, that it brings the condemned sinners back to a standing 
where they can have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ 
(v. 1). And yet more, not only are we justified, but through Christ 
and through the justification which he accomplished for us, we 
have access into a still further favor of God- access into this favor 
wherein we stand and rejoice, in hope of the glory of God. (vs. 1,2.) 
Not only then was our human nature justified, and a right to the 
glory of manhood restored, but a door was thereby opened to us by 



which we may have a hope of reaching the glory of God-the 
Divine nature. 

And not only have we obtained a hope of future glory, which 
causes rejoicing, but as we realize that that "glory of God" is 
promised as a reward for the sacrifice of the justified human nature, 
it enables us to rejoice in the tribulations by which alone that 
heavenly glory can be obtained, (v. 3.) 

After showing that the sacrifice of Christ was a full settlement of all 
condemnation and imperfection resulting directly and indirectly 
from Adam's transgression (vs. 15-21), he inquires (chap. 6:1) 
What shall we say then? If the sin of Adam has brought forth so 
much favor from God, shall we continue to sin in hope that still 
further favor would be manifested on our behalf? —and answers: 
God forbid. How shall we who have died by sin live any longer 
therein? 

The we here mentioned is the same class mentioned in Chap. 5:2,3, 
and 1:7 a class of saints who not only have been justified by faith in 
Jesus, the Redeemer, but have obtained by consecration, sacrifice, 
access into "THIS GRACE"-the begetting and promises of the 
divine nature-"the glory of God." This class had died, that is, had 
consecrated to death, and now reckoned themselves dead indeed. 
This was as a payment for sin, as death always is the wages of sin. 
But in this case it was not a payment of the wages of their own sin. 
No; they had been justified from their own sin by the death of 
Jesus, and had afterward consecrated to death, and that death was to 
apply for the sin of others just as Jesus had died, not for sin of his 
own, for he had none, but "for our sins." So these saints consecrated 
to die, not for their own sins, for they had none, since justified from 
all sin by Jesus death. 

But, says some one, does not the death of Jesus alone constitute the 
redemption price for the sins of the whole world? 

We answer, the merit of Jesus is the only merit which cancels the 
sin of the whole world; but whether that merit is applied directly to 
the world, or indirectly through "the Church, which is his body," is 
the question. This is the favor which is specially offered to the 
Gospel Church, viz.: to share with Jesus in making the sacrifice for 
sins, being first ourselves justified through HIS SACRIFICE. This 
is the Apostle's teaching when he speaks of filling up that which is 
BEHIND of the afflictions of Christ, (Col. 1:24,) and it was the 
teaching of Jesus when he said to the disciples: "Ye shall drink 
indeed of my cup [suffering] and be baptised with the baptism that I 

R649 : page 3 

am baptised with" [death] (Matt. 20:23.) And that the Apostle is 
carrying out this same line of thought in the epistle we are now 
considering, is evident. How [with what consistency] can we that 
have died [consecrated to death] by sin [on account of or as sin 
sacrifices], how could we consistently live any longer in sin, or 



have any fellowship with that which we are dying to destroy or 
remove. "Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized INTO 
Jesus Christ [into membership in that body of which He is the head] 
were baptized [plunged, swallowed up, buried] into HIS DEATH?" 
His death was not Adamic death, but a ransom or substitution for it, 
and we share in his death, and hence share in the results of his 
death-the putting away of the sins of the whole world. 

"We have therefore been entombed with him by the immersion into 
that DEATH [in order], that as Christ was raised from the dead by 
the glory of the Father, so also we should walk in a new life." Our 
condition is a reckoned one, and if we reckon ourselves justified by 
Christ and then dead with Christ, we should go yet further and 
reckon ourselves as though we had been resurrected and were now 
actually spiritual beings, as Jesus now is, and we should act 
accordingly, abstaining from sin and rejoicing in communion and 
glory, as though we had been made already perfect as spiritual 
beings. "For [this is the reason why we should so reckon] if we 
have been planted together in the likeness of his death [or, in the 
like kind of death— sacrificial], certainly we shall be also in that of 
his resurrection" [we shall share a like resurrection; that is, a 
resurrection to spiritual perfection]. "Knowing this [remembering in 
this connection], that our OLD man [our departed, sin-inclined 
selves, when under condemnation] was crucified with [more 
properly "in"] him [that is, was represented in Jesus when he was 
crucified], so that the body of sin might be destroyed [Jesus in his 
own person represented sin as a whole, and as such he was "made a 
curse for sin"], that we may no longer be enslaved to sin; for he 
who died [and only he who died thus representatively in Jesus 
death, that is, who accepts of the divine statement that Christ died 
for his sins, only such an one] has been justified from sin" (vs. 6,7). 

"And if [after being thus as sinners represented in Jesus' sacrifice, 
and justified thereby] we [as justified persons] died with him, we 
believe that we shall also live with him; knowing that Christ being 
raised from the dead, dies no more; death no longer lords it over 
him. For the death which he died, he died by sin [our sin imputed to 
him], but the life which he lives he lives by [the favor and reward 
of] God. Thus do you account yourselves dead indeed unto sin [as 
sharers with Jesus of the penalty of the world's sin], but [as] living 
by [the favor or reward of] God in the anointed Jesus." (vs. 8-11- 
Diaglott.) 

In view of these facts, "Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal 
body, that ye should obey its desires; neither present your members 
to sin as instruments of iniquity; but [according to your 
consecration, and in the carrying out of that death which you 
already reckon accomplished] present yourselves to God as if alive 
from the dead [just as though you were risen actually, and 
possessed your promised immortal, spiritual body complete], and 
present your members to God as instruments of righteousness" that 
you may be used of him as his agents and mouthpieces. 



R649 : page 3 



NOT HURT OF THE SECOND DEATH. 

From the foregoing it will be seen that the death of the saints as a 
sacrifice with Christ, as members of his body sharing his death, is 
their second death. It was reckoned that our death as sinners in 
Adam was accomplished in the crucifixion of Jesus, and our 
resurrection as justified men, as accomplished in Jesus' 
resurrection, as shown above. One death was therefore in the past, 
hence when we, as justified persons, presented ourselves as living 
sacrifices, to be baptized with Jesus' baptism of death and to fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, we then and there 
were covenanting a second death, and day by day, if obedient to our 
covenant, we are dying, and soon the second death shall have 
swallowed up this justified human nature. 

But will it be a great loss? It would be a sad and irreparable loss of 
our existence forever, were it not that the Father, who highly 
exalted Jesus, our Head, to the divine nature, has covenanted 
similarly to exalt all the members of his body— "So many of us as 
were baptised into Christ," "baptised into his death." 

These, who during this age follow in the footsteps of the 
Forerunner, are the overcomers of the world mentioned in our 
Lord's promise— "He that conquers, in no wise shall be injured IN 
CONSEQUENCE of the second death." (Rev. 2:11 -Rotherham's 
translation.) 

Shall we conclude then that the second death would injure no one? 
Nay; death is everywhere presented as the destruction of whatever 
it is applied to. It is the wages of sin always; the first or Adamic 
death which passed upon all men was the penalty of one man's 
disobedience entailed upon all whom he represented in trial, and it 
is because Adamic death is to be removed through Christ, that any 
could die again. But 

R649 : page 4 

the second death shall not be a continuance of the first, a dying on 
account of Adam's sin, but it will be the result of an individual and 
deliberate act of each one who suffers it. It shall no more be a 
proverb, "The fathers ate a sour grape [sin] and the children's teeth 
are set on edge"; but then, every man that dieth the second death 
will die only for his own wilful sin, against full light and power to 
do otherwise. "The soul that sinneth, IT shall die." (Ezek. 18:2-4; 
Jer. 31:29,30.) And not a single reference of Scripture, in which the 
second death is mentioned, ever refers it to any but a class of wilful 
sinners, who, in spite of knowledge and ability, love sin and hate 
righteousness, except this one, which hastens to assure us that 
though this class will suffer death aside from the Adamic, and, 
therefore, the second, they will not be injured in consequence. The 



unavoidable inference is, that all others than this class— the 
overcomers of the Gospel church— will be greatly injured by the 
second death. 

Since each one who dies the second death will have had a full 
individual trial, it follows, that to recover them from death would 
require the death of a Redeemer for each. And not only are we told 
that Jesus dies only once for sin, and will die "no more," but we can 
see that a ransom from the second death would be useless, since 
there could be no more favorable opportunity presented than that 
which they shall have experienced under the Millennial reign, 
before being condemned to the second death. 

As the first death, or wages of Adam's sin, was not torture, but a 
destruction of being, (Psa. 90:3,) so also the second death, the 
wages of wilful, individual sin, is a destruction or blotting out of 
being forever, but is not torture. As Adamic death would have been 
everlasting in duration without a ransom and resurrection, so the 
second death will be everlasting because of no ransom and no 
resurrection from it. "The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God 
is ETERNAL LIFE through Jesus Christ our Lord. " 



R649 : page 4 

SPECIAL LIGHT FROM HEAVEN. 

The notion of a special light [beyond or different from that 
contained in the Scripture, is evidently the brother's meaning. —Ed.] 
being vouchsafed to the prayerful reader of Scripture, is as 
destructive of the divine record itself, as it is of man's responsibility 
in rejecting it; for if God, by his Spirit, communicates directly with 
the minds of men now, as an Interpreter,* such communications 
will assuredly control any words given to mortals eighteen hundred 
years ago. 

So men who hold to this sort of divine aid, are already beginning to 
reason: "Are we," it is now said— not by skeptics only, but by 
evangelical teachers,— "to bring down the word inspiration to a use 
merely narrow and technical, asserting it only of prophecy and 
other Scripture writings, and carefully excluding from it all 
participation by ourselves, in whatever sense it might be taken?' 
Are we to 'become a class unprivileged, differing from the anointed 
men of Scripture and Scripture times— shut down to a kind of 
second-hand life, feeding on their words?' Is it to be believed that 
they were inspired, while we in no sense can be? If so, there is no 
relief for us, but in a recoil against inspiration itself, even that of the 
Holy Scriptures; for who will credit that men were inspired long 
ages ago, when now any such thing is incredible?" [Rev. Horace 
Bushnell, D.D.] 



[*The manner in which the Holy Spirit acts as a guide into truth, 
we believe to be, first, by purifying the moral nature— removing 
such obstacles as pride, prejudice, etc., and secondly, by directing 
the careful student through a comparison of Scripture, into such 
channels as to show its wonderful harmony with every other part of 
the Divine Revelation, and with a reasonable idea of the character 
of an all-wise God. What the author here combats is the prevalent 
claim of numerous careless readers of the Scriptures, that their 
fanciful imaginings— which cannot be proved in harmony with the 
divine record, are given by the Spirit of God.-Ed.] 

R650 : page 4 

The recoil thus spoken of as inevitable, finds its expression in 
those later forms of criticism which are now issuing from the great 
seats of learning, according to which the inspiration of the first 
century, is to bow before that of the nineteenth; the miraculous is to 
be expurgated; and if, as a necessary consequence, the Bible loses 
its authority, the result may be regretted, but it must be considered 
as inseparable from progress. 

The root of these terrible errors, is the notion that the Holy Spirit 
enlightens the mind by other means than by the purification of the 
nature. This is evident from the ground taken by Dr. Rowland 
Williams, who boldly asserts, not only that inspiration is a 
permanent power in the Church, but that the Bible always supposed 
in its readers, "an illumination kindred to its own." In explaining 
what he means, he quotes as an authority, St. Basil, who speaks of 
the Holy Spirit as an intellectual light, affording illumination to 
every rational faculty in the investigation of truth; the light which 
clears mental perplexities, and the secret energy through which 
every organ discharges its functions aright. 

In the faith of this doctrine it is asserted the creeds were developed, 
doctrine was drawn from doctrine, liturgies were collected, and 
gentile customs were adopted. 

But what follows? Why, of course this: that as the Comforter at 
present acts within the bounds of our capacities, leaving us liable to 
error and the shortcomings of our generation, so [the deduction 
would be] it is in harmony with the Divine dealings to suppose that 
while Apostles and Prophets enjoyed a larger measure of 
illumination, they, too, were left liable to shortcomings in 
knowledge or humanity in reasoning. The argument culminates in 
the question, What then is the authority of the Scriptures apart from 
what good men approve, and from what fair historians think 
credible? The answer implied is, Nothing at all. 

Such are the consequences involved in a doctrine which is to this 
day cherished with the utmost tenderness by all evangelical 
churches. 

But this is not the doctrine of Scripture. The "illumination" there 
supposed is a spiritual, not an intellectual gift. It is light proceeding 



from love. It is moral sympathy leading to the recognition of the 
Divine Word. It is, in short, reason, enlightened and sanctified by 
the Holy Spirit, and thus made capable of appreciating divine truth 
when it is presented to the mind. 

We lay it down then as 
A FIXED PRINCIPLE, 

That he who would understand the Bible must believe, first, that 
God in giving it, has not withheld anything necessary for its 
comprehension, so far, at least, as present duty is concerned; 
secondly, that to seek to CONTROL the inspiration of Prophets and 
Apostles by any fancied inspiration of our own, is a miserable 
delusion; and thirdly, that as a consequence, whether we approve or 
not, we must either feed on the words of men who wrote as they 
were moved by the Holy Spirit eighteen hundred years ago, or 
wither in our pride. And this, not because the Apostles and other 
Scripture writers are set between us and God, to fence us away, but 
because the action of the Spirit of God on man, when not exercised 
miraculously, as at the planting of the Christian Church, and as in 
the case of the Apostles and other Scripture writers, is on the moral 
nature only, and never directly on the intellect; that the Holy Spirit 
enlightens, not by a process of addition, but by one of subtraction; 
by removing moral obstacles to the free and healthy action of the 
natural faculties. 

The contrary view, however spiritual or consoling it may seem, 
destroys all tangible distinctions between inspired and uninspired 
communications; favors mysticism; lowers the authority of the 
written Word: and justifies, so far as anything can do, the most 
fanatical interpretation of Scripture. For it is evident that if a man's 
understanding of Holy Writ depends on anything else than the right 
use of the faculties God has given him (which of course implies 
their non-perversion by dislike or prejudice) it must be interpreted 
by a light, which, try to explain it as we may, can never be more or 
less than a personal inspiration, in which case, such personal 
teachings must be supreme. 

It is both curious and instructive to observe how error changes its 
form without changing its nature. It would really seem as if 
Protestants, like Romanists, believed that A DIVINE 
REVELATION without an INFALLIBLE INTERPRETER was no 
revelation at all. Dr. Whately has well shown that this craving for 
infallibility, than which there is no more powerful principle in 
human nature, not only predisposes men towards the pretensions of 
a supposed unerring Church, or of those who claim or who promise 
immediate inspiration, but becomes the parent of no small amount 
of infidelity. 

It is an error that falls in at once with men's wishes, and with their 
conjectures; it presents itself to them in the guise of a virtuous 



humility; and they readily and firmly believe it, not only without 
evidence but against all evidence. 

Vain, however, is it to hope that by any such means, we can evade 
our responsibility What we really want is that blessed indwelling 
of the Holy Spirit —the only influence we are authorized to seek and 
to pray for— which is not intellectual, but moral; which is 
inseparable from candor, love of truth, and obedience generally; 
which manifests itself in growing sympathy with the divine 
character; and which therefore involves clearer perceptions of, and 
a deeper insight into, the divine mind and will as exhibited in the 
Bible, than can be obtained in any other way: Fo saith the Lord 
himself, fl thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of 
light." 

H. DUNN. 



R650 : page 4 

HO, EVERY ONE THAT THIRSTETH! 

"Ho, every one tha thirsteth, cam ye to the waters."— Isa. 55:1. 

In all of God's dealings with his creatures, one principle is marked 
and prominent, and that is the dignity with which he maintains his 
own prerogatives while granting freedom to his creatures, in the 
exercise of their God-given powers. Thus having made man in his 
own likeness— with reason, will, judgment, etc.— he does not 
afterward deface or ignore that image, but, on the contrary, he 
honors it. 

God never demands of man a course of action out of harmony with 
his reason, at the sacrifice of his judgment, and in opposition to his 
will; but in every case he satisfies reason, appeals to the judgment, 
and leaves the decision subject to a free will, enlightened by an 
understanding of the inevitable final results in either case. He sets 
before us inducements or rewards to righteousness, and 
punishments for unrighteousness, but does not compel either 
course. With dignity and patknce h awaits a sufficient time for our 
enlightened decision, and then carries out his own purpose with 
reference to us, in the event of that decision. 

In accordance with this principle, is the above invitation through 
the Prophet Isaiah— "Ho, every one tha thirsteth, cmn ye to the 
waters" (truth). Water is unwelcome except to the thirsty, and food 
produces loathing if forced upon one who is not hungry; so truth is 
obnoxious to those who prefer error. Therefore, God only gives his 
good things where they are desired, and never compels the 
acceptance of his favors. But blessed is the man tha hungereth and 
thirsteth, for his soul shall be satisfied through the Divine bounty. 

"Ah!" say some anxious Christians, "but there are so many who 
have no thirst whatever for the truth, and if we don't compel them 



to hear and accept it we fear they will never get it;" and so they 
attempt to force the truth upon them at unseasonable times and in 
obtrusive ways, and sometimes the anxiety to enforce one truth, or 
supposed truth, leads to a sacrifice and darkening of other truth. But 
the result is always the same— more harm than good. A loathing of 
truth is generally the result. 

It will relieve such of much anxiety to call to mind what they have 
recently learned-that God's plan is so broad and generous that its 
gracious provisions cover all the interests of every creature. None 
are so small, or so degraded, or so mean, as to be left out. If at 
present they are so filled with the husks of human traditions, and 
the muddy waters of human philosophy, there is little use in trying 
to fill them with anything better. By and by (in the time of trouble) 
God will furnish them such an emetic that thereafter they will be 
prepared to receive the truth in its purity and in the love of it. It 
matters not, as we now clearly see, even if death should intervene, 
for all shall be brought to a knowledge of the truth under the 
favorable circumstances of the millennial reign of Christ, and have 
full opportunity to secure everlasting life. 

While we may thus rest in faith upon the sure promises of God with 
reference to these, it is our privilege to herald the blessed invitation- 
-"Ho, every one THAT THIRSTETH, come ye to the waters." And 
if they will not come, let them stay away until they are ready to 
come. In time they will be thirsty enough. A similar invitation is 
repeated in Rev. 22:17, as applying during the millennial age, after 
the espoused virgin church 

R651 : page 4 

has become the Bride of Christ- "Whosoever will [do not compel, 
but] LET HIM take the water of life freely." 

God does not now compel any to accept his great favor to be made 
the bride of Christ, neither in the age to come will he compel any to 
accept the favor of everlasting life. But, if when it is offered, they 
will have it, O, how freely they may have it-"He that hath no 
money; come ye, buy and eat... without money and without price." 

With a full conviction of the love and bountiful provision of God's 
plan for all mankind, Jesus could, during his ministry, ignore the 
Gentiles, and devote all his energies to Israel, and particularly to 
those among them who were anxious to know the truth; and he 
could tell his disciples to begin at Jerusalem and not to enter into 
any city of the Samaritans until first the Gospel had been 
proclaimed to Israel. So now, with equal composure and trust, we 
can devote ourselves to the work of the present, and carry no care 
about that part of God's work which lies beyond the present. 

Wherever we find a thirsty, hungry soul, a hearing ear, and a meek 
and quiet spirit, there is our work. The harvest work (in which time 
we are living) is to seek out and minister to the necessities of such; 
and it is a work in which the humblest saint may engage. The few 



or many talents may be carefully utilized. But the love of God must 
be not only the constraining motive of him who would bear the glad 
tidings, but it must also be the constraining incentive presented to 
those whom we would have to receive God's favors. All God's 
blessings are favors, and will never be forced upon his creatures. 

A zeal according to knowledge, will therefore never resort to those 
unreasonable and undignified proceedings which make religion a 
by-word, and bring upon the cause of Christ reproach. There is 
nothing in the religion of Jesus Christ which is out of harmony with 
the soundest reason and the most refined judgment. Its methods, 
according to the Scriptures, are not with sounding brass and 
tinkling cymbals; with extravagant words and actions that bring the 
children of God down to the level of those they seek to reach; no, 
its methods are as dignified, ennobling and elevating as are the 
precious truths it bears. And both the truth and the truth-bearer, 
who follows in the Master's footsteps, will command the reverence, 
even though they incur the persecution of men. 

Of Jesus it was said: "He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his 
voice to be heard in the street." (Isa. 42:2.) We are not heard, either 
by God or men, for our much speaking (Matt. 6:7); therefore let us 
endeavor to present God's truth in all its native simplicity and 
beauty, and trust its inherent power to win its way in due time to 
every heart. 

"Now, then, we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did 
beseech by us"; therefore, as his faithful servants we should 
specially study and conform to his methods. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R656 : page 4 

"Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In everything give 
thanks." 



R65 1 : page 5 

FALSE HUMILITY. 

"Ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the 
truth."-2 Tim. 3:7. 

One of the most serious and dangerous besetments of the 
adversary is an exaggeration of the truth. It seems to be one of his 
most successful methods against the saints. Thus faith is 
exaggerated into credulity, reverence into fear, the wages of sin into 
torture, and humility into mental listlessness, doubt and uncertainty. 

Under the influence of this false humility, how many take pride in 
saying on nearly all important religious subjects, "I tie to no man's 
opinion, and have none of my own— I want only the truth." They 



consider this a saintly humility, which never reaches any 
conclusion, for fear they should be considered bigoted. They say 
they are seeking truth, but if so, they never know when they find it, 
and might as well not have sought. These are covered by the 
language of our text— "Ever learning, but never able to come to 
[arrive at] the knowledge of the truth." Such, because not rooted 
and grounded in faith, are always tossed to and fro-"carried about 
with every wind of doctrine." (Eph. 4:14.) 

But, says one, since I find that so much which I once believed is 
error, I never believe anything very strongly, and am afraid to 
become rooted and grounded, lest it be again a rooting into error. 
Besides, I see so many rooted and grounded in error so firmly, that 
the truth cannot shake them. Ah yes; it is the same snare of the 
adversary; in spite of him you have gotten free from some of the 
error, but he drives to the other extreme to hinder you from ever 
getting so grounded in truth that you would be able to stand the 
storm, let alone assist others to stand. 

Can you not see the difference between being rooted and grounded 
in the teachings of a fallible church creed, a set of man-made 
doctrines and traditions, and, on the other hand, being rooted and 
grounded in the statements of God's Word, statements too, which 
do not contradict, but, by their harmony and oneness, support each 
other, and, by their reasonableness, appeal to your judgment as 
being the truth? 

The expression of some— "I drive no stakes"— is bad. We should 
drive stakes; the man who will not do so will have his tent of faith 
overturned by the first windy doctrine the adversary brings upon it. 
They should be driven in well —"grounded" well— in the firm 
ground of God's Word. The Word of God certainly calls for faith, 
strong faith, settled faith, grounded and well rooted, and without 
such it is impossible to please God. All the Scripture writers had a 
positive faith and expressed it in a positive manner, and called upon 
us to receive the same and be established IN THE TRUTH. 

But if those who seem to hold at least a measure of what we think 
Scriptural views, in common, shall differ on the minor details of 
truth, what then? We answer, that while we are in the flesh our 
surroundings may be such as to make some of the details of truth 
appear somewhat differently for a time, but as we each approach 
closer and closer to God's standpoint in viewing the matter, our 
ideas of the details will become more distinct and more 
harmonious. 

It is harmony and fixedness on the FUNDAMENTAL features of 
truth that Scripture demands, with so much harmony on the other 
features as we can obtain by communion of saints in the study of 
the Testimony, and we have the promise of full harmony ultimately 
among all true watchmen in Zion. Our desire and vigilance to 
ascertain the mind of God on even the details must not be relaxed, 
else we cease to grow in knowledge, and cease to do our share in 



bringing the body of Christ as a whole into the perfection of 
knowledge most beneficial to it and most pleasing to God. 

But if those who attempt to teach the Church differ, how shall I 
decide? says another. 

That God has been pleased throughout the entire age to use some 
members of the body as channels through which to send truth to the 
body, is unquestionable; and that Satan has adopted much the same 
plan to deceive and spread error in the Church, is also evident, not 
only from facts, but from Scripture statements. It would be a 
serious error, then, to believe anything because a would-be teacher 
wishes you to. To do so, would be to throw away chart and 
compass and let your faith drift before the changing winds of 
prejudice and preference, and would, sooner or later, make ship- 
wreck of faith. 

A teacher is of value only as an instrument of the Spirit of God in 
bringing all things to your remembrance and notice, whatsoever 
things were written for our instruction in the Scriptures. 
Whatsoever is more than this cometh of the evil one and tendeth to 
evil. The duty and office of a lawyer is not to make laws, but to 
clearly set forth the law and present to the jury its bearing upon the 
case discussed; so also, the duty of a minister of the Gospel is not to 
make truth, but to cite the TESTIMONY, and quote the covenants, 
and show their bearing upon any subject discussed; and the duty of 
the Church as of the jury is to decide each for himself what is the 
mind of the written and established law. 

True, this is not the common idea regarding the ministers (servants) 
of the church. On the contrary, their testimony is taken so implicitly 
that it takes the place largely of God's testimony, and thus the law 
of God is made void, and the traditions and theories of the teachers 
are received instead. It is because you had received and become 
rooted, and grounded in such teachings of men unsupported by the 
word of God that you had so much to unlearn and break loose from. 
We urge, then, that doctrines be received, not because of the 
teacher, but because tried and found to be the teachings of God's 
word. "Beloved, believe not every spirit [mind, or doctrine, or 
theory] but try the spirits [doctrines] whether they are of God." (1 
John 4:1.) But mark well, that the Apostles words, Believe not 
every doctrine gives no support to that FALSE CAUTION which 
never fully believes anything, and is never grounded; for his other 
words, "TRY the spirits [doctrines] whether they be of God," shows 
that it is a duty to DECIDE whether the doctrine is Scriptural or 
unscriptural. To "prove all things" and to "hold FAST that which is 
good," is a statement of similar import. But some would rather be 
always unsettled than go to the necessary labor of "proving" by 
diligent study of the Scripture what is good and what is erroneous 
doctrine. Verily, they 



R652 : page 5 



have their reward. Their indifference will expose them to error, of 
which the adversary will not be slow to take advantage. If thou 
searchest for her as men search for silver then shalt thou find the 
knowledge of God. (Prov. 2:4.) "Light is sown for the righteous." 
(Psa. 97:1 1), but for no others; and that heart is not right, and that 
soul not really truth-hungry, which, knowing the necessity of labor 
to prove all things, neglects it. 

The pathway of the just— of him who proves all things and holds 
fast that which is good— will shine more and more until perfect day 
is reached, but it is a sad mistake of some to suppose that they must 
be ever changing, ever discarding yesterday's light for to-morrow's. 
The light is added to, but never needs EXCHANGING. If we 
receive as light nothing which we do not first prove by the 
Testimony we will have nothing to throw away, but may both hold 
fast the good and add to the same daily. 



R652 : page 5 

BE NOT QUICKLY MOVED. 

"Continue in the faith, grounded and settled and be not moved 
away from the hope of the Gospel." —Col. 1:23. 

This shows that the Apostle thought it necessary to guard the 
Church against the adversary's beguilements, by which he would 
have them "move away" their faith-building from the TRUE 
FOUNDATION. That there was a tendency in that direction, and 
that some did leave the true Gospel foundation, is evidenced by 
Paul's words to the Galatians (1:6-12). He here shows also that 
those teachers who were attempting their removal to "ANOTHER 
GOSPEL" were making him (Paul) the centre of their attack upon 
the true glad tidings. It is here that he uses that very positive 
language, "If any man preach any other gospel [present any other 
foundation for faith] unto you than that ye have received, let him be 
accursed." 

It is evident that the Apostle did not refer to the Galatian Church as 
having received all truth on all subjects, nor all knowledge of God's 
revelation, for he always exhorts to study of the Scripture in order 
to growth in grace and knowledge. While all truth is related, and, 
therefore, all truth is "glad tidings," or Gospel, yet in the sense in 
which the Apostle uses the word, it has not so extended a meaning; 
but he refers it, evidently, to the FOUNDATION upon which all 
faith and hope must rest and build. Is it not evident, then, that he 
refers to the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus? the same which 
he elsewhere states as the sum of all his preaching: "I delivered 
unto you first of all, that which I also received [first], how that 
Christ died for OUR SINS according to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 
15:3.) 



This is the kernel of all the glad tidings; for had it not been for the 
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, nothing else 
could ever be glad tidings. Hence we should take heed not to be 
removed from the Gospel- this foundation of all hope and true 
faith. 

We live in a time when the foundation is being attacked by some in 
the church. It is becoming popular to say I believe that Christ died, 
but not that he died for our sins. Then the attempt is made to ignore 
and turn aside those statements of Prophets and Apostles which tell 
how the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all, and that he died 
the just for the unjust to bring us to God. Meanwhile they will ask 
you to examine the beauty of another theory-built upon another 
foundation. They say, instead of the foundation that "Christ died for 
our sins, according to the Scriptures, let us substitute another- 
Christ died only as an example, according to our theory. Then they 
will proceed to show you how beautiful a theory they can build on 
this other foundation. 

But every saint should answer, Stop! go no further; Before we can 
examine the theory built upon your foundation; we must be 
convinced that the Gospel foundation which Paul preached, and 
which we have received is WRONG. Then we must "prove" your 
foundation, and after that, if all things prove that the foundation 
which we have received, and upon which the saints of all ages have 
built, is faulty, and yours right, then we will be prepared to look at 
and prove the theory built upon it, but not before. But meantime we 
will "continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved 
away from the hope of the Gospel" which we "have received"— 
even redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, UNTIL 
you shall, piece by piece, examine every one of the many 
statements of which our foundation is composed, and shall have 
shown us that these statements are all unreliable or mean the 
reverse of what they say. We proved these testimonials once, and 
have been blessed of God in the development of a faith-structure 
thereupon, and we shall not even need to go back and unsettle faith 
to prove them again. If you CAN DISPROVE them, let us have that 
evidence, but none other until then. 

Some of the foundation stones upon which the faith of the saints of 
all ages has been built, and from which we refuse to be "moved 
away" until these are crushed to powder-which we think will never 
be-are as follows: 

Isaiah says-"All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned 
every one to his own way, and the Lord hath laid on HIM the 
iniquity of us all.. ..He was cut off out of the land of the living; for 
the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he let his grave 
be made with the wicked, and with the (Godless) rich at his death, 
although he had done no violence, and there was no deceit in his 
mouth. But the Lord was pleased to crush him through disease: 
when (now) his soul hath brought the trespass-offering, then shall 
he see his seed, live many days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall 



prosper in his hand. ...Through his knowledge shall my righteous 
servant bring the many to righteousness, while he will bear their 
iniquities. Therefore will I divide him (a portion) with the many, 
and with the strong will he divide the spoil; because he poured out 
his soul unto death, and with transgressors was he numbered, while 
he bore the sin of many, and for the transgressors he let (evil) befall 
him." Isa. 53:6-12, K.J. and Leeser's Translations. 

Jesus said: "I lay down my life for the sheep.". ..No man taketh it 
from me, but I lay it down of myself." John 10:15,18. 

Paul said: "I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also 
received [first of all] , how that Christ died for OUR SINS according 
to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15:3. "Being justified by his blood, we 
shall be saved from wrath through him." Rom. 5:9. "We have 
redemption through his blood." Eph. 1:7. "Christ hath redeemed us 
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us." Gal. 3:13. 
"Since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of 
the dead." 1 Cor. 15:21. "There is one God and one mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time." 1 Tim. 2:5,6. "When we 
were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. 
...For if by one man's offence death reigned by one, much more, 
they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of 
righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ. For, as by one 
man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience 
of one, shall many be made righteous." Rom. 5:6,18,19. 

"Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the 
blood of all men; for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the 
counsel of God. Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves and to all the 
flock, over which the Holy Spirit hath made you overseers, to feed 
the church of God, which he hath purchased with his blood," Acts 
20:26-28. 

John said: "He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world." 1 John 2:2. "The blood of 
Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin." 1:7. 

Peter said: "Ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible 
things, as silver and gold.. .but with the precious blood of Christ, as 
of a lamb without blemish and without spot." 1 Pet. 1:18,19. "Christ 
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to 
God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit. 
(3:18). 

And the glorified overcoming church exclaims: "Unto him that 
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath 
made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory 
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen." "And they sung a new 
song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the seals 
thereof; for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by the 
blood out of every kindred and tongue and people and nation." Rev. 
1:5,6 and 5:9. 



R653 : page 5 



READING THE SCRIPTURES WITH PRAYER. 

An interview with the Pope, during which the claims of the 
Catholic Church had been earnestly pressed, closed with these 
words: 

"Pray, pray for light from the Lord, for grace to acknowledge the 
truth; because this is the only means of attaining to it. Controversy 
will do no good. In controversy is pride and self-love. People, in 
controversy, make a parade of their knowledge, of their acuteness, 
and after all, every one continues to hold his own views. Prayer 
alone gives light and strength for the acquirement of truth and 
grace. For God wishes that we should humble ourselves, and he 
gives his grace to the humble." 

Such is the process by which perverts to Rome are multiplied. Is 
there not something wrong about it? Are the words of Pius, after all, 
true? We think not. In similar tones and language, 

R653 : page 6 

many an old Rabbi would, in our Lord's time, have addressed a 
young disciple of Christ, in order to win him back to the old faith; 
and, in similar tones, many a self-satisfied religionist still warns and 
rebukes the inquiring spirit. 

But wherein is it wrong? Is it not true that our first duty is to pray 
for light and grace? Unquestionably it is. Further; is it not true that, 
for the most part, in controversy there is much pride and self-love? 
and that men engaged in it often seek rather to display their 
acuteness than anything else? It cannot be disputed that such is too 
frequently the case. Wherein, then, lies the error? For if it be an 
error, it is one that is shared by thousands of Protestants in the 
present day, who are constantly teaching that all controversy is evil; 
that doubt is sinful; that free inquiry inevitably leads to skepticism; 
and that he who would arrive at Truth, must do so by abasing his 
rational faculties, and by reading his Bible on his knees, rather than 
in his library; in the light of devotion, rather than in that of 
research; with the intellect at rest, rather than alert and quickened; 
with prayer, rather than with careful study. 

The error lies in the supposition implied, rather than expressed, that 
devout submission and intellectual activity are somewhat opposed 
to each other; that the two cannot, if each be quickened, co-exist, 
the one being destructive of the other; and that consequently, free 
inquirers must, as a rule, be a prayerless race. But is it true that the 
intellect and the devout affections are thus opposed? that research 
and prayer cannot really go on together? 

The answer to the question must depend on the character of the 
prayer supposed to be offered. If, with some eminent modern 



divines, he regards the faith for which he entreats to be "a new 
faculty," "a Divine capacity," imparted only as a sovereign gift, it 
then follows, of course, that the more passive he is, the better; that 
creaturely activity, as it is sometimes called, is a hindrance to the 
reception of the divine blessing; and that prayer stands in direct 
opposition to the exercise of reason. 

This has always been the doctrine of the Church of Rome. It 
manifests itself most in the most devout of her children. It is the 
distinguishing characteristic of the quietists and mystics in her 
communion of all ages; and it has always had a charm for devout 
Protestants of meditative temperament, who do not perceive the 
poison that it embodies. Protestants also, believing like the 
Romanists, that God requires them to pray and wait for a light 
above and beyond any that they can get by the use of their rational 
faculties, however much these may be disciplined by labor or 
purified by a right state of heart, try to lay aside reason, in order 
that they may passively receive from above "the truth as it is in 
Jesus." They never consider that, from the course they are taking, 
they will necessarily be acted upon by forces, which, however 
divine they may deem them, are really as human as any by which 
they are in other ways affected. 

But let us suppose another case. Let us suppose that the praying 
man expects his answer from God in another form; that he has not 
the slightest expectation of obtaining light apart from the vigorous 
use of his faculties; that as, when he asks God for daily bread, he 
only expects to receive it in the form of a blessing on his industry, 
his skill, his perseverance, and his trust in God; so, in spiritual 
things, if, when he prays that the eyes of his understanding may be 
opened, he expects his answer only in the form of that eye-salve 
(humility) with which the eye must be anointed, if it would see 
(Rev. 3:18,)— in the form of purification from the various phases of 
evil that darken and becloud the faculties of a sinful man; if he bear 
in mind the words of his Lord— "If thine eye be single, thy whole 
body shall be full of light;" if he look, therefore, for his answer in 
growing freedom from prejudice, in a greater breadth of charity, in 
a more loving appreciation of truth and goodness; and consequently 
(a necessary consequence,) through the reception of these "fruits of 
the Spirit," to have a clearer intellect, a sounder judgment, a better 
balanced mind; the reverse of all we have stated then becomes true. 
Prayer and intellectual activity go on together, and as on the first 
supposition, they could not co-exist, so, on this, they cannot be 
separated. 

But which is the true view? 

For a reply we simply turn to the book and to the Master. 

The Jews came to Christ with their doubts. What was his reply? 
Pray? No! It was, Search the Scriptures: they are they which testify 
of me. (John 5:39.) Again he said to them, "I am come in my 
Father's name, and ye receive me not. Why? Because ye do not 



pray? No! The cause of unbelief is thus stated, "How can ye 
believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor 
which cometh from God," (v. 44.) "To this end was I born, and for 
this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the 
truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice, (John 18:37.) 

Paul, at Thessalonica, when dealing with unbelievers, does not call 
upon them to pray; but "as his manner was, went in unto them and 
three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures," (Acts 
17:2.) So, again, at Corinth, "he reasoned in the synagogue every 
sabbath day, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks," (18:4.) Again 
at Ephesus, we are told "he entered into the synagogue and 
reasoned with the Jews. " And so before Felix, he "reasoned of 
righteousness, temperance and judgment to come" till "Felix 
trembled." (24:25.) 

Nor was his method different with believers. Complaining of some, 
that, when they "ought to have been teachers," it was needful to 
teach them "which be the first principles of the oracles of God," he 
adds, "Strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even 
those who, by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern 
both good and evil," (Heb. 5:14;) i.e., their faculties exercised by 
practice in the distinguishing of truth from error. 

How different in this particular was the conduct of the Apostle 
before his conversion. He then prayed and persecuted; while 
Stephen and other Christians, though ever living in the atmosphere 
of prayer, reasoned out of the Scriptures. Saul and the priests, like 
the popes, supplicated God and threatened man. Stephen the martyr 
studied, and quoted and followed the written Word. The persecutor 
would have nothing to do with controversy. 

After his conversion, Paul, as we all know, became a great 
controversialist. Some of his epistles-that to the Galatians for 
example-are almost wholly controversial. Before his great change, 
we look in vain for a single argument against heresy; for then, like 
the Papal chief, he only "breathed out threatenings and slaughter." 
It was not till he became a Christian that he felt the necessity of 
giving "a reason for the hope that was in him," (Acts 17:2,17.) 

Nowhere in Scripture, either from the lips of Christ or his Apostles, 
is prayer set before us as the medium by and through which divine 
light [truth] is to be obtained. Everywhere we are taught to pray for 
a right state of heart, for pardon, for purity, for temporal and eternal 
good, for friends, for enemies, for all men, for a blessing from 
above on faithful teachers of the Gospel; but nowhere for a new 
faculty, or that which amounts to the same thing. No such petition 
occurs in the prayer Jesus taught his disciples. Would we know 
God's will we are to be babes, as distinguished from the wise and 
prudent of this world; we are to be obedient children; to seek for a 
renewed nature; for a wise and understanding heart; for a single 
eye; for the fear of God; and for strength and assistance in the 
fulfillment of every duty. 



Far be it from us to deny that, in one sense— the true and scriptural 
sense- light from heaven is essential to all of us. Our ignorance is 
often felt to be oppressive, our perplexities so harassing, that it 
would be crushing indeed to one's spirit to feel that we were 
forbidden to pray for light. But not in the Pope's sense can we 
rightly do so. The light we need, and the light God warrants us to 
expect, is that of love and purity, freedom from pride, prejudice, 
self-interest, and sin-in short, the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. 

In the Old Testament we are taught to "cry after knowledge, and to 
lift up our voice for understanding, but it is in connection with 
seeking after it as the miner seeks for silver, by long and unwearied 
toil. 

[Instructed by a careful study of the Word, light will come in by the 
removal of obstacles, and by increasing faith in God's promises. 
Thus, the eyes of our understanding being opened, we may 
comprehend with all saints more of the height and depth, the length 
and breadth of God's love as exhibited in his plan and Word.-Ed.] 

Paul prayed for his converts, that the word of Christ might dwell in 
them richly, (Col. 3:16;) that they might hold fast 

R654 : page 6 

that which is good, (1 Thes. 5:21;) that they might be filled with the 
knowledge of God's will, (Col. 1:9,10;) but all these petitions are 
but so many forms of desire for their sanctification, for increase of 
grace, and for the planting within them of holy principles and 
dispositions. In not a single instance does he direct them to pray for 
such blessings as direct gifts from heaven; but always to watch, to 
search, to be faithful to duty, to love truth, and to follow it at all 
risks, not doubting but that in this path they would find it. 

We have said nothing as to the danger of praying over the Bible, 
with the unconscious desire to find ourselves right. Yet nothing is 
more common; and it is certain that he who does so, will generally 
succeed in obtaining the object of his wishes. It is the same with 
Philosophy. If you have a strong wish to find phenomena such as to 
confirm the conjectures you have formed, and allow that wish to 
bias your examination, you are ill-fitted for interrogating nature. So 
it is with the Bible. Revelation is to be interrogated not as a witness 
but as an instructor. 

What, then, do we learn from the whole? We learn that in the 
acquisition of truth, prayer occupies precisely the same position that 
it does in relation to the acquisition of bread; that as God now 
showers not bread from heaven as he did in the wilderness, so he 
showers not truth upon our minds as he did upon the Apostles. And 
in each case for the same reason, because it is not requisite. The 
laborer has now what the Israelite in the desert had not,-the 
opportunity of gaining his bread by the sweat of his face; and the 
Christian has now what the Christian in apostolic days had not— a 
complete revelation of the will of God in his hand, and nothing to 



hinder his understanding of it as it becomes due, save his 
worldliness, selfishness, and sin. 

For the removal of these hindrances let us pray and labor earnestly, 
assured that only so far as they are supplanted by the Holy Spirit of 
God shall we be able to discern wondrous things in the Divine Law. 

H. DUNN. 



R654 : page 6 

PARABLE OF THE SHEEP AND GOATS. 

MATT. 25:31-46. 

It has been truly said, that order is heaven's first law; yet few, we 
think, have realized how emphatically this is true. In glancing back 
over the plan of the ages, there is nothing which gives such 
conclusive evidence of a Divine Director as the order observed in 
all its parts. 

As we have seen, God has had definite and stated times and seasons 
for every part of his work; and in the end of each of these seasons 
there was a finishing up of that work and a clearing off of the 
rubbish, preparatory to the beginning of the new work of the 
dispensation to follow. Thus in the end of the first dispensation 
(from creation to the flood), which, as we have seen, was placed 
under the control of the angels, there was a finishing work— an 
exhortation through Noah to forsake sin and turn to righteousness, 
and a warning of certain retribution. And when the full end of the 
time allotted for that dispensation had come, there was a selection 
and saving of all that was worth saving and a clean sweeping 
destruction of all the refuse; and with that which remained a new 
dispensation began. 

In the end of the Jewish dispensation the same thing is observed— a 
harvesting and complete separation of the wheat class from the 
chaff, and an entire rejection of the latter class from God's favor. 
With the few judged worthy in the end of that age, a new 
dispensation began; and now we find ourselves amidst the closing 
scenes (the harvest) of this Gospel dispensation. The wheat and 
tares which have grown together during this age are being 
separated. And with the former class, of which Jesus is the head, a 
new dispensation is about to be inaugurated, and these are to reign 
as kings and priests in that new dispensation, while the tare element 
is judged as utterly unworthy of that favor. 

As a skilled mechanic or artisan puts on the finishing touches and 
brushes away the refuse materials from one part of his work 
preparatory to the beginning of another part, so God has made a full 
end of each dispensation, preserving the finished work and casting 
off the refuse. 



While observing this order with reference to the dispensations past 
and the one just closing, our Lord informs us through the parable 
under consideration, that the same order will be observed with 
reference to the dispensation to follow this. 

The harvest of the Jewish age was likened to the separation of 
wheat from chaff; the harvest of this age to the separation of wheat 
from tares; and the harvest of the Millennial age to the separation of 
sheep from goats. 

That this parable refers to the Millennial age is clearly indicated in 
verses 31 and 32 —"When the Son of man shall come in his glory, 
and all the holy angels with him, THEN shall he sit upon the throne 
of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations: and he 
shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his 
sheep from the goats." As in the present age, every act of those on 
trial (the Church) goes to make a part of that character which, in 
due time, will determine the final decision of the Judge in our case, 
so will it be with the world (the nations) in the age to come. As in 
the present age, the trial of the majority of the individual members 
of the church ends, and the decision of their case is reached long 
before the end of the age (2 Tim. 4:7,8); so under the Millennial 
reign, the decision of some individual cases will be reached long 
before the end of the age (Isa. 65:20); but in both ages there is a 
harvest or general separation time in the end of the age. 

In the dawn of the Millennial age, after the "time of trouble," there 
will be a gathering of the living nations before Christ, and in their 
appointed time and order, the dead of all nations shall be called to 
appear before the judgment seat of Christ-not to receive an 
immediate sentence, but to receive a fair and impartial trial, under 
the most favorable circumstances, the result of which trial will be a 
final sentence, as worthy or unworthy of everlasting life. 

The scene of this parable, then, is laid after the time of trouble and 
after the exaltation of the "little flock" to the throne, when the 
nations have been subdued, Satan bound (Rev. 20:2) and the 
authority of Christ's kingdom established. The Bride of Christ, ere 
this, will have been seated with him in his throne, and will have 
taken part in executing the judgments of the great day of wrath. 
Now the Son of man appears (is made manifest) to the world "in his 
glory," and together Jesus and his Bride "shine forth as the sun in 
the kingdom of their Father." (Matt. 13:43.) 

Here is the New Jerusalem as John saw it, (Rev. 21,) "that holy city 
[symbol of government]... coming down from God out of heaven." 
During all the time of trouble it was coming down, and now it has 
touched the earth. This is the stone cut out of the mountains 
(kingdoms of earth) without hands, (but by the power of God,) and 
now it has become a great mountain, (kingdom,) and has filled the 
whole earth, (Dan. 2:35,) its coming having broken to pieces (Dan. 
2:34,35) the evil kingdoms of the Prince of darkness. 

Here is that glorious city, (government,) 



R654 : page 7 



prepared as a bride adorned for her husband, (Rev. 21:2,) and the 
nations are beginning to walk in the light of it. (ver. 24.) These may 
bring their glory and honor into it, but there shall in no wise enter 
into it (or become a part of it) anything that defileth," etc. (ver. 27.) 
Here, from the midst of the throne, proceeds a pure river of water of 
life, (truth unmixed with error,) and the Spirit and the Bride say, 
come, and take it freely. (Rev. 22:17.) Here begins the world's 
probation, the world's great judgment day-a thousand years. 

But even in this favored time of blessing and healing of the nations, 
when Satan is bound, evil restrained, mankind released from the 
grasp of death, and when the knowledge of the Lord fills the earth, 
two classes will be developed, which Jesus, in this parable, likens to 
sheep and goats. These, he tells us, he will separate. The sheep 
class-those who are meek, teachable and willing to be led, shall, 
during the age, be gathered at the Judge's right hand-symbol of the 
Judge's approval; but the goat class, self-willed and stubborn, 
always climbing on the rocks-seeking prominence and approval 
among men-and feeding on miserable refuse, while the sheep graze 
in the rich pastures of truth furnished by the Good Shepherd, these 
are gathered to the Judge's left hand opposite the position of favor- 
as subjects of his disfavor and condemnation. 

In the end of the Millennial age, in the final adjustment of human 
affairs, Jesus thus addresses his sheep: "Come ye blessed... inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." 
What kingdom? Was not the kingdom under the whole heavens 
given to the saints? (Dan. 7:22.) 

Yes, as we have heretofore seen, a "little flock," "the saints," the 
overcoming "sheep" of the Gospel age, having followed the Lamb 
(Jesus) whithersoever he went, through evil and through good 
report, even to the sacrificing of the human life, with him have been 
exalted to the divine nature, and to the throne of the spiritual, 
unseen kingdom, and He (the Christ, head and body) must reign, till 
he has put all enemies under his feet, (1 Cor. 15:25.) The saints 
shall reign with Christ a thousand years. (Rev. 20:6.) 

R655 : page 7 

Jesus calls believers of the Gospel age who know and obey his 
voice, his sheep. But he says, "Other sheep I have which are not of 
this fold (referring to those who should become his followers in the 
Millennial age,) them also I must lead (into truth and righteousness 
during that age,) and there shall be one fold and one shepherd. Jesus 
and the "little flock," the Bride, united as one, will be the Good 
Shepherd, who will lead mankind into the one fold of safety- 
harmony with God. 

This gradual work of separating sheep and goats will require all of 
the Millennial age for its accomplishment. During that age, each 
individual as he comes gradually to a knowledge of God and his 



will, by conforming or not conforming thereto, takes his place at 
the right hand of favor, or the left hand of disfavor according as he 
improves or misimproves the opportunities of that golden age. By 
the end of that age, all the world of mankind (not the present 
Church) will have arranged themselves, as shown in the parable, 
into two classes. As in nature, sheep are far more numerous than 
goats, so we doubt not that with the perfect knowledge then 
possessed, the sheep company will far outnumber the goats. 

With the end of that age is the end of the world's trial, or judgment, 
and final disposition is made of the two classes. The goats who 
have not developed the element of love-the law of God's being and 
kingdom— are not counted worthy of life, and must be destroyed, 
while the sheep who have developed, and by deeds exhibited God- 
likeness (love) are to be installed as the rulers of earth for future 
ages. 

The work of restitution will not be quite complete until the great 
mass of mankind, having been restored to the perfect condition, is 
re-invested with the dominion of earth as possessed by Adam 
before sin entered, as God had said, "After our likeness let him 
have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, 
over the cattle and over all the earth,. ..and over every living thing 
that moveth upon the earth"-a ruler over earth, like as God is ruler 
over all things. And the Psalmist expresses the same idea, saying, 
Thou hast made man a little lower than the angels, and hast 
crowned him with glory and honor; thou madest him to have 
dominion over the works of thy hands. (Ps. 8:5-8.) The dominion is 
not to be over each other, for when the law of love controls human 
hearts, there will be no necessity for dominion over one another, 
though by mutual consent, prompted by love, regulations may be 
made among themselves for the common good and blessing of all. 

This, then, is the kingdom that has been preparing for MANKIND 
from the foundation of the world. It was expedient that man should 
suffer six thousand years under the dominion of evil, to learn its 
inevitable results, misery and death, and in order by contrast to 
prove the justice, wisdom and goodness of God's law— love. Then it 
requires the seventh thousand years under the reign of Christ, to 
restore him from ruin and death, to the perfect condition, thereby 
fitting him to inherit the kingdom prepared for him from the 
foundation of the world. 

This kingdom in which all are kings, will really be a GRAND 
REPUBLIC, whose stability and blessed influence will be assured, 
by the perfection of every member, which result now so much 
desired is almost an impossibility. The kingdom of the saints is on 
the contrary a Theocracy which will rule the world (during the 
period of its imperfection and restoration) without regard to their 
consent or approval. 

But the righteous will inquire why they are crowned with such 
glory, honor and dominion. And the Lord replies: "I was hungry, 



and you fed me; thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was a stranger, 
and you took me in; naked, and you clothed me; I was sick, and you 
visited me; in prison, and you came unto me." 

"Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we 
thee hungry, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When 
saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed 
thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?" 
"And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto 
you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my 
brethren, ye have done it unto me." 

Let us notice who these are that Jesus calls his brethren, and in what 
sense the evils here named may be true of them. We observe, first, 
that Jesus is addressing all the sheep or the righteous class, in the 
end of the Millennial age. Then all of that class will have had 
opportunity to minister to the necessities of the Lord's brethren. 
Jesus calls the Church of the Gospel age his brethren (Matt. 
12:49,50,) but all of the sheep class then addressed, will not have 
had opportunity to minister to those brethren. Millions of the sheep 
class will be of those who lived before the Gospel Church had an 
existence; and others will have been born during the Millennial age, 
after the Gospel Church has been exalted and no longer needs their 
ministry. 

The brethren of the Gospel Church then are not the only brethren of 
Christ. All who at that time will have been restored to perfection, 
will be recognized as sons of God; sons in the same sense that 
Adam was a son of God. (Luke 3:38) -human sons. And all of 
God's sons whether on the human, the angelic, or the divine planes, 
are BRETHREN. Jesus' love for these, his brethren, is here 
expressed. As the world will now have opportunity to minister to 
those who are shortly to be the divine sons of God, and brethren of 
Christ, so they will have abundant opportunity during the age to 
come to minister to (each other) the human brethren. 

The dead nations when again brought into existence will need food, 
and raiment, and shelter. However great may have been their 
possessions in this life, death will have brought all to a common 
level; the infant and the man of maturer years, the millionaire and 
the pauper, the learned and the unlearned, the cultured and the 
ignorant and degraded, and all will have an abundant opportunity 
for the exercise of benevolence, and thus they will be privileged to 
be co-workers with God. We are here reminded of the illustration 
given in the case of Lazarus: Jesus only awakened him from death, 
and then permitted the rejoicing friends to loose him from his grave 
clothes and clothe him and feed him. 

Further, these are said to be "sick and in prison," (more properly, 
under ward or watch.) The grave is the great prison where the 
millions of humanity have been held in unconscious captivity; but 
when released from the grave, the restoration to perfection is not an 
instantaneous work. Being not yet perfect, they may properly be 



termed sick and under ward. They are not dead, neither are they yet 
perfect; and any condition between those two is properly called 
sick. And they will continue to be under watch or ward until made 
well -physically, mentally, and morally perfect. During that time 
there will be abundant opportunity for mutual helpfulness, 
sympathy, instruction and encouragement. 

Since mankind will not all be raised at once, but in separate ranks 
or orders (1 Cor. 15:23) during the thousand years, each new rank 
will find an army of helpers in those who will have preceded them. 
The love and benevolence which men will then show to each other 
(the brethren of Christ) the King will count as shown to him. No 
great deeds are assigned as the ground for the honors and favors 
conferred upon the righteous; they have simply come into harmony 
with God's law-love-and proved it by their works. "Love is the 
fulfilling of the law" (Rom. 13:10), and "God is love," so, when 
man is restored again to the image of God-"very good" -man also 
will be love. 

Then follows the message to those on the left- "Depart from me ye 
cursed (condemned)"-condemned, as unfit vessels for the glory 
and honor of life, who would not yield to the moulding and shaping 
influences of divine love. When these my brethren were hungry, 
and thirsty, naked, sick, and in prison, ye ministered not to their 
necessities, thus continually proving yourselves out of harmony 
with the heavenly city (kingdom) for "there shall in no case enter 
into it anything that defileth." The decision and sentence regarding 
this class is, "Depart from me into everlasting fire [symbol of 
destruction] prepared for the devil and his angels." Elsewhere (Heb. 
2:14) we read in plain language that Christ "will destroy.. .him that 
has the power of death that is the devil." And the lake of fire is 
defined to be the second death (Rev. 20:14). 

"And these" [the goats] "go away into everlasting punishment" 
[cutting off— Diaglott— cutting off from life] "but the righteous into 
life eternal." The punishment is as lasting as the reward. The reward 
is everlasting life; the punishment is to be forever cut off from life- 
everlasting death; a death from which there will be no redemption, 
no resurrection. 

To the sheep it is said, "Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from 
the foundation of the world." But though God give it to man at first, 
and designs restoring it to him when he has prepared him for the 
great trust, we are not to suppose that God intends man to rule it 
except as under or in harmony with his supreme law. "Thy will be 
done in earth as it is done in heaven," must forever be the rule. 

Man henceforth will rule his dominion in harmony with the law of 
heaven— delighting continually to do his will "in whose favor is life, 
and at whose right hand [condition of favor] there are pleasures 
forevermore." (Ps. 16:11.) O who would not say, "Haste thee along 
ages of glory," and give glory and honor to him whose loving plans 
are blossoming into such fullness of blessing. 



R656 : page 7 

"BEWARE of evil thoughts. They have done great mischief in the 
world. Watch against them; pray against them. They prepare the 
way for the enemy." 



R656 : page 7 

MUTTERINGS OF THE COMING STORM. 

We clip from papers of recent date the following suggestive items, 
which give fresh evidence of the general unrest and forebodings of 
evil to come. Again and again we are reminded of the prediction of 
our Lord, that the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, and that 
men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking after those 
things that are coming on the earth. 

The problems of the present hour baffle the wisdom and skill of 
statesmen, and with an increasing emphasis demand their attention. 
Divine wisdom alone can adjust the tangled problem of human 
affairs. But we rejoice to know that after the storm shall have 
reached its climax and spent its force, men will be prepared for a 
better order of things, and then they shall recognize the Son of man 
coming in power and great glory; and will be prepared to submit to 
his rightful authority. 

SOCIALISM-ITS DANGERS. 

"Just how long the questions raised by American socialists and so- 
called land reformers of the Henry George stripe can be kept out of 
politics is more than can be told, yet it would be foolish to ignore 
their existence or keep ignorant of their nature. Socialism is a 
subject that has received very little attention from our students or 
legislators. Its aims are illy understood. The popular eye has seen 
little more than a discontented lot of fierce sans-culottes and the ear 
heard only their wild and incoherent ravings. About all that is 
known of them is that socialists would tear the present order of 
things to pieces if they only had the power. Sunday's Globe- 
Democrat contains an interview with T. V. Powderly, General 
Master Workman of the Knights of Labor, an organization of 
workingmen that bears 900,000 on its rolls, and has an active 
membership of full 600,000. 'Do you think that labor now enjoys 
the rights that belong to it?' questioned the reporter. We quote the 
reply: 

'We do not. The condition of the working classes is truly deplorable 
in many respects, and I very much fear there is trouble ahead. 
Capital must learn to respect the claims of labor, and that soon. If 
not we shall have revolution. It is no use to be mealy-mouthed 
about the situation. Talk of communism! That amounts to nothing. 



The relations between the capitalists and the workingmen are all 
wrong, and they must be righted. It is our mission to do as much to 
this end as we can. When Gen. Grant came back to this country 
after going abroad, he spoke of the asphaltum pavement. That he 
said was what was needed— that and Gatling guns, and then they 
could adjust these differences of capital and labor. Why asphaltum 
pavements? Because they can not be torn up and made into 
barricades." 

The speaker's eyes flashed and his voice took on the lower tones as 
he continued: 'But we have a counter-irritant now. Dynamite! That 
will offset their pavement and their guns. We hope it will not come 
to this. There are other ways of settling differences, and our order is 
devoting itself to a peaceful and a rational solution of the problem.' 

That all sounds like idle bravado, yet it may be the inner thought of 
a million workers. Men must have worked themselves to a 
considerable frenzy, when they even talk of dynamite as a means of 
avenging their supposed wrongs. 

On the same day, in Chicago, there was a gathering of working 
men, and their theme was 'Socialists, What they Want, and How 
they want it.' This very comprehensive subject was discussed by 
Alexander Jonas, editor of the New York Volks Zeitung, Paul 
Grottkau of the Arbeiter Zeitung (Workingman's Paper), and a T. J. 
Morgan. Mr. Jonas is said to be very moderate in his views as 
compared with other apostles of Socialism, yet they contrived to 
say: 

The object of socialists was that each man should be free to work as 
much as he thought he owed to the world, and take in return as 
much as he needed. He did not care for art and science as 

R656 : page 8 

long as millions were starving and in misery. Socialists did not 
want charity, but justice, and it was the duty of workingmen who 
were enlightened as to the aims of socialism to canvass their 
fellow-laborers actively and impart their own intelligence and 
knowledge to them. It had been asked why in Cincinnati the 
workingmen who all had rifles at home did not turn out and shoot. 
The reason was simply that they did not know enough yet. But the 
day would come when intelligent workingmen, formed into armed 
battalions, would turn out, and then, would capitalists and landlords 
see who was the strongest of the two! [Terrific applause.] 

We see that the 'terrific applause' came in just at the point where 
blood became visible. 

Morgan, who spoke in English, did not have a good show to unload 
himself, but said in substance that socialists demanded that their 
condition be measured by the possibilities that surrounded them. 
They were dissatisfied with the existing condition of affairs. At one 
end of the social system was Vanderbilt, and at the other the tramp. 
Both must be done away with, and to accomplish this, land, 



railroads, manufacturers, tools and machinery should be made the 
common property of the people, and not be controlled by a few. 

This was entirely too tame a statement to arouse enthusiasm among 
the revolutionists, but he was followed by Grottkau, who pleased 
them better. In his opinion, socialists should attain their ends by a 
physical revolution, and should do so at once. He was opposed to 
their taking a part in politics, but wanted a revolution, pure and 
simple, with plenty of dynamite and gunpowder. Alexander 
Kempke believed in educating the working people in the principles 
of socialism, and in their participating in politics. A revolution must 
surely come about, but they were not prepared for it at present. 

These are samples of teachings and expressions that are being 
inculcated and find utterance in most of our large cities. There 
certainly ought to be some definite information in the hands of the 
authorities as to the extent to which these sentiments are entertained 
among workingmen. We have an unfortunate habit of letting things 
run until they are practically beyond control. 

The city of New York did so with the Boss Tweed Ring. The nation 
did the same with the propagation of States Rights doctrines, and it 
resulted in the most tremendous war of modern times. We have 
done the same with Mormonism, till now it is fairly entrenched in 
the heart of the continent, and is able to bid defiance to the 
Legislature and moral forces of the Republic. With these examples 
before us, it is certainly unwise to continue the laissez faire system 
with so active, seductive and dangerous a thing as socialism." 

"THE DYNAMITE SCARE IN LONDON. 

LONDON, June 22.— The Irish leaders in London just now seem 
to be anxiously awaiting some expected development of an 
extraordinary character. The fact that the Parnellities seem to be in 
a state of constant apprehension would indicate that they have a 
good reason to know that the 'Force Party' are on the eve of 
attempting to carry out some well-planned scheme of terrorism. The 
police are nervously active. London was never so thoroughly 
patrolled. Strangers arriving at any of the Metropolitan entrepots 
are closely scrutinized, and in many cases "shadowed" until proved 
beyond suspicion. All the Ministers are guarded by detectives to 
and from Parliament and the public offices. The entire detective 
force has been put on double duty alternately. When Parliament is 
in session visitors are discouraged from attendance and strangers 
are not allowed in the building at all. Before each sitting the 
Parliament buildings are searched by the police from cellar to roof, 
and immediately after each rising all people are ejected from the 
palace yard and the gates are locked and placed under guard. All 
the Ministers and a majority of the Troy leaders have adopted the 
custom of leaving Parliament in cabs, the Ministers making their 
exits through the private entrances. During each recess all the 
corridors and vaults of the Parliament buildings are constantly 
patrolled by special sentries. 



The Thames Embankment has been placed under the care of special 
appointed watchmen. Nearly all the well-known Invincibles who 
recently were conspicuous in London have either disappeared or 
suddenly become quiet. Peter Tynan, long regarded as the 
mysterious "Number One," recently left London, leaving word that 
he was going to America. It has been ascertained that he went 
straight to Paris, and it is asserted that he was seen in the French 
capital recently. Capt. McCafferty is known to be there. It is 
generally feared that the leaders of the Invincibles are in secret 
session in Paris for the purpose of directing from there the expected 
developments which are awaited with a fear bordering upon panic." 



R657 : page 8 

GOD'S LITTLE ONES. 

"Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say 
unto you that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of 
my Father which is in heaven."— Matt. 18:10. 

Some of the disciples had come to Jesus desiring to know who is 
the greatest in the kingdom of heaven; and Jesus called a little child 
to him, and setting him in the midst of them said, "Verily I say unto 
you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall 
not enter the kingdom of heaven." What a charm there is in 
childhood's simplicity, faith, love, hope and its meek teachable 
spirit. It confidently takes your hand to be led where you please, 
and you may write upon its blank pages whatever you will. 

Just so God would have men be, but it takes very thorough 
converting to bring them back to the simplicity of childhood. As 
they have grown to years of maturity hope has so often been 
blighted, faith so often betrayed, and love rebuffed, that the 
simplicity and meekness of childhood has been displaced by the art, 
the selfishness and the proud, haughty spirit which despises 
instruction. 

But God comes with abundant proof of his love, and with promises 
to inspire hope and faith, and requires of us a return to childhood's 
simple faith, not in men, but in God who will never betray it. Those 
who have thus come to childlike faith and obedience to God, he 
calls his "little ones." And like as a father pitieth his children, so the 
Lord pitieth his little ones that love him. (Psa. 103:13.) He has pity 
and patience for all their weak, imperfect efforts to do his will, and 
his special care is over all his little ones, whether young or old in 
years. 

God's special care and love for these is strongly expressed in the 
above words of our Lord. "Their angels do always behold the face 
of my Father." God has given his angels special charge of these. 
"Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister to them 
who shall be heirs of salvation?" (Heb. 1:14.) And these unseen 



ministers of the saints always have access to our Father. O how 
little we realize the wondrous care that is over us. Even "the very 
hairs of your head are all numbered (Matt. 10:30); an innumerable 
company of angels who have constant access to our Father watch 
over us continually, and no good thing will he withhold, while 
every seeming ill shall be made to work together for our good. 
Does poverty, sickness, loss of friends or any other ill distress you? 
ever remember and be comforted by the blessed assurance that none 
of these things can separate us from the love of God. (Rom. 8:35.) 

Neither should any of these things separate God's children from one 
another. If they do, it is a sure indication that those so influenced 
are losing the spirit of God and turning back to the spirit of the 
world. Jesus specially warns us on this point, saying, that if God 
and all the heavenly hosts of superior beings so love, and esteem it 
a privilege to serve these little ones, see that ye despise them not. 

We believe that there are many of these "little ones" yet in the 
nominal church who, because of adverse worldly circumstances, are 
despised and unnoticed by the proud professors of Christianity who 
occupy the prominent positions in Babylon. We would suggest to 
the many who have asked, What can I do in the Lord's service? that 
here is a wide field of usefulness open to the average talent. 

There are doubtless those in every locality who are hungry for 
Christian sympathy and help. You can make it your business to 
seek them out and feed them with the precious truth which has so 
nourished you. If you have no ability to preach in a public way, 
how freely you can tell the blessed story in your own way, when 
heart to heart you can meet with some of the Lord's little ones. 
Many of them have become so accustomed to being despised and 
indifferently passed by, that your genial sympathy and help would 
be greatly appreciated. 

A little special effort, or, perhaps, more than a little, may make you 
acquainted with many such, and you will find abundant opportunity 
for the use of your talents right in your own locality. We should not 
be too quick to decide that all who are in Babylon are of Babylon, 
else all effort will be paralyzed, and many precious opportunities of 
service lost. It should be our constant endeavor to be co-workers 
with God and with all his unseen hosts of ministering spirits. 

But in all our efforts, let us remember the instruction to be wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves, not giving strong meat to those 
who are babes in Christ, but first the sincere milk of the word, and 
afterward stronger truth as they are able to bear it. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R657 : page 8 



QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Question. Please harmonize if you can Prov. 17:15 with Rom. 4:5. 
The first reads: "He that justifieth the wicked and he that 
condemneth the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord." 
The second is: "But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him 
that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness." 

Answer. Strictly speaking, no man can justify another, i.e., to make 
or truthfully pronounce him conformable to God's law. Yet it is 
quite a common thing for men to pronounce that right which is 
wrong, and thus they attempt to justify evil and evil doers. And the 
same disposition which leads them to do this, leads them also to 
condemn the just. Because they prefer evil, they attempt to deceive 
themselves and others into the idea that wrong is right and right is 
wrong. This is an abomination to the Lord. 

But while God condemns man's attempt to thus justify the wicked, 
the second text shows that he can and does justify the wicked. 
How? Certainly not in the same way he has just condemned —by 
excusing wickedness, or attempting to make it appear right, and 
remitting the penalty which he had justly pronounced against it. No, 
but God devised a way by which he could be just, and yet the 
justifier of sinners who believe in Jesus (Rom. 3:26), viz.: By 
giving his only begotten Son who "for the joy set before him," 
became our willing substitute. Our sins having been laid upon or 
imputed to him (Isa. 53:6) if we believe on him, his righteousness 
will be imputed to us; and thus we are justified. Sin having been 
cancelled by the Redeemer, the sinner will in due time be made 
actually perfect. 

Question. Was the prize of the high calling ever presented as an 
incentive to entire consecration? Is it not rather a spiritual truth 
revealed to the newly begotten creature— a truth which the natural 
man cannot receive? 

Answer. We so regard it. Paul urges consecration to God on 
account of the mercies of God as displayed in their justification 
(Rom. 12:1). When the natural man out of gratitude and love 
surrenders his whole being to God, he does not understand that the 
will of God is the complete surrender of his humanity, nor does he 
understand how the new creature develops into his Lord's likeness. 
Truth relative to his high calling is unfolded to him by degrees. 



R657 : page 8 

AFFLICTIONS are the rough touches and hard rubs that we get to 
polish us for use, and for shining. 



R657 : page 8 



"COMING to the Saviour we need not fear to place our hand of 
faith in His hand of power, for He is able and willing to lead from 
darkness into the marvelous light of love and grace." 



R657 : page 8 

"AS THE sunlight tints the flower and colors the rock; as it 
alternately sparkles in the dew-drop and shines in the broad ocean; 
so the true religious spirit should be present in the humblest bargain 
and the lowliest acts of life as much as in the great songs of Hebrew 
bards and the profound teachings of Paul." 



R657 : page 8 

"THE sentiment that it matters not what a man believes, so that he 
is sincere, is as unscriptural as it is absurd. Sincerity in belief has no 
more effect in warding off evil in the spiritual than in the natural 
kingdom. If the teachings and persuasions of a reputed chemist 
should prevail on you to believe that arsenic is harmless, would it 
therefore be harmless? Could you mix it with your bread, and eat it 
without injury. Oh, no; neither will the sincerity of your belief save 
you from the consequences of error in religious faith. Right belief- 
truth, God's truth, my brethren, is the only foundation on which you 
can safely rest your hopes." 



R658 : page 1 

VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1884. 
NO. 1. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 44 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



page 1 

WE have removed our business office to No. 44 FEDERAL ST., 
ALLEGHENY PA., where we will be pleased to receive a visit 
from any of you, when in the city. 



R658 : page 1 

TO NEW READERS. 

The TOWER comes to you as unpretentiously as the ministers of 
the early church. We present no list of titled and world-renowned 
contributors— none whose fame would command your attention to 
the subjects we present. But we come to you with the Bible as 
God's Word, and seek to enlist your attention to its statements and 
your obedience to its requirements and thus to lead the hearts and 
minds of some of God's children away from the jarring confusion of 
precept and doctrine, prevalent among the various divisions (sects) 
of Christians, into the harmony, beauty, simplicity, and confidence, 
which come from the study of God's Word and its acceptance as a 
harmonious whole and a self-interpreter. 

It would be but natural that you should wonder how these things 
could be true, yet not recognized long ago by earnest Christians; 
and why so many of those in the churches manifest a bitter 
opposition to things so full of harmony with God's Word, and so 
fully vindicating the justice, wisdom and love of our heavenly 
Father. 

In answer to your supposed queries, we suggest that if a broad view 
of God's dealings be taken, it shows that he has a plan with 
reference to men. While he was pleased in past times to reveal an 
outline of that plan, it was nothing more; no details were given. The 
details of the plan began to be recognized since Pentecost. The light 
of revelation shines with special brightness on the ends of the ages. 
Upon the ending of the Jewish age which was the beginning of the 
Gospel Age, new and special light shone out relative to the blessed 
privileges about to be enjoyed in the Gospel Age. Remember, too, 
that it came from the Scriptures, written long before, but which 
were never before appreciated or understood. Matthew, Mark, 



Luke, John, Peter and Paul, all quoted the prophecies and applied 
them to the events taking place and due to take place, in their day- 
the opening of the Gospel Age. The prophecies had been there for 
centuries, but the revelation or understanding of them, was reserved 
for those in the ends of the ages. (See 1 Cor. 10:1 1.) So now in the 
closing of the Gospel Age and dawning of the grand Millennial 
Age, we should expect the light to shine out brightly relative to 
God's plans for this incoming age. And so it does. Search and see. 
Gem after gem of precious truth now glows with unparalleled lustre 
to the diligent searcher, not because of his superior ability to find it, 
but because God's due time has come for such to understand it. 
Soon the blessed bow of promise shall span the whole heavens, and 
weeping earth shall dry her tears and shout for joy. 

It is no more surprising that these truths relative to God's plan for 
the blessing of all mankind should have been but dimly seen 
heretofore, than that the call of the Gentiles to be heirs of the 
Abrahamic promise, (Acts 11:18; Eph. 3:5,7; Gal. 3:29,) should 
have been but dimly seen until the Gospel Age began to dawn. We 
can understand prophetic scriptural statements only as they become 
due. Thus— "Light, (truth, was long ago) sown for the righteous." 
When due, the light springs up and gradually unfolds. Thus our 
Father has made abundant provision for the household of faith and 
the true servants shall bring forth things both new and old, that the 
household may have meat in due season. The cause of the 
opposition on the part of many to the truth now due, is the failure to 
recognize this progressive and unfolding character of God's 
revelation of his plans. Most Christians take for granted that good 
men of the past who walked in the light then due, had all the truth 
worth knowing. Knox, Calvin, Luther, Wesley and others were, we 
believe, followers in our Lord's footsteps of self-sacrifice and 
devotedness to God; but more truth is due in our day than in theirs. 
According to God's plan, the light should shine more and more until 
the perfect day. Therefore many Christians of to-day make a great 
mistake, and sit in comparative darkness, when they might be 
walking in glorious light, because they search the theology of these 
men instead of the Word of God. 

O, that all would turn away from musty church creeds of times past 
and give more earnest heed to the ever living, ever fresh, ever 
unfolding, ever new Word of God. Again, others take the Bible and 
search it only for the purpose of seeing how nearly they can make it 
to fit either their mental or written creed. If your habit has been 
such, we hope you will at once resolve to lay aside all human 
teachings as authoritative, and hereafter judge all you hear or read 
by the statements of Scripture. If you believe anything, make sure 
that you have Scriptural statements warranting it. Prove all things, 
hold fast that which is good, and cast away all else. 

The action of the nominal church today relative to the light now 
shining clearly resembles that of the Jewish church relative to light 
in the end of their age. They reject every new ray of light because it 



would conflict with some cherished theory or statement of their 
creed. They are so enwrapped with their own plans and 
arrangements for converting the world, that they are unwilling to 
hear that God has a better, grander, and infinitely more 
comprehensive way of dealing with evil, and blessing and teaching 
the world. Their ears are so stopped by the din and confusion of 
their own religious efforts that they cannot discern the plan of 
Jehovah. 

Satan is doubtless interested in the promotion of the confusion of 
sects, and stimulates and encourages that zeal which is not 
according to knowledge, and thus hinders their hearing Jehovah's 
voice, saying, "Be still and know that I am God, (the mighty one); I 
will be exalted among the heathen; I will be exalted in the earth." 
(Ps. 46: 10.) The power to do this is with our Father, and not with 
us. When he gives the saints with Christ their Lord, the heathen for 
an inheritance —when he gives the kingdom under the whole 
heavens to the people of the saints, THEN, and not by poor human 
effort, will God's kingdom come and his will be done on earth as it 
is in heaven. (Dan. 2:35,44 and 7:18,27.) 



R658 : page 1 

A FORMER PASTOR'S LETTER 

TO THE PRESENT PASTOR AND HIS CONGREGATION. 

DEAR BROTHER:— Your note, stating that you and the church of 
which you are the pastor, desire me to write to you, is at hand. Not 
doubting the general interest of yourself and those for whom you 
speak, in the welfare of a former pastor whose relations were 
mutually most amicable, I still suppose that it is particularly on 
account of my having withdrawn from the ministry and 
membership in the M.E. Church that you desire to hear. To those 
who listened to my preaching during my pastorate at 
Townsendville, it is unnecessary to state that I was at the time a 
Methodist. My notions of the teachings of Scripture were gained 
while yet a child. They were taught me by Methodist parents, in 
Methodist Sunday-schools, and from Methodist pulpits. 

I find that years before I was capable of forming for myself 
intelligent opinions concerning even the general scope of Scripture 
teaching, they had already been moulded, and I had 
unquestioningly accepted the opinions of others and made them my 
own. I am now disposed to believe, however, that it was with some 
degree of mental reservation that I accepted some of the doctrines 
of orthodoxy. How else could I, while professing to believe in 
endless torment for the unrepentant, associate with them, accept 
their many kindnesses, and speak to them from the pulpit on themes 
often tending to divert their attention from, rather than attract it 
toward, so horrible a fate. I believe, however, that by the churches I 



served, I was adjudged faithful to my duties; and, though coming 
short of my own model of what a minister of Christ should be, I 
have the happy consciousness of having ordinarily walked up to the 
degree of light I possessed. To relate my varied and peculiar 
experiences after resigning my pastorate would transcend the limits 
of an ordinary letter, and perhaps would be without interest to those 
for whom I write. Suffice it to say, that after about two years of 
such experiences, there fell into my hands, providentially as it 
seems to me, a publication which was the means of a decided 
change in my understanding of much of God's Word; a change, 
however, which led me to much more exalted views of the 
character of God, and served to harmonize many passages in his 
Word which before appeared either unmeaning or contradictory. 

Though disposed to look with much suspicion on all that cast a 
doubt on so-called orthodox teachings, I nevertheless found them so 
fatally assailed by God's own Word, that my prejudices, one by 
one, yielded, and orthodoxy crumbled and lay in a mass of ruins at 
my feet. 

You are now ready to ask, which of these doctrines appear to me to 
be out of harmony with the teaching of the Word, that my 
prejudices, one by one, yielded, and orthodoxy crumbled and lay in 
a mass of ruins at my feet. 

You are now ready to ask, which of these doctrines appear to me to 
be out of harmony with the teaching of the Word? The present 
opportunity will allow me to speak of but few of these, and I will 
select such as I trust will appear plain to you. Orthodoxy teaches 
that the present life irrevocably determines the future condition of 
every human being. Though it is nowhere stated 

R659 : page 1 

in Scripture that there is not for any a probation after this life, it is 
preached and enforced much more vigorously than many things 
which the Bible does affirm. 

If it be true, as preached, that there will be no probation after this 
life, then surely much the larger part of the human family never 
have a probation. No person can be said to have a probation until 
made acquainted with that for which he is to be held accountable. 
Besides, if there be no future probation, many passages of the 
sacred Word are to me unmeaning; nay, more, are positively 
contradictory. Please notice Luke 2:10, "Behold, I bring you good 
tidings of GREAT JOY, which shall be to ALL PEOPLE. " 

We are all aware that a large majority of the PEOPLE who have 
lived and died, even since these words were uttered, never heard of 
the event here referred to. In what sense, therefore, has it been 
GREAT JOY to them? What possible advantage can they have 
derived from it? 



Again, in John 1:9, it is stated of Jesus, "That was the true light 
which lighteth EVERY MAN that cometh into the world." How, 



permit me to ask, has he lighted those millions of the race who 
never heard of him? How can this be true, unless there is to be a 
trial for them in the future in which this light shall be received? 
Again, in 1 Tim. 2:6, it is stated that Christ Jesus gave himself a 
ransom for ALL, to be testified in DUE TIME. Now, we all know, 
that it has not yet been testified to ALL. 

But, if this Scripture be true, it will be; so we can reach no other 
conclusion than that the DUE TIME-God's DUE TIME-for much 
the larger part of the human family to receive this testimony will be 
FUTURE. 

I might cite many other passages that are susceptible of a rational 
interpretation only in this light, but surely they will occur to your 
minds. 

But, you may ask, Why is it not taught in the Scripture, if there is to 
be an opportunity 

R659 : page 2 

for those who have never heard of him of whom it is declared, 
"There is no other name given under heaven, among men whereby 
we must be saved?" To this I answer, It is so taught, and not in a 
single text merely, but in many Scriptures. Before referring you to 
such teachings, however, permit me to remark, that the doctrine of a 
future probation for the world is not more strange to nominal 
Christianity to-day than was that of a salvation for the Gentiles to 
the Jewish Church at Christ's first coming. In illustrating my 
position, I will call attention to a single instance from Scripture; not 
because it does not contain others, but because the limits prescribed 
me will not permit their notice. This one instance, however, will be 
sufficient, I trust, to answer every reasonable objection. 

We will select what is usually regarded as the most marked 
illustration of Divine wrath, viz.: the Sodomites. Now, if we can 
show from the plain statements of God's Word that these people are 
to come back to life, in order that they may have an opportunity of 
having it testified to them that Jesus Christ gave himself a ransom 
for all, of believing this testimony if they will, and of receiving the 
benefits of belief, viz.: justification: if we make this plain, then we 
think the case of the others will appear, at least, very hopeful. But, 
first, let us learn from the Great Teacher, who "knew what was in 
man," what he thought of these Sodomites. 

In his preaching he compared them with the Jews, and particularly 
with the people of favored Capernaum (Matt. 11:23,24). Jesus here 
says, "If the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been 
done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day. But I say 
unto you that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the 
day of judgment than for you." 

Thus we see that it was for want of light that these people were 
destroyed. We see also, that Jesus teaches a time of retribution- 
future-which shall be tolerable for ALL, even for the people of 



Capernaum, who rejected Jesus and his miracles; and yet more 
tolerable for the Sodomites that perished in ignorance. Are we not 
all ready to say, this is surely, as we have a right to suppose God 
would deal with those to whom in their lifetime he had never given 
light and knowledge? 

Now, turn if you please to the prophet Ezekiel, 16th chapter, and 
see that God is teaching the Jews of their final restoration to the 
"land of promise," as he had long before promised to Abraham. 

Bear in mind that the prophet is writing about 1,000 years after the 
destruction of this people, and that Jesus says (Luke 17:29), "It 
rained fire and brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all." 
Notice now, that in the 46th verse the prophet refers both to the 
people of Samaria and to those of Sodom, and in the 53d and 55th 
verses plainly states that these people who were all destroyed 
SHALL RETURN to their FORMER ESTATE. In the 60th and 
61st verses it is again stated that God will establish with Israel an 
everlasting covenant, and that he will give to her Samaria and 
Sodom for daughters (that she may instruct them and bring them 
into harmony with God's plans). Thus we see that the promised 
blessing to Israel is not alone for herself, but that she may be God's 
agency in extending light and knowledge to "ALL PEOPLE." 

How well all this comports with Peter's words (Acts 3:21), in which 
he declares the "times of restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all of his holy prophets since the world 
began. " A careful study of these holy prophets can scarcely fail to 
discover this glorious doctrine of a restitution of all things 
interwoven in all their writings. We are able in this light to 
comprehend John's definition of God's character— (1 John 4:8)— 
"God is love. " Is it not notably the case that the fear of future 
torment is now the principal incentive held out to induce men to 
come to God? John says, however, that "He that loveth not knoweth 
not God." 

Another teaching of the nominal Church, which I believe to be at 
variance with the teaching of the Word is, that all believers are to 
be of the body or Bride of Christ. The Bible teaches that the result 
of belief is justification to that condition which Adam forfeited by 
his disobedience. He forfeited human perfection; moral— mental- 
physical. Belief in Christ as the Redeemer, is the condition on 
which it may be recovered. The conditions to the high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus (Phil. 3:14); the holy calling (2 Tim. 1:9); the 
heavenly calling (Heb. 3:1), are far different. These require not only 
justification, but that their justified human nature shall be presented 
to God a living sacrifice— conditions which never were required 
until the narrow way to life was opened up by Jesus Christ (Heb. 
10:20; Matt. 7:14). Those who follow Jesus' footsteps in this 
narrow way are promised immortality. "For as the Father hath life 
in himself, so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself" (Jno. 
5:26); and we (his body) shall be like him (1 Jno. 3:2), spiritual 
beings, no longer human, but partakers of the Divine nature. 



By rejecting the Bible doctrine of a future probation— after the dead 
shall have heard the voice of the Son of God and come forth, as 
illustrated in the case of Lazarus, the widow's son and others —by 
rejecting this and other Bible teachings, the nominal Church has 
been thrown into confusion and led into many errors. 

That this confusion and these errors have largely contributed 
toward bringing about a rapid increase of infidelity, both within and 
without her own pale, I firmly believe. What is the spiritual 
condition of the Church to-day? Where are the revivals of former 
years? Alas, they exist only in name, or are the result of the efforts 
of a few professional revivalists. The barriers that formerly 
separated between the Church and the world are mostly swept 
away, and the man of fair worldly prospects, with whom she 
refuses to share all her privileges, must fall below the world's 
standard of morality. 

These, dear brethren, are some of the causes which led me to sever 
a connection which I once so highly prized, and to accept doctrines 
which, though they may bring reproach and obloquy, I believe to 
rest on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ 
himself being the chief corner stone. 

Commending you to God, who is able to make all grace abound 
toward you, and trusting that this letter may lead you to a more 
careful study of His Word, which only is able to make you wise 
unto salvation, and to trust less in human creeds and traditions, I 
remain, 

Your servant, for Christ's sake. 

S. T. TACKABURY. 



R659 : page 2 

JUSTIFICATION DEFINED. 

"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ."— Rom. 5:1, 

The word justification has two meanings, which are closely 
related; one is to prove that a thing is right, the other to make a 
thing right which is wrong. 

Webster defines the word justify thus: I. "To prove or show to be 
just or conformable to law, right, justice or duty— to vindicate as 
right." II. "To pronounce free from guilt— to absolve." 

These terms are used in these two senses in Scripture. As 
illustrating the first definition, viz.: proving or showing to be just 
and right, notice that our Heavenly Father is said to be justified and 
Jesus also. When John preached repentance for sins, the people who 
believed justified God; i.e., they acknowledged that God had been 
just in condemning and punishing them as sinners; 



R660 : page 2 



his dealings were vindicated as being right. Jesus as a man was 
tried or tested in all points (the world, flesh, and devil) as we are, 
"yet without sin"-"In him was no sin." He was "holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners." Jehovah was his judge, and he justified, i.e., 
declared him to have been proved right and just. He was vindicated 
as being right, or, as we read, he was "justified in spirit and 
received into glory." (1 Tim. 3:16.) 

His unspotted humanity he gave up to death, to pay for us, the 
penalty of Adamic sin. Thus his death was not for his own sins, but 
for ours. "He bore our sins in his own body on the tree." "Jehovah 
(in harmony with his own desire) laid on him the iniquity of us all." 
The man Christ Jesus gave himself (his manhood) a ransom for all. 
And one of the best evidences that in God's sight he was free from 
all sin, is found in the fact that though he gave his humanity as a 
ransom, yet God, while accepting the human sacrifice for our sins, 
raised Jesus to life on a plane far above the human. Had he been a 
sinner, this would have been impossible, for God's law condemns 
every sinner to death. 

Now notice the second meaning of justification-the making right 
of something which is wrong. This is the sense in which the term is 
applicable to us, who by "the fall" are wrong and sinful. 

God cannot say arbitrarily, though you are sinful, a violator of my 
just laws, I will declare you to be right. No, he must be just-justice 
is the foundation of his throne; everything rests upon it. If you are 
imperfect and sinful he cannot say that you are righteous. If you 
were righteous he could not declare you a sinner, nor treat you as 
such. 

Do you remind us that there is none of the Adamic race righteous- 
no, not one— and urge that, therefore, God cannot justify any of us? 
We reply that he cannot justify us in the first sense of the word, as 
seen above, but there is a way which God's love and wisdom have 
devised by which he can be just and the justifier of those sinners 
who believe in or accept Jesus. (Rom. 3:26.) Thus our justification 
is in the second sense explained above; that is, we who are wrong, 
sinful and condemned before God, are made right by having our 
sins and shortcomings settled by another— by having the 
perfections of another set to our account. 

But, some one may raise the question as to what is the cause or 
basis of justification. One claims that is by Jehovah's grace, and not 
because our ransom has been paid, and quotes Titus 3:7, "Being 
justified by his grace." Another claims that we are justified, not by 
grace, nor by a ransom, but by faith, and quotes Rom. 5:1, "Being 
justified by faith." Another claims the ransom as the basis of all 
justification, and refers to Rom. 5:9, "Being now justified by his 
blood" (death). Are there three ways to be justified? No, answers 
Jesus, "I am the way.. ..No man cometh to the Father but by me." 



What can there be about believing in Jesus? Why not believe in 
Peter or Moses or Samson or Isaiah or Jeremiah? Why could not 
God justify those who believe in these as well as those "who 
believe in Jesus?" There must be something special and peculiar 
about Jesus, something different from all other teachers and 
prophets that we may be justified through faith in him, and not by 
faith in them. 

Again, what is it to believe in Jesus? Is it merely to recognize the 
fact that such a person once lived in Judea and died on a cross? 
Surely not; many prophets perished in Judea; many persons died on 
crosses. 

In explanation, we suggest that if the context be studied, these texts 
will be found harmonious. It is by Jehovah's grace or favor that we 
are justified, for 

"Grace first contrived the plan 
To save rebellious man." 

We are justified by faith, too; that is, we must by faith grasp the 
agency of God's grace-the ransom-before we can realize its full 
value. But down under all is the ransom— Jesus' death— the basis of 
all justifying faith and the channel of God's grace. These three 
things: the value of the ransom as the power of justification, the 
grace which provided it, and the faith which appropriates it are all 
beautifully joined by Paul in Rom. 3:24,25. "Justified freely by his 
grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God 
hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood." 

The secret is, that Jesus died for our sins. But, does some one 
suggest, that as sin is the cause of all death, therefore Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, Peter and others died because of sin as well as Jesus. We 
answer, yes; they all died because of sin; all except Jesus died 
because of their share in the sin, because they were descendants of 
the condemned Adam, whose life was forfeited by sin. Thus all but 
Jesus die because of the inherited taint. Jesus died because of sin, 
too, but not because of inherited taint or personal guilt. His life 
came direct from God and was unforfeited; but he died for our sins. 
"Jehovah laid upon him the iniquity of us all." "Him who knew no 
sin [either personal or inherited] he made a sin offering [treated as a 
sinner] on our behalf, that we might become God's righteousness in 
him." (2 Cor. 5:21, Diaglott). 

Thus we see why God justifies believers through Jesus and not 
through themselves, nor through apostles or prophets. Now, we see 
why there is no other name given under heaven or among men 
whereby we can be saved from the penalty of the fall. It is because 
he gave his sinless, perfect humanity a RANSOM-substitute for 
ours. 

Did God unjustly lay upon the willing substitute the iniquity of us 
all? Ah, no; for the joy set before him he endured the cross, 
despising the shame. Therefore his present exaltation and glory. 



Wondrous wisdom of the infinite Jehovah! Who can find a flaw in 
his glorious plan or charge him with injustice? 

Now we see what it is to believe in Jesus. Not merely believing that 
such a man lived and died, but that he lived and died free from all 
condemnation and sin— attested and approved of God— and that his 
death was for our sins. And thus we see how God can justly justify 
those who believe in and accept of that sacrificial offering of the 
humanity of Christ Jesus. Now we can see that the sins and the 
frailties of the Adamic family were cancelled by the ransom price 
which the second Adam gave. The first Adam's sins were imputed 
to the second, and the second Adam's human purity is imputed to 
the first and his children-when they believe, and thus they are 
justified to live again. 

It is blessed to realize, too, that the spotless one who bought us by 
the sacrifice of his humanity is now highly exalted to the spiritual 
condition and power, and thus as a new creature -partaker of the 
divine nature— he will continue to carry forward the Father's plan. 
Soon he will bring from the prison-house of death those whom he 
bought, that they all might be (thus) saved (from the penalty of 
Adam's sin) and come to a knowledge of the truth, viz.: that they, 
by faith in Christ, are justified freely from all things and may come 
to perfection and harmony with God as before sin. 

How Paul brings out this doctrine of justification in Rom. 5:18,19, 
showing the condemnation to death on all through Adam, and the 
justification out of death to life through Jesus Christ our Lord, to 
whom be glory throughout all ages. Amen. 

Justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus, whom God hath sent forth to be a propitiation 
(satisfaction) through faith in his blood; to declare his righteousness 
(right doing) in the remission of sins that are past.. ..To declare, I 
say, at this time his (God's righteousness: that he might be just and 
the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus. (Rom. 3:24,25.) Those 
who will study the chart in "Food," page 105, will be helped in the 
understanding of this subject, and also the important subject of 
Sanctification, which should follow it, but cannot precede it. 



R660 : page 2 

"THE sentiment that it matters not what a man believes, so that he 
is sincere, is as unscriptural as it is absurd. Sincerity in belief has no 
more effect in warding off evil in the spiritual, than in the natural 
kingdom. If the teachings and persuasions of a reputed chemist 
should prevail on you to believe that arsenic is harmless, would it 
therefore be harmless? Could you mix it with your bread, and you 
and your children eat it without injury to health life? Oh, no! 
Neither will the sincerity of your belief save you from the 
consequence of error in religious faith. Right belief-truth, God's 



truth, my brethren, is the only foundation on which you can safely 
rest your hope. 



R661 : page 3 

A FREE SALVATION. 

ROMANS 3:24. 



Nothing to pay? No, not a whit; 
Nothing to do? No, not a bit; 
All that was needed to do or to pay, 
Jesus has done it his own blessed way. 

Nothing to do? No, not a stroke; 
Foiled is the captor, broken the yoke; 
Jesus at Calvary severed the chain, 
And none can imprison his free man again. 

Nothing to fear? No, not a jot; 

Nothing within? No, not a spot; 

Christ is at peace, and I've nothing at stake; 

Satan can neither harass me nor shake. 

Nothing to settle? All has been paid; 
Nothing to anger? Peace has been made; 
Jesus alone is the sinner's resource; 
Peace he has made by the blood of his cross. 

What about judgment? I'm thankful to say 
Jesus has met it and borne it away; 
Drank it all up when he hung on the tree, 
Leaving a cup of full blessing for me. 

What about terror? It hasn't a place 
In a heart that is filled with a sense of his grace. 
My peace is most sweet, and it never can cloy, 
And that makes my heart bubble over with joy. 

Nothing of guilt? No, not a stain; 

How could the blood let any remain? 

My conscience is purged, and my spirit is free; 

Precious that blood is, to God and to me. 

What of the law? Ah, there I rejoice; 
Christ answered its claims and silenced its voice. 
The law was fulfilled when the work was all done, 
And it never accuses a justified one. 

What about death? It hasn't a sting; 

The grave to a Christian no terror can bring; 

For death has been conquer'd, the grave has been spoiled, 

And every foeman and enemy foiled. 



What about feelings? Ah, trust not to them; 
What of my standing? Who shall condemn? 
Since God is for me, there is nothing so clear— 
From Satan and man I have nothing to fear. 

What of my body? Ah! that I may bring 
To God, as a holy, acceptable thing; 
For that is the temple where Jesus abides, 
The temple where God by his Spirit resides. 

What of my future? 'Tis glorious and fair, 

Since justified, sanctified, his glory I'll share; 

By his blood first redeem'd; by his grace then enthron'd. 

Side by side with my Lord, His Bride I'll be owned, 

What, then, dost thou ask? O, glory shall follow; 
Earth shall rejoice in the dawn of the morrow. 
To rule and to bless comes that kingdom and reign; 
Flee then, shall sorrow, death, crying and pain. 

-Selected. 



R661 : page 3 

THE LAW OF GOD. 

Christians are in the habit of looking at "the law" as a great 
enemy. Why? Because it does not countenance the least sin. It says, 
"walk before me and be thou perfect." Is this not right— could a 
perfect God recognize or make a law in any way imperfect? Surely 
not. The reason men count the law their enemy is that all have 
sinned, and ever since the disobedience of Adam they have been in 
the condition known as "sinful flesh." Prior to sin's entrance, the 
law was Adam's friend, and justified him; but the condition of death 
obtained after sin had entered, and man in this fallen condition of 
death finds it utterly impossible to so live and act in harmony with 
his Maker, that God's perfect law would not condemn him. And 
since all are sinners, of course none but a defective law could 
recognize such persons as perfect. The law of God has condemned 
all, and every one who has reasoning faculties seems to recognize 
that he is not perfect. 

God has always had a law; even before the giving of it at Mount 
Sinai. Since God always has been perfect, his laws always have 
been perfect, and condemned and opposed even the slightest sin. 
Abel, Noah, Abraham, and all the patriarchs recognized the fact 
that they were sinners when they made altars and sacrificed 
thereon, before attempting to hold communion. Thus they 
acknowledged themselves sinners and unable of themselves to 
approach God. How different from the way Adam and God walked 
and talked in the garden! No sacrifices or offerings for sin were 



there needed, for Adam was justified, or recognized as right by 
God's law. Thus we see that what the patriarchs knew of God's law 
condemned them. 

The giving of the law from Sinai did not take away man's sin. No, it 
only showed it the more fully. Did the keeping of it ever justify any 
of them? No; "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in 
his (God's) sight." Was the fault in the law, or in the people? Paul 
said, "The law is holy," and God's commands "holy and just and 
good." (Rom. 7:12.) The imperfection was with mankind. Since the 
law did not justify them, it must have condemned them, even as it 
had condemned the patriarchs. Not any more really (for there is 
only one penalty— death) but more loudly. They were no greater 
sinners than those of the Patriarchal Age who had not had the full 
law given them, but they were shown their condition as sinners 
more clearly. Why? That they might see their own fallen and 
imperfect condition, and learn the exceeding sinfulness of SIN, 
(Rom. 7:13,) and by this knowledge be prepared for the Redeemer. 

We have seen that God always has had a perfect law which 
condemned every sin in every being, and how it was shown in 
different degrees to the patriarchs and Israel, yet that the effect was 
the same-condemnation-only more fully realized by those who 
saw the law most clearly. Now, how about the great heathen world? 
Surely a righteous law could not say: The heathen are 
RIGHTEOUS; unless they live in harmony with God. And if you 
thought they were living in harmony with God you would not send 
missionaries to them. No, they too, are condemned by God's law. 
And as Paul says: These that have not the law (the full written law 
as given to Israel) "show the work of the law written in their 
hearts," a spark of that principle of justice and knowledge of right 
and wrong which must have been an important part of the natural 
organization of the first perfect man, Adam; a spark merely, not 
quite extinguished by the degrading effects of sin. 

What did this spark of conscience do for them? It sometimes 
justified, and sometimes condemned. But if their spark of 
conscience condemned them only ONCE during their lifetime, it 
showed that they were imperfect-sinners— hence subject to the sin 
penalty, death. 

Now, "all unrighteousness is sin," and "sin is the transgression of 
the law," and "the wages of sin is death." So we see that the only 
voice of the law of God to any who hear it is: You cannot live. "All 
have sinned and come short of the glory of God: " Therefore must 
"every mouth be stopped and all the world become GUILTY before 
God." (Rom. 3:9,19.) 

There lay the whole human family dead and dying through sin; the 
law hanging up before them, they admit, is grand, "just," and 
"holy." They were told that "The man that doeth these things shall 
live." (Rom. 10:5; Gal. 3:12.) But O, they could not do them. Some 
tried hard, as Paul describes. (Rom. 7:14-24.) When with their 



minds they resolved to "do those things and live," they found sin in 
their members hindering and preventing. When the striving ones 
found they could not deliver themselves from death, they 
exclaimed: "Wretched man that I am, who will deliver me from this 
body of death?" (Diaglott) or, from the sin and death which has 
gotten possession of me. When he so cries out, he has reached the 
place God wanted to bring him to, i.e., to realize that he can 
NEVER deliver himself from death and sin. But some one asks: If 
he dies does not the act of dying fill all the requirements of the law, 
and could he not, after thus dying, be raised up by God? No, you err 
in supposing that the act of dying is the penalty. Man has been 
dying ever since sin entered the world, but the penalty will not be 
entirely inflicted until all are dead. The penalty is, that sinners shall 
have life no longer; they forfeit their right to live. 

But when will the law of God release the sinner from the bondage 
of death? Never; if he could not obey the law while partially dead, 
he certainly cannot when completely so. Ever since the "fall" from 
perfect manhood through sin, man has been in a dying condition, 
sometimes spoken of as already dead (See Matt. 8:22). And none 
but a perfect man could keep a perfect law. But, says one, did not 
God send his Son into the world to show us how we could work our 
way up to spiritual life— appearing among us on the lowest round of 
the ladder, did he not point out to us the way? he being thus "our 
forerunner?" 

This view in many respects is held by a great many, mostly 
"Unitarians" and "Universalists," and like many other views has a 
mixture of truth in it; but as a whole it is far from being "the truth" 
on this subject. Jesus did indeed "lay aside the glory which he had 
with the Father, before the world;" he did appear to "set us an 
example that we should follow in his footsteps" and to be "our 
forerunner," but more, he is also our "Redeemer" from the curse of 
the Law. The curse of the law upon us as sinners is death. How did 
he redeem us from death? To redeem is to purchase back. He is 
therefore said to have "bought us with his own precious blood." 
Blood represents life— "The life of the flesh is in the blood" (Lev. 
17:11), therefore shed blood represents death or sacrificed life. "He 
gave his life;" "He shed his blood;" "He tasted death;" all have the 
same meaning. But how could his life purchase or redeem or buy 
ours? He as a man, a perfect man, kept the perfect law; and was 
therefore uncondemned by it. Therefore the same law which was 
the sinners' enemy condemning us to death, was his friend and 
guaranteed life to him. But was he not born into the world under 
condemnation of death, as much as any other son of Adam? No he 
was a direct creation of God— "made in the likeness of sinful flesh," 
but "in him was no sin." If he had done sin or been born a sinner, 
his life would have been forfeited as was ours. 

If born under condemnation as other human beings, he would have 
been as much a sinner as we, and as such would have been obliged 
to die for himself, and consequently would have nothing to give as 



a ransom for our life. But he was perfect, he kept the law, had a 
right to perfect human life forever; But "for the joy set before him," 
by the promise of the Father to raise him from the dead a spiritual 
body, he renounced the natural, human life, and gave it for our 
ransom. 

But when he arose from death, was not that a taking back of the 
price? Yes, if he had taken back the same life which he had laid 
down; but he did not take back the human; he was quickened by the 
Spirit— "made a quickening Spirit," raised a "spiritual body." There 
is a natural, human body and there is a spiritual body. 

Thus, "by his precious (valuable) blood" (life,) we were "redeemed 
from the curse of the law"-death. To what kind of life were we 
redeemed? The same which man had before death (the curse) came; 
the same kind that Jesus gave for us, i.e., human life. But we are 
promised spiritual life, and that we shall be made like unto Christ's 
glorious body? Yes; it is a part of God's offer to us (during the 
gospel age,) that we die earthly and fleshly— natural— life, we may 
be reckoned as "members of his body," and partake of the same 
kind of life as our Head. If we leave our Father's house (the human) 
we may become espoused to the Lord of glory as his Bride. In this 
arrangement we are reckoned as being justified to the perfect 
natural life first, else we could not give our lives. Being justified to 
life, Jesus says to us, you can either have this natural life, or, if you 
will renounce this natural, as I did, and become dead to the world, 
you shall have instead, the spiritual life and body. "If we be dead 
with Christ, we shall live with him." Rom. 6:4-8. "It is a faithful 
saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if 
we suffer we shall also reign with him." 2 Tim. 2:11. "Ye are 
partakers of Christ's sufferings." 1 Pet. 4:13. "Joint heirs with 
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also 
glorified together." Rom. 8:17. 

And it is because God thus waits until the elect number, the bride, 
the body, the Church, has "filled up the measure of the afflictions of 
Christ, which are behind," that the "restitution of all things," 
purchased for the world by the blood of Christ, is delayed and yet 
future. The Head suffered and died over eighteen hundred years 
ago; but all of the suffering and death of the body are not yet 
completed. Not noticing this, has caused wonder on the part of 
almost all, that the benefits and results of the ransom have not 
sooner come. (See Typical Sacrifices, in the Tabernacle Tract.) 

But would it be right for God to reckon the one righteous life given, 
as a full payment for the lives of the millions of sinners who have 
died? Does not the price— one, for a billion or more— seem like a 
short payment? 

This is a reasonable question, and we will allow Paul to give it a 
reasonable answer. He is a logical reasoner, as well as an inspired 
Apostle, and argues that, as God had seen proper to condemn all 
men to death on account of Adam's disobedience, so he had a right 



to reckon the second Adam a representative man, and justify to life 
all the race, in return for the sacrifice of this one perfect life. "For 
as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the 
obedience of one shall many be made righteous. "Therefore as by 
the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation," 
(condemned to suffer the penalty of sin, death,) "even so by the 
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto 
justification to life." Remember that none now enjoy life; our 
condition is a dying one. "Dying thou shalt die" was the penalty 
pronounced on Adam. Death reigns. 

The condition of perfect life as it was enjoyed before death came, is 
what all men are justified to, by the obedience of "Jesus Christ who, 
by the grace of God, tasted death for every man." 

"For as in Adam (or by Adam's sin) all die," so "in Christ (or by 
Christ's obedience, etc.) shall all be made alive." As the first 
Adam's bride was a party to the sin, so we see the second Adam's 
bride is made a party with her Lord in the removing of the curse. O 
glorious plan, of our all-wise and loving Father, and the exceeding 
riches of his grace toward us in Jesus Christ. 

But says one, I thought that Jesus had nullified, set aside and 
destroyed the law; and that therefore man could approach God. Oh 
no, that was a great mistake. Would it not be strange, indeed, if the 
Father made a law, which we have seen was "just" and "holy," and 
in fact the only one he could give because perfect and holy himself, 
would it seem proper even to think of Jesus as setting aside and 
destroying that "just" and "holy" law, or in any way making a 
league with sin or sinners? No, no. He came to do the Father's will, 
and the law is the record of that will. Jesus kept it himself, and 
taught the true meaning of it to be higher than the letter, and that to 
be "angry with a brother without cause," was to violate the 
command, "Thou shalt not kill." No, says Paul: "Christ magnified 
the law (made it larger and more minute), and made it honorable," 
showed, in fact, that that law could not be set aside or broken. He 
showed, too, by keeping it perfectly himself, that God's law was 
just, and not beyond a perfect man's ability. 

But we read, "Christ is the end of the law." What can that mean? 
The trouble is you have not quoted the connections. The text reads: 
"For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that 
believeth." (Rom. 10:4.) To whom is he this? To believers. How? 
Righteously, not by breaking it, but by righteously fulfilling its 
requirements, and we in him are just before the law. Because we in 
him are reckoned dead to the world and alive toward God through 
him— our new life, another similar text reads: "There is therefore 
now no condemnation to them which are IN Christ Jesus." Why are 
those in Christ not condemned? Because, since coming into him by 
faith they have received of his spirit, and with him can say, "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." 
(Ps. 11:8.) They are then alive spiritually though yet living in the 
dead body of sinful flesh which they are opposed to, and which by 



the Holy Spirit given they are enabled to "crucify." These walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit, and to all so walking in 

R661 : page 4 

Christ, there is no condemnation from the law. 

And in the glorious Millennial age, when all shall know God from 
least to greatest, when, "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth;"— "the times of restitution"— there will be the same 
"holy and just" law, and under the "Royal Priesthood" after the 
order of Melchisedec (the order of an endless life), poor fallen 
humanity will be helped back again to that perfect condition from 
whence Adam fell; a condition in harmony with God's law, and 
therefore in harmony with God. 

But will they receive no punishment for misdeeds of the present 
life? They will receive punishment, "stripes" in proportion as they 
had light and lived contrary to it. As our Master explained, "It shall 
be more tolerable for Sodom," in the day of judgment (in the age of 
trial) than for the Jews to whom he spoke, because the Sodomites 
had sinned against less light. (Matt. 11:24.) There will be many or 
few "stripes," in proportion to the amount of light they have had 
and the use made of it. 

There will be rewards given to some during that age also; "for 
whosoever shall give to one of these little ones (of the 'little flock'), 
a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, shall in no wise 
lose his reward." (Matt. 10:42). 



R663 : page 4 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD. 

"But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, 
a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him who 
hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light." 1 Pet. 2:9. 

"Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his own 
blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; 
to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever." Rev. 1:5,6. 

"And hast made us unto our God kings and priests; and we shall 
reign on the earth." Rev. 5:10. 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection; on 
such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of 
God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years." Rev. 
20:6. 

The above scriptures clearly teach that a part, at least, of the 
Church's work in the future, will be to officiate as the priests of 
God. As the work of the priest is one of intercession and of 
instruction in righteousness, they clearly prove that the glorious 
work of evangelization will go on after the resurrection has taken 



place. The fact that these offices of "king" and "priest" will exist, 
logically implies that there will be subjects to rule and learners to 
teach; otherwise the names would be meaningless and the titles an 
empty sound. 

It is held by some that the reign of the saints will consist of a very 
brief "reign of terror," during which— with Jesus at their head— they 
will trample their enemies into the dust and utterly destroy them. 
We thank our dear Lord for a better hope. Our work will not be one 
of destruction, but of salvation. We shall rule as kings, even with a 
rod of iron; but the grand object will be to humble the nations, and 
so fit them for the reception of truth. "For, when thy judgments are 
in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 
Isa. 26:9. 

What a blessed prospect! what a glorious calling! A royal 
priesthood! 

Who that is imbued with the spirit of the Master; who that has but 
tasted that the Lord is gracious, could desire more agreeable 
employment than to show forth the praises of our Saviour King, to 
those sitting in darkness? to bind up the broken-hearted? to 
proclaim liberty to the captive? to give beauty for ashes and the oil 
of joy for mourning? 

"To tell the old, old story 
Of Jesus and his love?" 

To fit us for such an exalted and responsible position we require a 
peculiar training, and we feel warranted in claiming that the trials, 
temptations and discipline of this present life are for that very 
purpose. 

Many a struggling believer, trying hard to overcome, buffeted by 
the enemy, tried by friends, weighed down by hereditary 
weaknesses in self, discouraged and faint, has cried out, from the 
depths of a loving heart: "Why, O! why this suffering? why this 
severe chastisement?" Let us glance for a moment at the pathway 
trod by the Master— our forerunner— and we shall find the answer. 

"So, also, Christ glorified not himself to be made a high priest; but 
he that said unto him, Thou art my son.... Who in the days of his 
flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong 
crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and 
was heard in that he feared: Though he were a son, yet learned he 
obedience by the things which he suffered, and being made perfect, 
he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey 
him." Heb. 5:5-9. 

"For it became him, for whom are all things, in bringing many sons 
unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through 
sufferings. Wherefore, in all things it behooveth him to be made 
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high 
priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the 
sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being 



tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted." Heb. 2:10,17- 
18. 



"For we have not a high priest who cannot be touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we 
are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of 
need." Heb. 4:15,16. 

The reason, then, that the Church is called on to "fill up that which 
is behind of the afflictions of Christ" is, that all the body, in like 
manner to the Head, may be trained to perfect sympathy and to 
perfect obedience through suffering. In this present time, we in all 
our troubles come to our compassionate High Priest with boldness, 
realizing that he, having been partaker of flesh and blood, can truly 
feel for us and pity us; so in the age to come, the Church, the 
promised seed of Abraham, through whom all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed (compare Gen. 12:3; Gal. 3:14,16,29,) shall 
go forth a royal priesthood, according to the order of Melchisedec, 
fully prepared to sympathize with the nations, to lead them to the 
paths of righteousness, and to encourage them in the way of life. 

Shall we shrink, then, from our cross? Shall we seek to put away 
the bitter cup that is sometimes pressed to our lips? Surely not. 'Tis 
a loving hand that presents it, 'tis a loving heart (infinitely loving) 
that sees the need of it. It is but the Master fitting us for his work; 
training us for the priesthood; teaching us to rule ourselves that we 
may know how to rule others; opening our eyes to the weakness of 
our own flesh, that we may have patience with those over whom we 
shall be given authority. (Luke 19:17,19.) 

Courage, then, my Christian brother or sister, seeking with weary 
steps to run the narrow way. Heed not the rugged course; it is all 
hallowed and sanctified by the blessed feet of the Master. Count 
every thorn a flower; every sharp-rock a mile-stone, hurrying you 
onward to the goal. Let every advancing step be a "Nearer, my God, 
to thee:" every hillock in the road an "upward toward heaven." 
Keep your eye fixed on the prize. Soon— very soon— you may wear 
the crown. 

"It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also 
live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him." 

W. I. MANN. 



R663 : page 4 

LOVE DEFINED. 

"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have 
love one to another." 

Love is that tender solicitude and affection with which anything 
commanding admiration and respect, is regarded. That which is not 



lovely never can be loved in the true sense of the word. A 
degenerated nature may desire and find a morbid satisfaction in that 
which is unlovely, but that is not love. Love wherever found is a 
gleam of the divine likeness, and is spontaneously awakened by the 
presence of that which is noble and pure and good. This wonderful 
principle binds in holiest and most delightful union and harmony all 
intelligent beings controlled by it. God is the most glorious 
exhibition of its nobility and grandeur. It is the law of his being and 
shall ultimately be the controlling law of all his universe. 

But one inquires, if only that which commands admiration and 
respect can be truly loved, how could God love sinners and tell us 
to do the same? We reply that God never loved sinners as such; he 
loved the jewel he had brought into perfect being because it was 
truly lovely; and when, under temptation it lost its excellence and 
glory, his love for its perfection pitied it in its fall, while his justice 
condemned it; and that love devised the wondrous scheme for its 
recovery. 

Let us here note the attitude of Jehovah toward those whom he so 
loved as to give his only begotten Son to redeem them. For six 
thousand years he has permitted their adversary to have dominion 
over them. Famine and pestilence have stalked abroad; hatred and 
strife, and war and bloodshed, have filled the earth with untold 
agony and woe, until the grave closed over generation after 
generation. Six thousand years, but no deliverance yet; God still 
stands off, and still the king of terrors reigns. When the long 
promised Deliverer comes, it is to rule with a rod of iron- to dash 
in pieces as a potter's vessel the kingdoms of earth, which from 
human standpoint seem necessary for protection against greater 
evils. In fear and dismay men look upon God as an enemy, and seek 
to hide from his presence; yet "God is love," and 

"He knows, not they, how sweet accord 
Shall grow at length from out this clash 
Of earthly discords, which have jarred 
On souls and sense: They hear the crash, 
But do not know that on His ear, 
Breaks harmony— full, deep and clear." 

Now the love of God is vailed, but soon it shall be revealed in the 
glorious restoration to Edenic perfection and bliss. 

R664 : page 4 

Soon "the redeemed of the Lord (all mankind) shall return and 
come with singing unto Zion, (the Church in kingdom power,) and 
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away." Thus viewing 
God's dealings, we see that his wisdom often veils his love. 

True love while it seeks to shield and protect, will justly judge and 
endeavor to eradicate a fault-expose it, let the light shine on it and 



show it up to those affected by it, that it may be removed, and grace 
and beauty take its place. 

A very false notion of love obtains among the majority of Christian 
people, and under this false notion our adversary endeavors to 
shield some of the most dangerous and deadly errors that seek to 
sap the very foundation of the Christian's hope. Let this deadly 
thing which the adversary dares to present to God's children be 
touched by the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God, and 
he who wields it is said to be uncharitable, loveless. But does this 
make it so? By no means. Jesus was full of the love of God, but he 
spoke most emphatically against evil doers:-"Ye blind guides 
which strain at a gnat and swallow a camel;" "Woe unto you, for 
you shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; ye neither go in 
yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in." (Matt. 
23:13-33.) And again he said to erring Peter, "Get thee behind me 
Satan, (adversary) thou art an offence unto me, for thou savorest 
not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. " (Matt. 
16:23.) But how differently the Lord's rebukes affected his loving 
disciples and the proud Pharisees. 

Paul was a noble pattern of his Master's spirit in his zeal for the 
truth, and his care for fellow members of the church. His usual 
manner toward all, like that of Jesus, was kind, generous, and 
affectionate, but did Paul cover the truth, shield error, or fail to 
warn an erring brother or the flock of God against the 
encroachments of the enemy? If he had so done, as an unfaithful 
steward he would have lost his stewardship. Though Peter was a 
noble soldier of the cross and fellow servant in the Lord, Paul 
withstood him to the face when, by giving way to the old nature for 
a time, he was to be blamed. (Gal. 2:11.) Note in connection with 
this, the sympathy and love existing between these brethren; (2 Pet. 
3:15,) evidently the rebuke was accepted in the spirit of meekness. 
And again we find Paul faithfully warning the church against 
"some" who had become the enemies of the cross of Christ. Phil. 
3:18. 

Does some one object that we must "judge not that we be not 
judged?" We reply that to exercise human judgment in condemning 
others would be wrong; but to apply the judgment of God as 
expressed in his Word is right. We are commanded to do so. And 
the various descriptions of evil deeds, false teachings, and seducing 
doctrines, are given that we may judge- "That the man of God may 
be thoroughly furnished," for reproof, for correction of error and 
instruction in righteousness. (2 Tim. 3:16-17.) It is therefore the 
duty of every child of God to judge what is right and what is wrong, 
what is true and what is false. That against which we are cautioned 
is judging by other standards than the Word of God —condemning 
on our own, or any other human authority. That Paul judged 
according to God's Word and taught the church to do the same is 
very clear. (See 1 Cor. 5:3; Gal. 2:11; 1 Thes. 5:21; 2 Tim. 4:2; 1 



Cor. 6:2,3- Note also Paul's prayer that love might abound in 
judgment, Phil. 1:9,10. 



No doubt Paul's faithfulness in seeking to build up and establish the 
church in purity of doctrine and life, was often misunderstood, and 
failed to be appreciated by them. This is very apparent from 1 Cor. 
chap 4. "But (he says) it is a very small thing that I should be 
judged of you, or of man's judgment. He that judgeth me is the 
Lord." Then speaking of his labor and suffering for them, he says: 
"I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I 
warn you." (Read the chapter throughout). 

Jesus said: "By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if 
ye have love one toward another," and Paul says: "Let love be 
without dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which 
is good." When contending with an unseen, but wily and powerful 
foe, what mere hypocrisy is that profession of love which fails to 
warn of immediate or approaching danger. 

The new creature in Christ is a jewel of infinite value, "and every 
one that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is begotten of 
him." (1 John 5:1.) Dearly beloved, "Be kindly affectioned one to 
another, with brotherly love; in honor preferring one another;" 
"Reprove, rebuke, exhort (each other) with all long suffering and 
doctrine." Give and receive in the spirit of meekness, remembering 
that "Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave 
itself unseemly (unbecomingly) seeketh not her own, is not easily 
provoked, thinketh no evil." 

By this mutual love, and this care one for another, will all men be 
able to discover who are Jesus' disciples— "Let love be without 
dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is 
good." So shall you "be blameless and harmless, the sons of God 
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, 
among whom ye shine as lights in the world." 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



page 4 

A BIBLE READING. 

THE ATONEMENT. 

When we know that a doctrine rests on the Word of God, we can 
rest on it without fear. Many of God's children, though walking in 
the light, are inclined to lean too much on the arm of flesh; and if 
we mistake not God is going to shake them loose. Blessed will they 
be who are standing on the rock of his truth. 

All do not have equal facilities for searching the Word, so we wish 
to help 

page 5 



them. We would say, however, that there is but little excuse for the 
most of us, seeing that good reference Bibles are so cheap. A 
teacher's Bible and a full concordance, a prayerful heart and an 
honest mind, with time and patience, are all we need— God will give 
the rest. 

Study carefully and prayerfully the following texts; use them as 
starting points with your reference Bibles; you will find plenty 
more. Keep a list of all you find; compare any theory of the 
atonement, no matter where it comes from, with every text on your 
list; if it agrees, believe it; if not, reject it. Let God's Word be the 
end of all controversy between you and every doctrine brought 
before you. Don't be afraid to investigate. "Light is sown for the 
righteous." "Prove all things, hold fast that which is good." 

Here are some of the things that Jesus did for us in the 

ATONING WORK: 

He died for us. 1 Thes. 5:10; Rom. 5:8. 

He died for all. 2 Cor. 5:14,15; John 11:50-52. 

He died for our sins. 1 Cor. 15:3; 1 Pet. 2:24. 

He justified us. Gal. 2:17; Rom. 4:25. 

The law could not. Gal. 5:4; Rom. 3:20. 

Our works could not. Gal. 2:16; Rom. 3:27,28. 

Faith in his work justifies. Gal. 3:13,14; Rom. 4:24. 

He bought us. 1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23. 

He redeemed us. Gal. 3:13; 1 Pet. 1:12-20. 

He ransomed us. Matt. 20:28; 1 Tim. 2:6. 

He washed us. Rev. 1:5; 1 John 1:7. 

He sanctified us. Heb. 13:12; Eph. 5:26. 

He saves us. 1 Cor. 1:21; 1 Tim. 1:15. 

He was an offering for us. Heb. 9:28; 10:10. 

He was sacrificed for us. Eph. 5:2; 1 Cor. 5:7. 

He knew no sin. 1 John 3:5; Heb. 4:15. 

He was made sin (a sin-offering) for us. 2 Cor. 5:21; 1 Peter 2:22- 
24. 

The Just died for the unjust. 1 Pet. 3:18; consider also the meaning 
of the sacrifices of 4,000 years. 

His blood bought us; 1 Pet. 1:2. Purchased us; Acts 20:28. 
Redeemed us; Rev. 5:9. Justified us; Rom. 5:9. Washed us. Rev. 
1:5. Sanctified us; Heb. 13:12. Saves us; Acts 4:12. 

"A little Scripture is better than a good deal of reasoning." 



W. I. MANN. 



R664 : page 5 

MAN'S INHERITANCE. 

When God created man, he endowed him with qualities of being 
like his own. Qualities of justice and judgment fitted him to be a 
ruler; qualities of mercy and love prepared him to be a reasonable, 
kind and wise ruler. Such is a brief description of earth's first king- 
Adam. An image of his Creator, (not physically, but mentally and 
morally,) he was invested with authority over earth and its affairs, 
like as God is ruler over all, as we read: After our likeness let them 
have dominion over the beast of the field, the fowl of heaven and 
the fish of the sea. (Gen. 1:26.) Thus was he installed lord of earth. 
He was but another form of creation, a step lower than angels, as 
lower and under him, came the brute creation. Accordingly we 
read: "Thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast 
crowned him with glory and honor. Thou madest him to have 
dominion over the works of thy hands. Thou hast put all things 
under his feet," (Ps. 8:5-6.) 

All of this glory, honor and rulership was invested in him, to be 
used in harmony with his nature, which being perfect, was in 
perfect harmony with the will of God. This was his inheritance, but 
he lost it. 

As God had foreseen, man disobeyed his superior ruler, the King of 
kings and Lord of lords. This could not be allowed to go 
unpunished. He had been informed from the first that disobedience 
to God would be sin, and that its legitimate punishment and effect 
is death. While man always was mortal, i.e., liable to death, if 
disobedient to God's laws, yet the loving Creator had made every 
provision necessary to his welfare, in the garden prepared for his 
trial. And not only had he arranged that the soul (person) that 
sinned should die, but also that if obedient the person should 
continue to live. The means for life's continuance was in "every tree 
of the garden," i.e., the food provided for man's sustenance was 
amply sufficient to meet all the wastes of his system, and would 
have preserved the freshness and vigor of his perfect being forever. 
This would be everlasting life. 

When man became a sinner the penalty "death" must be executed. It 
mattered not so far as the penalty was concerned, whether Adam 
should die the same moment that he disobeyed, or the same year, or 
a thousand years after. He must die. The word "day" used in 
connection with the penalty, is the general term used now as well as 
in past times, for a period or epoch of time, as: "The day of 
temptation in the wilderness —forty years;" the days of creation, etc. 
The marginal reading clears up the meaning: "In the day that thou 
eatest thereof, dying, thou shalt die," (Gen. 2:17.) This was fulfilled 



not by God's striking Adam dead with a thunderbolt but simply by 
cutting off his access to the life-giving food supplied by the trees of 
the prepared garden. Accordingly an angel drove Adam from the 
garden and prevented with flaming sword, his access thereafter to 
the tree (trees or woods) of life, (Gen. 3:24.) 

Thus was the lord of creation driven out into the world which God, 
foreknowing his fall, had left in an unprepared or "cursed" 
condition. The garden which we are told was "prepared" was 
doubtless an illustration of what the whole earth will be when man 
and his perfect conditions are restored-in "The times of restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets." 

Thus thrown upon his own resources for obtaining by sweat of face 
elements to sustain life, Adam found it a hard lot, and by its effects 
was enabled to know what evil is, and the exceeding bitterness of 
sin. And oft, no doubt, he desired, perhaps prayed, that he might be 
permitted again to dwell in Eden, and promised that with his 
present knowledge of sin and evil he would more highly prize the 
good things there enjoyed and more fervently love and obey him 
"from whom cometh every good and perfect gift." But though 
God's plan was no less loving than this, it was broader, wiser and 
more comprehensive. God's plan was to let not only Adam, but also 
the entire race, learn just this same lesson of the bitterness of sin 
and disobedience which each must individually learn to fully 
appreciate. Then bringing all back to the Eden condition, sin might 
be forever banished, and the entire race live in harmony with God. 

Toil and care told in time upon even the perfect physical form of a 
perfect man, resulting finally in his complete overthrow and 
wresting from his grasp the last shred or spark of life. He is dead. 
After nine hundred and thirty years of struggle with his foe-death- 
he is conquered. The penalty of sin was inflicted and continues to 
this moment, since he still is one of the prisoners in the great 
charnel house of death, which has since swallowed up the race, and 
will hold them all until the second Adam, who ransomed the race, 
and who declares, "I have the keys of hell and death" [hades— the 
grave] (Rev. 1:18) shall take his great power and reign, releasing 
"the prisoners of the pit" [grave], "the captives" of sin and death. 

But not only did the casting out from the life -preserving fruits of 
the garden tend to the impairing of Adam's physical powers, but of 
his mental qualities also. It was not possible that he should retain 
perfect mental vigor, when he became physically impaired, thought 
being the product of the mental organism made active by the 
physical vitality. 

We see then that Adam's mental powers decreased with his physical 
deterioration, and the moral qualities of his mind suffered the most. 
While the energy of body and mind were taxed to their utmost to 
take care of self, it is but reasonable to suppose that the quality of 
benevolence (love) which, as he was in God's image, must have 



been one of the ruling characteristics of his being was crowded out, 
and the qualities of acquisitiveness (selfishness) and combativeness 
were developed instead. This same idea followed out would show 
us that all the higher, grander, nobler qualities were suffered 
measurably to decline, while all of the lower ones (common to the 
lower animals) were the more developed. 

As man lost the grandeur of his being, and its powers decreased, his 
rulership over the lower creation, as well as over self gave way, 
until to-day we find him afraid of all wild beasts, and that they no 
longer recognize the rulership of their fallen lord. And the influence 
once exercised by our father Adam is barely discernible in the 
occasional man who can master and tame (partially) the ferocious 
beasts. Here we have a brief glance at the first dynasty of earth and 
its overthrow. Now we see the result: "By sin came death." In the 
expressive language of Paul, 

"DEATH REIGNED" 

King of Terrors under "him that has the power of death, that is, the 
devil"— "the prince of this world." All bow before him; all are 
under his control. From the cradle to the tomb, every ache and pain 
attests his power over us, and the same agency which first placed us 
under his rule (sin) conspires yet, to more quickly destroy the race. 
His rule or reign must continue so long as there is sin to be 
punished, or until the entire race is reduced to the condition of 
lifelessness. But Jehovah foresaw all this, and in his plan has 

A DELIVERER PROVIDED. 

Such a ransom and deliverance was a part of God's plan from the 
first; and we read, "for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, 
that he might destroy the works of the devil"— sin and death, (1 John 
3:8.) And not only so, but also "him that hath the power of death, 
that is, the devil," (Heb. 2: 14,) and thus release from his grasp all of 
the race. 

But as Satan, in exercising the power of death, is the executor of 
justice, and thus unwittingly serving God's purpose for a time, his 
destruction is delayed for a season. The one who would deliver the 
race from death must first satisfy the claims of the law of God. This 
the fallen ones could not do for themselves, as God had from the 
first foreknown and arranged for in his plan. Carrying out this plan 
he had already condemned the entire race on account of one man's 
disobedience. His purpose from the first being that he would 
provide another, man, who, being without sin, should give himself 
"a ransom for all" the race— that "as by one man's disobedience 
[the] many [all] were made sinners, so by the obedience of one 
shall [the] many [all] be made righteous" (justified from sin and 
death,) (Rom. 5:19.) 



But who is the one righteous, pure, holy, sinless, one? How could 
there be such an one among a race all of whom were condemned? 



"There is none righteous, no not one," the scriptures answer. But 
when mankind had learned effectually his own weakness and 
inability to deliver himself from death, his extremity became God's 
opportunity, and "God's eye pitied and his arm brought salvation." 
The very chief of God's creation higher than angels (Heb. 1:5-8,) he 
who is called "the beginning of the creation of God" (Rev. 3:14) is 
selected as the one who shall undergo the labors of redeeming 
humanity. We are not to suppose this was an irksome or unwilling 
work, for we cannot suppose a being in perfect harmony with 
Jehovah who would not take delight in doing his will. Nor would 
obedience be the only motive which would actuate, partaking as all 
perfect beings on whatever plane they exist must, of the divine 
quality— love —he would love to do the work for the sake of its 
benefits to mankind, in releasing them from death. This no doubt 
was a part of "the joy set before him, for which he, "endured the 
cross despising the shame." (Heb. 12:2.) 

But in addition to this joy at the opportunity to release the human 
race from death, was that of "bringing many sons to glory,"— some 
to the lost earthly glory and some to heavenly glory. To a little 
flock gave he power to become sons of God of a higher than human 
nature— even to be "partakers of the Divine nature," and joint heirs 
with him of his own inheritance. These, according to God's plan are 
reckoned as the bride of Christ and as such enter the heavenly 
family. To these sons this mighty one is now the leader or "captain 
of their salvation." He leads them now through suffering, toil and 
sacrifice even unto death, which is working out for them an 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Another part of this 

"JOY SET BEFORE HIM, " 

was that he himself should, because of his obedience, labor, 
sacrifice, etc., be accounted worthy of still higher honor and more 
intimate relationship and communion with Jehovah than he had 
ever yet possessed, even to partake of his divine nature. So we read: 
"He became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted him and given him a name 
which is above every name," (Phil. 2:8,9,) "that all men should 
honor the Son even as they honor the Father." (John 5:23). 

But how shall this redemptive work be accomplished? We have 
seen that God's plan was, that since by man came death, by man 
should also come the resurrection of the dead. (1 Cor. 15:21.) Then 
to redeem man, this mighty one must become a man, in every 
particular. He must partake of "flesh and blood," (Heb. 2:14,) and 
consequently must have the exact nature of the fleshly race, but not 
the sinful and depraved dispositions with which we are now 
burdened, but he must be a perfect man, standing exactly where 
Adam stood, except to know more perfectly the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin and its dire effects which he saw everywhere about 
him, and also for what purpose he had come. He took not the nature 



and form of angels, for that would not have served God's purpose, 
but he took the nature and form of a man. 

All things were now ready. "In the fullness of time, God sent forth 
his Son, born of a virgin," "born not of the will of the flesh but of 
the will of God"— in a word, as much of a specially creative act on 
God's part as was the creation of Adam; the difference being that 
the one could say, "The earth is my mother," the other was "born of 
a woman." Had he been a descendant of Adam he would have been 
under the curse of death, as all other members of that race. He 
would have been unable to keep the law as other men in whom 
sinful dispositions and depraved tastes are born. But while of the 
same (human) nature he is a new being, distinct from the race. He is 
born, grows in wisdom and in stature but manifests powers beyond 
others because he is perfect, they imperfect. Now he has reached 
maturity (according to the law) at thirty years of age. He knows as 
no one else does, the great work for which during those thirty years 
he has been coming-his body preparing— it was "for the suffering 
of death"-that he "should taste death for every man" -"that 
through death he might destroy death," and liberate the dead race— 
"in due time." Now he is come, the second perfect sinless man, and 
offers his perfect life as a ransom for the race-"Lo, I come, (as) in 
the volume of the Book it is written of me, to do thy will, O, God." 
(Heb. 10:7.) This was his covenant, to die, as he afterward 
expressed it, saying: "For this cause came I into the world." And 
here in type he was buried in the water and rose again, thus making 
the picture of that which he covenanted to do. 

There then, as the perfect one he had done all that he could do, 
given himself up to die in whatever way the Father might direct. 
But though the death had not actually occurred (at baptism) it was 
so reckoned, (as with us when we covenant,) and the new nature's 
powers and will, which belong to the spiritual body, which he was 
to be when the work of death was complete; ("raised a spiritual 
body,") these powers and qualities were given to him in a measure 
as soon as the human— earthly— body was consecrated. This was at 
his baptism when the spirit descended and a voice from heaven 
acknowledged his begetting again to the spiritual plane, and to the 
divine nature— "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well 
pleased." (Matt. 3:17.) Henceforth the life of Jesus is that of a dual 
being, the outward form being 

R664 : page 6 

the man Christ Jesus, whose life and being were daily spent for the 
good of others— a body already given up to death, and a new being 
within— the Divine nature— the spirit power of God. And in this he is 
the pattern and leader of "all who come unto God by him," "who 
become partakers of the Divine nature"-the "little flock" called his 
bride— his body. We must surrender ourselves to God— be baptised 
in his death— in order to be begotten of the spirit and receive the 
earnest of our new spiritual being, the fullness of which will be 



received when we are completely delivered from this fleshly 
condition to our spiritual bodies. 

Thenceforth he "did not his own (human) will" but was "led of the 
Spirit," and the actions now were of God, as Jesus testified: "The 
word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me." 
(John 14:24 and 17:8.) "The Father that dwelleth in me, He doeth 
the works." (John 14:10.) If we as our head "are led by the Spirit of 
God"— even unto death— we also become "the sons of God," (Rom. 
8: 14,) who will also work in us to will and to do of his own good 
pleasure." (Phil. 2:13). 

And we who are now "new creatures (in Christ Jesus") should take 
courage from the life of our beloved Master; as Paul says: 

"CONSIDER HIM 

who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye 
be weary and faint in your minds." If you sometimes find it hard to 
endure the frowns of the world and to be thought of and treated as a 
deceiver by your friends, think of him weeping in Gethsemane, 
condemned before Pilate, crucified as a malefactor, forsaken and 
denied by his loved ones, "yet he opened not his mouth." And if 
human nature sometimes shrinks, although reckoned dead, think of 
him. Remember that he was tempted in all points like as we are, 
(yet without sin,) and can and does sympathize with us, and though 
you may sometimes cry out, as he did: "Father, if it be possible, let 
this cup (the ignominy) pass from me," forget not to add, as he did, 
"yet not my will but thine be done. " The human will of Jesus 
though given up at consecration— baptism— felt the crucifixion so 
that he needed the heavenly "grace to help in time of need" to keep 
the human will perfectly obedient to the new being— the divine. 

This dying process continued during the three and one-half years of 
his ministry, from the moment of his consecration and acceptance 
at baptism, until on the cross he cried: "It is finished." But what was 
finished there— the work of atonement? No, the work of atonement 
signifies the making at one of two parties. In this case God was one 
and humanity the other party. Man's sin had brought upon him 
God's curse, death, instead of his blessing; and by its degrading 
influence (as we have seen) it had so marred the mental and moral 
likeness of man to his maker, that he no longer took "delight in the 
law of God," but in sin, and it will be readily seen that there was 
much work necessary to bring about full reconciliation between 
God and man. First— Justice must be met, a ransom must be given 
for the sinner, else God could never, to all eternity, recognize him 
as having a right to live. Secondly— Man must be brought to his 
original condition of perfection— in God's image— before he can be 
of himself perfectly in harmony with God's perfect will and law. 
Now, while this work, as a whole, was Jehovah's plan from "before 
the creation of the world," its accomplishment only began with 
Jesus, and will not be completed until the end of the millennial 



reign, when Jesus shall deliver up all things to the Father, having 
put down (destroyed) all opposition to God's law. 1 Cor. 15:24-28. 

When Jesus cried, "it is finished," he referred only to the first 
mentioned part of this work of atonement viz.: The giving of the 
ransom; this was now complete; the penalty of Adam's sin was now 
met, for "Christ died for our sins according to the Scripture"— "He 
gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time." He "is a 
propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins, and not for ours only, but 
also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) 

Having thus "purchased us from death with his own precious 
blood," all the race belongs to him. A race of sinners they were, 
having no right to life; a race of ransomed beings they are against 
whom justice has no claim, who may be restored to perfect life at 
the pleasure or will of Jesus their Redeemer who proclaimed, that in 
due time "all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son 
of man and come forth." And again: "I am he that liveth and was 
dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, and have the keys of hell 
[hades-the grave] and of death." (Rev. 1:18.) Yes, says Paul: "For 
this purpose Christ was manifested, [in the flesh] that he might 
destroy death, and him that has the power of death, that is the 
devil." 

But while we are thus informed of the plan of God to destroy 
"death," yet nearly two thousand years have passed since the 
ransom was paid and still death reigns. Why does not the purchaser 
take his "purchased possession"? Ah, he has a grand plan with 
regard to some of the race he has purchased. He will by trial of faith 
and patience, develop and separate from the world "a little flock" 
whom he will associate with himself as his bride. They will be a 
peculiar people, zealous of good works, and full of faith, who walk 
in his footsteps of self-sacrifice and entire giving up of their human 
nature-will and body-receiving instead the Divine nature -will 
and body. 

When the Church, the body of Christ is made perfect through 
suffering and trials, and united with him [which event we believe to 
be so close at hand], then the great work and reign of earth's new 
monarch— the second Adam— begins. Though possessing the power 
over evil ever since he rose from the grave its victor, yet he has not 
exercised that power up to the present time, because evil is 
necessary to the development of his body. But when we are 
complete, he shall take to himself his great power and reign. (Rev. 
11:17.) This statement is applied as having its fulfillment at the end 
of the Gospel age during the sounding of the seventh (symbolic) 
trumpet. 

Now let us inquire, how long will Christ reign— or exercise 
authority and rule? The Scriptures answer, "He shall reign forever 
and ever," (Rev. 11:15.) that is, being associated with the Father, 
Christ (and we in him) shall always belong to the reigning and 
ruling power-Jesus at the Father's right hand (next in authority) 



and we at his right hand, consequently "above all principalities and 
powers." But in the especial sense of ruling over and subduing 
earth, the reign is limited to the period of time necessary to the 
restoring of all earth's people and affairs to a condition of at-one- 
ment or harmony with God, the Father. As Paul expresses it: 

"HE MUST REIGN TILL HE HATH PUT ALL ENEMIES UNDER HIS FEET 

The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death." For "He (the 
Father) hath put all things under his (Christ's) feet," but it is evident 
that the Father did not put himself under the control of Christ. "And 
when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also, 
himself, be subject unto him (the Father) that put all things under 
him, that God may be all in all," (or above all.) 

Man having been restored to his original dominion, every inferior 
creature will recognize him as its Lord, and every human being will 
recognize "Christ as Lord to the Glory of God the Father." (Phil. 
2: 1 1.) And thus will be completed the great work planned before 
our creation, commenced at the baptism of Jesus and ending with 
the close of the Millennial reign. (Rev. 20:6,) viz.: At-one-ment. 

Then, "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," and 
his "will be done on earth as in heaven." 

That this is God's plan, is implied in the term "Restitution," and is 
the legitimate conclusion to be drawn from Paul's argument. (Heb. 
2:6-9.) He starts out with the original plan of God in creating man 
perfect— "Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou 
crownedst him with glory and honor and didst set him over the 
works of thy hands. Thou hast put all (earthly) things in subjection 
under his feet." But as we have seen, sin has marred all this glory 
and honor, and has degraded us far below angels; taking the 
dominion out of our hand and permitting death to reign. And if we 
look about us we will say with Paul, that it seems as though God's 
plan was a failure, for though six thousand years have passed, "We 
see not yet all things put under him" [man]. But is there any hopeful 
sign to indicate that man may yet be restored to his honor and glory, 
and set over the earthly works of God's hand? Yes, we have the 
assurance that ALL God's purposes shall be accomplished, (Isa. 
14:24,) and that a "seed of the woman" should yet destroy the 
serpent —evil— and "bless all the families of the earth." And though 
this work is not yet accomplished, yet we see a beginning of it. As 
Paul says, "we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the 
angels," [the condition of a perfect man], for the suffering of 
death... that he, by the grace of God, should taste death for every 
man." Thus far had the plan progressed in Paul's day and if he were 
living now, he would doubtless add, as we can, that the Church, as 
his body, is about complete; that the Gospel age of suffering with 
him and "filling up the measure of the afflictions of Christ which 
are behind" is ending and the Millennial age in which we shall "live 
and reign with Christ a thousand years" is dawning. 



As those who expect to be of the bride— the body— of Christ and to 
be glorified together with him, we rejoice to think that the time is so 
near at hand when we shall be changed, leaving forever the human 
nature, and being made like unto Christ's glorious body. But one 
thing which adds much to our interest and rejoicing, is the thought 
of the necessity of our development and change, as the body of the 
great deliverer before death can be destroyed and the race liberated, 
brought to the liberty of the sons of God, as Adam and angels —free 
from the bondage of corruption —death. For we know that "they 
without us shall not be made perfect." We must be perfected, on the 
spiritual plane as divine beings, before they can be perfected on the 
earthly plane as human beings. 

Seeing then what high honors and glory await the overcoming sons 
of God, and the blessings awaiting the world through us, can any 
one wonder that we long for the happy moment of change? Surely 
not, and not only we, but the world also, are waiting and hoping 
[though ignorantly] for a good time coming, for the whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now waiting for the 
manifestation of [the Church] the sons of God, (Rom. 8:22,19,) — 
the sun of righteousness which "arises with healing in his wings" to 
heal, and perfect, and restore all things to the perfect will of God. 
Thus earth will have had when man is restored, the following great 
over-ruling powers: First, Man under God; Second, Death reigned 
and him that has the power of death, that is the devil (Rom. 5:17; 
Heb. 2:14); Third, Righteousness under Christ; Fourth, The first 
restored, i.e., man under God. 

God classes all present governments of earth as Satan's. "The 
prince— ruler— of this world" would not permit any government 
which would not in a great measure, act in harmony with him, so 
long as he has the control, which will be until the end of this age, 
when the Redeemer takes his great power and reigns. Satan has 
ruled among the nations for ages, except the one nation, Israel, of 
which God says: "You only have I known of all the [nations] 
families of the earth. " (We have seen that they were used thus as a 
type of the higher spiritual Israel, the Church, which was to be in 
the world, but not of it). The time came, however, that God gave 
over even this nation as the others, when they went into captivity to 
Babylon, and God's prophet said of the last reigning prince, "Take 
off the diadem, remove the crown; this shall not [continue to] be the 
same, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it [the kingdom] until he 
come whose right it is, and I will give it him" [The Christ]. Ezek. 
21:27. 

At the same time, God indicated that the government of earth was 
given over to the dominion of evil, and pictures it to 
Nebuchadnezzar as 

A GREAT IMAGE 

illustrative of human power, divided into four parts, 
Nebuchadnezzar's government representing the head; the 



succeeding, Medo-Persian government represented by the breast 
and arms; and the belly and thighs representing the third or Grecian 
government; while the fourth and last part, the legs and feet 
represent the last phase of earthly government, the Roman Empire, 
which, in a divided form, still continues, and is to be followed by 
Messiah's Kingdom— the kingdom of heaven, which "shall break in 
pieces and consume all these kingdoms [not people], and it shall 
stand forever." (Dan. 2:44.) 

Thus, as a glorious image, did these earthly kingdoms appear to the 
natural man; and as glorious they still are regarded by the world. 
Extolled in prose and verse, through all generations, are their deeds 
of blood and violence, which shock the feelings of all possessed of 
the spirit of love. Their history is one successive record of crime 
and death, each of their heroes claiming higher honor than his 
predecessor because he had butchered greater numbers of his 
fellow-beings, and made more widows and orphans and more 
misery. No wonder that when God pictured the same four earthly 
governments to the holy prophet Daniel, he gave it as a beastly 
picture. (Dan. 7.) They are indeed beastly governments. How 
perfectly they represent, in their evil and death-dealing power, their 
master, the devil. The picture, or likeness of the fourth (Roman 
power) to Satan is so strong that Jesus, when presenting it in 
symbol in Revelation, almost invariably calls it "the dragon," "that 
old serpent, which is the devil and Satan," etc., thus using the name 
of its prince as a name for the kingdom. 

While God thus permits evil to triumph now, seemingly without 
restraint, and uses it as an agency for punishing sin, yet it is under 
an over-ruling guidance by which God "causes the wrath of man to 
praise him, and the remainder he will restrain." 

The inventions and arts of the last three centuries (machinery, 
printing, application of steam, electricity, etc.,) have come about 
gradually, but we believe are none the less of God— His agencies 
now in preparation for the blessing of humanity during the coming 
reign of righteousness. These scientific attainments, which will so 
fully bless in the future, are even now exercising a powerful effect 
upon humanity, enlightening the understanding, and, by increasing 
the dependency of one upon another, they naturally tend to promote 
sympathy, affection, and fraternity between the various members of 
the human family. 

But all of these blessings, while they serve to lift mankind in a 
measure out of evil, are only temporary helps. Satan is still equal to 
the occasion, and though he could not now induce millions of men 
to follow for years a leader for his glory's sake, he can foment angry 
strife between nations upon pretexts of honor, etc., and, though men 
do not now fight as incessantly as of old, yet the "arts of war" more 
than keep pace with those of peace, so that to-day the standing 
armies of earth are far larger and far better prepared for mutual 
destruction than ever before. 



The progress of science and art fails to bring now the blessings 
which will result in the future, because avarice (selfishness) has 
crowded out love and benevolence. Capital and power combine to 
oppress the poor, and they in turn despise and envy the rich. 

Nor can we wonder if the masses of mankind notice this condition 
of affairs; and that as knowledge increases among them, they 
should seek to band themselves together for self -protection, 
especially if they see, as in Europe, kings, emperors, nobles, and 
landlords rolling in wealth and luxury, while some of them 

R664 : page 7 

barely eke out an existence on the commonest necessaries of life, 
without luxury or comfort. All that they can earn more than will 
purchase meal, potatoes, and salt, with coarse fabric for clothing, is 
required as tax to support these corrupt governments, which, like 
great boils, absorb the strength and vitality of humanity. So we see 
that Satan is still ruling over earth. He may change his tactics 
according to the necessities of the hour, but he is ruling still. 

God's Word informs us that, by the general uprising of humanity 
and overthrow of governments, the new age will be introduced. In 
the coming struggle the two spiritual powers, Christ and his saints, 
and Satan and his angels, will each have earthly armies whose 
causes they will support and advance. Satan's will be the kings, 
chief captains, rich men, and mighty men, [Rev. 19:19,] while 
Christ will espouse and bring to victory the cause of the oppressed, 
who, inspired by a vague sense of justice and right, will be used to 
some extent as agents to their own liberation from the thraldom of 
evil and oppression. 

How we see the preparation for this time of trouble in the world 
going on all around us, and how unconsciously each one takes his 
place to play his part in the closing act of the reign of sin and death! 
In this country, less oppressed and in every way more blessed than 
others, 

CAPITAL AND LABOR 

are arraying themselves against each other as if against enemies; 
labor fearing that capital will grind the life out of it unless it 
organizes and protects itself; capital fearful of losing the upper hand 
of labor. Look abroad and see the Nihilists of Russia, the Land 
Leaguers and Liberals of Great Britain and Ireland, and the 
Socialists and Communists of Austria, Germany, and France, and 
tell me, do not all of these things, visible to our natural eye, 
corroborate what our spiritual eye of faith has seen by the light of 
the prophetic page— that "the day of the Lord is a day of trouble," 
and "distress upon nations"? 



THE RESTORATION. 

The future dynasty of earth, like the present one, will be the ruling 
of an invisible power through visible agencies of earth. As now 
Satan reigns unseen, then "The Christ of God" will reign and rule 
unseen. As now sin abounds, so then the opposite— righteousness- 
will rule. As Satan now has agents in men and governments, so 
with Christ's reign, every man coming into harmony with truth and 
righteousness will be reckoned a servant of God. The kingdoms of 
this world being all overthrown, (Dan. 2:44,) will be re-established 
on principles of justice and equity, based upon the golden law of 
love to God and men. 

The chief nation of earth during that age, the Word informs us, will 
be fleshly Israel, in glory and prominence exalted above all other 
nations— "The joy of the whole earth." And next in positions of 
favor and blessing will come other nations in proportion as they 
conform to the law of the kingdom of God. Thus will the light of 
truth emanating from the spiritual city— the church— the New 
Jerusalem, (Rev. 21,) bless all nations, and result in healing and 
blessing all mankind, until ultimately, having put down all 
opposition, and brought all men to the condition of perfection and 
righteousness, the third empire will give place to the fourth, which 
is the first restored, viz. : man over earth its lord and himself in 
perfect obedience to the King of kings and Lord of lords. Thus, 
"God [will be] all in all." Amen. 

Whosoever in faith prays, "Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, 
on earth as it is in heaven," let him watch for the evidences of the 
presence of the King and the manifestations of his power." 



R664 : page 7 

THE ECCLESIA. 

This is a Greek word which is translated church. It signifies a 
company, assembly, or body of people bound or compacted 
together. 

To-day there are many organizations claiming to be the church, and 
having various bonds of union; but we wish to know, upon the 
authority of God's Word, what ekklesia, body, or church, Jesus 
established, and what are its bonds of union; secondly, we wish to 
show that every Christian should belong to that church; thirdly, the 
injurious effects of joining the wrong ekklesia or church; and 
fourthly, having joined the right church, what are the results of 
losing our membership. 

First, then, the church which Jesus began to gather during his 
ministry, and which was recognized by the Father at Pentecost after 
their ransom price was paid, was the little company of disciples 
who had consecrated earthly time, talents and life, a sacrifice to 
God. They were organized and bound together as members of one 



society, and as such had laws and government, and consequently a 
head or recognized ruling authority. The bonds, were bonds of love 
and common interest. Since all were enlisted under the captaincy of 
Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys and sorrows, and aims of one were 
those of the other; and thus they had a far more perfect union of 
heart than could possibly be had from a union on the basis of any 
man-made creed. Thus their organization was of the Spirit; their 
law for the government of each was love, and all as a whole were 
put under obedience to the "law of the Spirit" as it was expressed in 
the life, actions, and words of their Lord. Their government was the 
will of him who said, "If ye love me keep my commandments." 

Thus we see the early church organized, governed, and in perfect 
unity and harmony under the rulership or headship of Jesus. 
Contrast this church organization with what now affects to be a 
continuance of the same-viz.: the various denominational 
organizations, each of which binds its members to a mental union 
on the basis of some creed or dogma of its own (many of them 
anything but love-ly) and each having its own laws. 

These laws emanate from their heads, and rulers or law-givers; so it 
is clearly seen that these present day churches, have and recognize 
as heads, or directing, ruling powers over them, the ancient 
founders of their various creeds, each contradicting the other, while 
their clergy, in conferences, councils, synods, and presbyteries, 
variously interpret and enforce the "traditions of the elders" which 
"make void the Word of God." These take the place of the true head 
of the church- Jesus-and the true teacher and guide into all truth, 
the Holy Spirit. Hear the prophet Isaiah express it. (chap. 9:15.) 
"The ancient and honorable, he is the head, and the prophet that 
teacheth lies, he is the tail." And the whole nominal system is 
described in the Revelation as "Babylon "-confusion- Papal mother 
and Protestant daughters. 

Will they own this to be so? No, for the lukewarm nominal church 
of to-day believes herself to be rich and increased with goods, 
having need of nothing; not knowing that she is wretched, and 
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. (Rev. 3:17.) 

These are "hard sayings, who can receive them?" But these are not 
our sayings: it is the warning voice of the "sure word of 
prophecy.. .whereunto ye do well that ye take heed." And it is a 
loving voice, for again our Lord declares: "As many as I love, I 
rebuke and chasten." 

There are two senses in which the true church of Christ may be 
considered: All who, like the early church, were fully consecrated 
to the doing of our Father's will, amenable only to His will and 
government, recognizing and obeying none other— these saints, 
from the beginning of the Gospel Age down to its close, when all of 
this class are sealed, constitute the "CHURCH OF THE FIRST 
BORN," whose names are written in heaven. These are all one in 
aim, hope, and suffering, and in due time will be joint-heirs with 



Jesus Christ to the great inheritance —heirs of the kingdom which 
God hath promised for them that love him. 

The other sense in which this same class is recognized, is by 
counting a part for the whole; thus all the living of this class may be 
spoken of as the church; or, again, any part of this class of living 
followers who may meet together may properly be called the 
church; for, by the word of Jesus we know that wherever two or 
three are assembled he will be among them, consequently that 
would be a church meeting— an assembly of the "church of the First 
Born." The general assembly will be, when all the church are made 
like, and glorified with, their head-Jesus. 

Such, then, is our definition of the church of Christ; it is perfectly 
illustrated by Paul (Rom. 12:4,5) when he compares the church to a 
human body. In this figure Jesus represents the head, and all who 
are his constitute the body, over and through which the head rules. 
Jesus has been and always will be the head over his church as a 
whole; he is likewise the head and ruler of the entire living church, 
and in every assembly where two or three meet in his name he is 
the head, ruler, and teacher. 

Is it asked, in what sense does he teach? We answer, by exercising 
the qualities of the head, or teacher; by using one or more of those 
present as his mouth-pieces in unfolding truth, strengthening faith, 
encouraging hope, inspiring zeal, etc., just as the head of your body 
can call upon one member to minister to another. But here a word 
of caution: If one becomes a useful instrument as a right hand, he 
should take care that he aspire not to become the head. Be not 
puffed up; pride will paralyze and render useless. "Be not ye called 
Rabbi, (master, teacher,) for one is your master, (head,) even Christ, 
and all ye are brethren. " And let not the least member despise his 
office, "for if all were one member, where were the body?" "Nay, 
those members of the body which seem to be more feeble are 
necessary"— "God hath set the members every one of them, in the 
body as it hath pleased him." 

How simple, beautiful and effectual is God's plan of organization! 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz. : that all Christians 
should be joined to this organization. In the light of what has just 
been said as to the class constituting the Church which Jesus 
organized, it is evident that if you have given up all your will, 
talent, time, etc., you are recognized by Jesus as a follower, and 
member of the ekklesia, or body of which he is the head, whose 
names are written in heaven. Thus we join Jesus' Church and have 
our names recorded as members by consecration. But, says one, 
must I not join some organization on earth, assent to some creed, 
and have my name written on earth? No; remember that Jesus is 
your pattern and teacher, and neither in his words nor acts will you 
find any authority for binding yourselves with creeds and traditions 
of the elders, which all tend to make the word of God of none 
effect, and bring you under a bondage which will hinder your 



growth in grace and knowledge, and against which Paul warned 
you, saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of 
bondage." (Gal. 5:1.) 

But some say: If it is not proper to unite with any of the present 
nominal churches, would it not be well to form a visible 
organization of our own? Yes, this is what we have-an 
organization modeled after that of the early church. We think we 
have come back to primitive simplicity. The Lord Jesus alone is our 
head or lawgiver; the Holy Spirit is our interpreter and guide into 
truth; our names are all written in heaven; we are bound together by 
love and common interest. 

Do you inquire— how shall we know one another? We reply, how 
could we help knowing one another when the Spirit of our Master is 
made manifest in word and act and manner and look? Yes, the 
living faith, the unfeigned love, the long-suffering meekness, the 
child-like simplicity, coupled with the constancy and zeal of 
maturity, make manifest the sons of God, and we need no earthly 
record, for the names of all such are written in the Lamb's book of 
life. 

Do the sick need visiting or assistance? —these stand ready with 
consecrated time. Does the Lord's work require money?— these 
stand ready with consecrated means. Does His work bring the 
reproach of the world, and of a degenerate nominal church- these 
have also sacrificed reputation- all-all to God. 

But again, do you inquire how shall we deal with one who walks 
disorderly in our midst; if we have no organization such as we see 
about us, how can we free ourselves from such, as the Lord requires 
us to do? We answer, Do just as Jesus and Paul directed. 

Now, as in the early church, there are various degrees of 
advancement among the individual members; and Paul says, (1 
Thes. 5:14,) some are feeble-minded, comfort them; some are 
weak, support them; but while you should be patient toward all, you 
should warn the disorderly, (those who are drifting away from the 
true spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly for the weak, and 
comfort them; nor for the feeble-minded, and support them; but 
patiently, lovingly, warn the disorderly. Whom does he call 
disorderly? Doubtless there are many ways of walking disorderly, 
but in 2 Thes. 3: 1 1, he speaks of some who work not at all, but are 
busy-bodies, these he says should do as he did— work, that they be 
not chargeable to any; and if any will not work, neither should he 
eat. Thus he said he did, that he might be an example to others. He 
warns us also against immoral and unjust persons, and those who 
wrest (twist) the Scriptures, and thus turn the truth of God into a lie. 
Then again, vs. 14: After you have warned such a one, if he "obey 
not,. ..note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be 
ashamed. Yet, count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a 
brother. " 



Again Jesus gives explicit directions where there is a matter of 
offense between two brethren, (Matt. 18:15,17): "If thy brother 
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee 
and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother; 
but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, 
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be 
established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the 
church, (the company of brethren who assemble together,) but if he 
neglects to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man 
and a publican." If, under the organization of our Head, we heed his 
commands, which we will do if we love him, how few will be the 
misunderstandings and difficulties among the brethren. 

This organization has its evangelists, pastors and teachers appointed 
and directed by the Lord. They need no laying on of hands by the 
so-called "Apostolic succession"; for the "Spirit of the Lord" hath 
anointed all the members of the body "to preach," (Isa. 61:1,) and it 
is the duty of every member of the body to exercise his office for 
the edification of the other members. How complete is the 
organization of the Church of Christ with its heaven-written, love- 
bound and Spirit-ruled membership, and how sad the error of 
mistaking the nominal for the real Church! 

The importance of our fourth proposition need not be urged. It 
would, indeed, be a dreadful calamity to lose our membership in the 
true Church or body of Christ. And no member is out of this danger 
except when keeping a vigilant watch over the old nature, counted 
dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself in the form of pride, 
selfishness, envy, evil- speaking— or what not? But if filled with love 
(the love that prompts to sacrifice) and clothed with humility, and 
under cover of the redeeming blood, we are safe in the Church 
(body), having the assurance that it is our "Father's good pleasure to 
give us the kingdom." 

Yes, the kingdom is the glorious destiny of the true Church— the 
"little flock"-now treading the pathway of humiliation and drinking 
the bitter cup of death. The glory that shall be revealed in us, doth 
not yet appear except to the eye of faith, but the temptations and 
trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let us, therefore, fear lest a 
promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 

Thus Paul warned others, and thus he 

R664 : page 8 

feared, lest (even after) having preached to others, he himself 
should be a castaway. (1 Cor. 9:27.) We may have our names cast 
out as evil by those of the nominal Church, and yet "rejoice and be 
exceeding glad because our names are written in heaven." They 
may frown upon you and despitefully use you and say all manner of 
evil against you falsely, or they may seek to win you back by 
flattery, saying they cannot afford to lose your influence- you 



could do so much good by remaining among them. Oh, how 
necessary in this "evil day" is the faith— 

"That bears unmoved the world's dread frown, 
Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile." 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the warning: "Stand fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not again 
entangled with the yoke of bondage"— not even in the slightest 
degree. Make sure that you are of the Church which alone is 
recognized in Scripture and cut loose completely from all the 
Babylon systems which it condemns— "Come out of her my 
people." 



page 8 

THE CHURCH WALKING WITH THE WORLD. 

The Church and the World walked far apart 
On the changing shores of time, 
The World was singing a giddy song, 
And the Church a hymn sublime. 

Come, give me your hand," said the merry World, 
"And walk with me this way"; 
But the good Church hid her snowy hands 
And solemnly answered "Nay, 

I will not give you my hand at all, 
And I will not walk with you; 
Your way is the way that leads to death; 
Your words are all untrue." 

"Nay, walk with me but a little space," 
Said the World, with a kindly air; 
"The road I walk is a pleasant road, 
And the sun shines always there; 

Your path is thorny and rough and rude, 
But mine is broad and plane; 
My way is paved with flowers and dews, 
And yours with tears and pain; 

The sky to me is always blue, 
No want, no toil I know; 
The sky above you is always dark, 
Your lot is a lot of woe; 



There's room enough for you and me 

To travel side by side." 

Half shyly the Church approached the World 

And gave him her hand of snow; 

And the old World grasped it and walked along, 
Saying in accents low, 
"Your dress is too simple to please my taste; 
I will give you pearls to wear, 

Rich velvets and silks for your graceful form, 
And diamonds to deck your hair." 
The Church looked down at her plain white robes, 
And then at the dazzling World, 

And blushed as she saw his handsome lip 
With a smile contemptuous curled. 
"I will change my dress for a costlier one," 
Said the Church, with a smile of grace; 

Then her pure, white garments drifted away, 
And the World gave in their place, 
Beautiful satins and shining silks, 
Roses and gems and costly pearls; 

While over her forehead her bright hair fell 
Crisped in a thousand curls.: 

"Your home is too plain," said the proud old World, 
"I'll build you one like mine; 

Carpets of Brussels and curtains of lace, 
And furniture ever so fine." 
So he built her a costly and beautiful house; 
Most splendid it was to behold; 

Her sons and her beautiful daughters dwelt there 
Gleaming in purple and gold; 
Rich fairs and shows in the halls were held, 
And the World and his children were there. 

Laughter and music and feasts were heard 

In the place that was meant for prayer. 

There were cushioned pews for the rich and the gay, 

To sit in their pomp and pride; 

But the poor, who were clad in shabby array, 
Sat meekly down outside. 

"You give too much to the poor," said the World, 
"Far more than you ought to do; 

If they are in need of shelter and food, 
Why need it trouble you? 
Go take your money and buy rich robes, 
Buy horses and carriages fine, 

Buy pearls and jewels and dainty food; 
Buy the rarest and costliest wines: 



My children they dote on all these things, 
And if you their love would win, 

You must do as they do, and walk in the ways 
That they are walking in." 

Then the Church held fast the strings of her purse, 
And modestly lowered her head, 

And simpered, "Without doubt you are right, sir, 
Henceforth I will do as you've said." 
So the poor were turned from her door in scorn, 
And she heard not the orphan's cry; 

But she drew her beautiful robes aside, 

As the widows went weeping by. 

Then the sons of the World and sons of the Church 

Walked closely hand and heart, 

And only the Master, who knoweth all, 
Could tell the two apart. 
Then the Church sat down at her ease and said 
"I am rich and my goods increase; 

I have need of nothing, or ought to do, 

But to laugh, and dance, and feast." 

The sly World heard, and he laughed in his sleeve, 

And mocking said, aside— 

"The Church is fallen, the beautiful Church, 
And her shame is her boast and her pride." 
The angel drew near to the mercy-seat, 
And whispered in sighs her name, 

Then the loud anthems of rapture were hushed, 
And heads were covered with shame. 
And a voice was heard at last by the Church 
From Him who sat on the Throne, 

"I know thy works, and how thou hast said, 

I am rich;' and hast not known 

That thou art naked, poor and blind, 

And wretched before My face; 

Therefore from My presence, I cast thee out, 

And blot thy name from its place."— Selected. 



R670 : page 8 

INSPIRATION. 

A beautiful landscape might inspire the artist or poet, each in his 
talent. Circumstances, audiences, etc., may be said to inspire a 
public singer or speaker. Murder is sometimes inspired by jealousy, 
etc., etc. And the child of God should be so inspired by the 



teachings of Jesus, the Apostles and Prophets, as to act and teach in 
harmony with them. 

But let no one forget that these, though proper uses of our English 
word inspired, yet, when used in Scripture the word has a much 
deeper significance. It there means, that the "Scriptures given by 
inspiration of God" are given not by inspiration of circumstances, 
nor by inspiration of the teachings of others, but are a special 
inspiration or infusion of knowledge direct from God. Thus only 
Apostles and Prophets ever spoke to the Church. 



R670 : page 8 

WAITING FOR HIS COMING. 

If in this world only we have hope we are of all creatures the most 
miserable. It is comparatively easy for the few of us who live in 
comfort, who have been refined by culture and thought till we can 
see how the shadows of time lend a new intensity and beauty to its 
lights, and how pain and suffering are a discipline in wisdom and 
goodness, to think this world a very tolerable one, and to regard 
human life as a grand, a sacred possession. But think what life is to 
the countless myriads of our race; think what the world is, and has 
been, as a whole. Remember how in all ages the vast majority of 
men have been plagued by toil, by care, by fear, by sordid penury; 
how they have been crushed under the bloody heels of tyrants who 
were bound to protect them, maimed and tortured, stultified and 
coerced, by the very priests who were bound to enlighten and 
emancipate them; how they have been decimated and degraded by 
war, by famine, by disease, by ignorance and superstition; and who 
can deny that, if this life be all, then human life taken as a whole, is 
the most fatal of blunders, of curses the most terrible? If the tragedy 
of human life be pregnant with no divine purpose, if there be no 
better time coming, no golden age of righteousness and peace— if, 
in short, we can no longer believe in the advent and reign of Christ, 
then surely every thoughtful spectator of this vast tragedy must say, 
"It were better for men that they had never been born!" 

But if we believe in this great promise, if we cherish this great 
hope, then can we with patience wait for it. And this is the very 
posture which our Lord enjoins. He would have us to be like 
servants who watch for the coming of their Lord, that, when he 
comes, they may open to him immediately. He would have us 
believe in, and look for, the advent of a better era, in which all the 
wrongs will be rectified. He would have us sustain ourselves under 
all the toils and sorrows of our individual lot, and under the still 
heavier oppression of the world's lot, by looking forward to that end 
and purpose of the Lord God Almighty which will vindicate all the 
ways in which we have been led, the painful discipline by which we 
have been tried and purified and refined. And whosoever holds fast 
this great hope for himself and for the world at large, he is a true 



believer in the distinct promise of the New Testament, viz., the 
second advent of Christ, and may use with sincerity all the words 
and phrases which it has expressed.— The Expositor. 



R664 : page 8 

THE LORD'S JEWELS. 

BY H. GRATTAN GUINNESS. 

The Christian Church as a witness for God in the world has failed, 
like the Jewish nation, and become apostate. There is a little flock, 
there is a true Church, but its members are scattered abroad and 
almost invisible in the great Babylon; they are the seven thousand 
who have not bowed the knee to Baal, they are the called and 
chosen and faithful who follow the Lamb, they are those who have 
turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, and to 
wait for his Son from heaven; they are those who have not the form 
only, but the power of godliness, those who keep themselves 
unspotted from the world, and overcome through faith. They are 
found in every section of the professing Church, and the Lord 
knoweth those that are his— "They shall be mine, saith the Lord of 
Hosts, in the day when I make up my jewels." 

But for the rest— for the vast professing body which bears the name 
of Christ, it has not continued in the goodness of God, it has turned 
his grace into licentiousness, its sentence is gone forth, it must be 
"cut off. " The long suffering of God has been abundantly 
manifested, it is right that his holy severity should be again 
revealed. The professing Church has long been unworthy of the 
sacred name it bears, and of the high and holy responsibility of 
being God's witness on earth, which belongs to it; it is time it 
should cease to hold the position it has so fearfully forfeited. 
Instead of being the instrument of spreading the truth of the Gospel 
among men, it is the worst hindrance to their attaining that 
knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent, in which 
life eternal lies. Like the Pharisees of old it stands as the great 
obstruction, neither entering itself into the kingdom, nor suffering 
those who would, to enter in. The name of God is blasphemed 
among the nations, by reason of the corruption of the professing 
church; the light that should have been in it, is become darkness, 
and great is that darkness ! The church is confounded with the 
world, and the true saints are strangers in its society; It is no longer 
the pillar and ground of the truth, it is the hotbed of heresy, false 
doctrine, and corruption of every kind. What contrast can be more 
complete, than that between the church as Christ intended it to be, 
and the church as it now exists in the world! An end must come to 
all this! Not only does the Word of God predict it, not only does our 
own sense of righteousness demand it, but the solemn analogies of 
history distinctly intimate it. Let the undeniable fact that past 
apostasies brought down the judgment they deserved, forewarn men 



what must be the end of the existing apostasy of the professing 
people of God. Babylon must come in remembrance before God, 
who will give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his 
wrath, for her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath 
remembered her iniquities. 



R664 : page 8 

CONSECRATION. 

Submission is a strong word, consecration still stronger. Surrender 
is cessation of resistance, consecration a transfer of all we are and 
have to Christ for active service. It covers person and property, 
talents and opportunities, and accepts of Christ as leader, manager, 
friend, and Saviour, present, active, and efficient in all the minutiae 
of life. There are degrees of consecration, and even entire 
consecration is progressive, for new interests, cares, burdens, 
capacities, and opportunities rise and await disposal, and Christ is 
revealed in new relations, making new demands, offering new 
privileges, and these await trustful acceptance, so that ever and 
anon the proposition to devote all to Christ and receive all of Christ 
claims fresh attention. Many commit spiritual interests to his care, 
and worry on alone with temporal concerns; they trust Him to save 
their souls, but hesitate to ask His aid in business; accept daily 
grace, but doubt respecting daily bread; rejoice in Christ, as a 
Saviour, but fail to apprehend Him as a brother, a companion, a 
present constant friend. Consecration is not absolutely perfect until 
the fulness of our Lord is perceived and received, and the fulness of 
life is devoted to Him, for every revelation of Christ calls for new 
devotion from us. The consecration must be as broad as the 
apprehension, covering the fulness of Christ and fulness of man.— 
Sel. 



R670 : page 8 

WHENEVER I meet with the will of God, I feel that I meet with 
God; whenever I respect and love the will of God, I feel that I love 
and respect God; whenever I unite with the will of God, I feel that I 
unite with God; so that practically and religiously, although I am 
aware that a difference can be made philosophically, God and the 
will of God are to me the same. He who is in perfect harmony with 
the will of God, is as much in harmony with God himself as it is 
possible for any being to be. The very name of God's will fills me 
with joy.— Madame Guyon. 



R670 : page 8 

PRAYER.— He that is much in prayer shall grow rich in grace. He 
shall thrive and increase most that is busiest in this, which is our 



traffic with Heaven, and fetches the most precious commodities 
thence. He that sets oftenest these ships of desire, that makes the 
most voyages to that land of spices and pearls, shall be sure to 
improve his stock most, and have most of heaven upon earth.- Sel. 



R670 : page 1 

VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1884. 
NO. 2. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 44 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



page 1 

NOTE the removal of our business office to No. 44 FEDERAL 
ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. There, we will be pleased to receive a 
visit from any of you, when in the city. 



R670 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Every member of the Church (whose names were "written in 
heaven") in the early times was a preacher. We know this not only 
because it is recorded that they "went every where preaching the 
Word" (Acts 8:4), but because we know that no one then or now led 
of the Spirit of Christ could help being a preacher of the glad 
tidings. If the anointing of the spirit led Jesus to preach; if the same 
spirit in Paul led him to feel "woe is unto me if I preach not the 
gospel" (1 Cor. 9:16), wherever the same mind or spirit of Christ 
may be, it will have the same general effect, it will make a preacher 
of the one controlled by it as surely as it did of those referred to 
above. Of the Church whose names are written in heaven— every 
member is a preacher. Are you one? Are you faithful to your 
ministry? 

The Greek word rendered "preach" in the above citations is euagg. 
It signifies —"To tell good news or tidings." —Young. One 
definition of our English word preach is, "To give earnest advice on 
moral or religious grounds." —Webster. From this, it will be seen 
that to confine the use of the word preach to a public discourse, as it 
usually is, is an error, begotten no doubt of the custom of having a 
special class do all the expounding of the glad tidings, while others 
feel themselves relieved from it. 

The secret is this: The "glad tidings of great joy" which always did 
and always will kindle a flame of holy fire, which must find vent 
through tongue or pen, and to restrain which would be "woe unto 
me" if I preach not— has been so handled by Satan and his able 
assistant "Babylon the Great," that the "glad" element has been 
obscured, and the whole turned into "bad tidings" of great evil to 
ninety-nine in every hundred of the race. 



It is greatly to the credit of the Church, that many have lost interest 
in the promulgation of the bad news. It makes evident, too, another 
thing, viz.: that the bad news, called gospel, now preached by those 
who are paid good salaries for so doing, must be a very different 
story from that which every member of the early Church preached 
for nothing. Nay, they got regular wages, but instead of money and 
titles and respect, they got stripes, imprisonments, and revilings, 
being accounted the filth and offscourings of the world— driven 
from their homes, "they that were scattered abroad, went every 
where preaching the Word." (Acts 8:4.) 

Ah, yes! with such exhibitions of self-sacrifice and devotion on the 
part of the preachers, could we doubt that their message was really 
"glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all people," and that the 
humblest of them felt, as Paul expressed it, that he was "not 
ASHAMED of the gospel of Christ." What wonder, too, that "under 
such a message" by such preachers— "the number of the disciples 
was multiplied"? (Acts 6:1.) 

And now, when under the providence of God THE CHURCH is 
getting back to the "good tidings" as originally held by THE 
CHURCH in the days of the Apostles, and getting rid of the 
traditions of men under which it had been buried for centuries by 
contending sects and factions, we find that the real "glad tidings" 
has to-day the same effect that it had in early times upon all imbued 
with its spirit of truth. It is now, as then, impossible for anyone to 
receive the glad tidings and the spirit of it, without becoming a 
preacher of it, even though by so doing such meet with the same 
opposition as did their brethren in early times with the same glad 
tidings of the ransom for all and consequent resurrection hope for 
all. 

Some inquire where are our Bishops, Apostles and preachers? We 
reply that Jesus is still recognized as the great Bishop (1 Pet. 2:25). 
And we have under-shepherds or overseers of the flock to-day as 
Timothy and others were in the early Church. We still have the 
words and teachings of the genuine Apostles-James, John, Peter, 
Paul, et al., and, judging from letters received there are not less than 
two thousand preachers and evangelists, who, being "scattered 
abroad, go every where preaching the Word," and referring those 
who "have an ear to hear," to the words of Jesus, Apostles and 
Prophets. 

Beloved fellow-preachers, ministers (dispensers) of the grace of 
God which is through Jesus Christ our Lord, let us 

R671 : page 1 

make full proof of our ministry, that we may not be ashamed before 
the Great Bishop, when giving an account of our stewardship. The 
more we learn of the "glad tidings of great joy," the more we will 
feel with Paul that we would be in distress and woe, if you could 
not tell the joyful message: the more you will feel as Peter and John 



expressed it: "we cannot but speak the things which we have seen 
and heard." (Acts 4:19,20, and 5:29,40,41.) 



Your zeal in the spread of this good news is very precious to us and 
we are sure also, that it is so to our Chief Shepherd. Probably one- 
half of all the letters received indicate that by one means or another 
the writers are preaching daily. The majority find their greatest 
success in preaching, to be by means of a wise circulation of special 
numbers of the TOWER, with special articles marked, and 
accompanied by "a word in season"— among those who seem to be 
"the meek," and to have "an ear to hear." 

We repeat what some do not seem to have fully understood 
heretofore, viz.: that "ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT 
SOCIETY," (whose funds are voluntary donations only) provides 
reading matter for gratuitous circulation on these precious subjects, 
to all who will use discretion in circulating it. 

During the four years of the Society's existence nearly two hundred 
million (200,000,000) pages of tract matter has been circulated, and 
the experience thus obtained is, that greater results proportioned to 
the outlay, are derived from the use of specially prepared numbers 
of the TOWER (the last number was one of these) than by any 
other form of tract. Hence, efforts are at present mainly aimed in 
that direction, and thousands of papers in English and Swedish are 
printed and sent forth continually. We mention this that you may 
know that you have a supply to draw from so long as the Master 
shall supply the funds. Order as many "sample copies for 
distribution," as you think you can use to advantage in preaching 
the "glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all people." 

Though you may have a bountiful supply, use it not wastefully; but 
as wise stewards seek to use each paper or pamphlet according to 
the value of its message in your appreciation, and as men who shall 
render an account to a Master. 



R671 : page 1 



EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

page 1 

Callington, Cornwall, Eng. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your card received, also June 
number of the TOWER. I read and re-read the various articles, and 
compared them with God's Word, and I find it bears the test as far 
as I can see, and I am building with it upon the old rock; and it 
seems to be standing all right so far. I have had a few storms, but 
not a stone has moved, and I am, thank God, still finding plenty of 
good building material through your assistance from God's Word. I 
do not want to have to remove any of the building this time, for I 



am perfectly aware that if I get any of the devil's rubbish in, it will 
be sure to cause trouble. I wish to be very particular this time. 

I may just say, by the way, that I found the good old rock about 14 
years ago, and I at once began to raise a building. I continued to 
build on, up to the time I began to read the WATCH TOWER, and 
true I had raised a high building. I had gained a good name among 
most people that I was associated with; but when I through the 
TOWER was led to view the structure from bottom to top, I found I 
had made a lot of mistakes, and it did not look near so well in a 
clearer light; in fact I was ashamed to see it. 

This was my mistake, I had put into my building, any kind of 
material that was presented to me, if it came from a good man. I did 
not ask the quality of it, but piled away, feeling confident it was 
genuine, and that if it was fit for these good men to build with, I 
might rely on it too. Thanks be to God, I see my mistake, and 
although my structure was standing all right up to this time, I saw 
from the clearer light, that it was doomed to destruction, and by his 
help whom I love, I took it all down; and my good name and high 
esteem, with many other things, is all gone, and I am now raising a 
new building. My name is Noah, and like Noah of old, I am 
building an ark to save myself, although laughed at and persecuted 
and counted a heretic; by God's help I shall go on with it. I feel 
rather lonely sometimes, having none save my wife that I can talk 
with freely on these subjects. Some say they would like to have a 
talk, and others are afraid, and I feel perplexed what to do, and 
grieved at heart to see the superstition and prejudice that prevails. 

I trust that the dear Master may make my path clear, although it 
may be rough. I hope to be found among his jewels, when he 
gathers them. My prayer is that the good Shepherd may continue to 
lead us into green pastures and to living fountains of water. Your 
brother in Christ, 

Duncan ville, Pa. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I received the papers you sent me, and am 
distributing them where I think they will do the most good. I have 
been a Bible reader —a Methodist-for forty years, and I thought I 
understood the Bible, and yet I was not satisfied, and was hungry 
for something that I had not. I made a consecration of myself to 
God, and promised by his grace to live to his glory; still I was in the 
dark, and prayed earnestly for light-for truth. It came at last. The 
first food I got was from a copy of the TOWER, and I began to "see 
men as trees walking." I continued searching and kept on reading 
the TOWER in connection with the Word of God, I also read "Food 
for Thinking Christians"; my eyes again being touched, I see now 
clearer, and now I am hungry and will search for food until I am 
filled. I thank God for the TOWER and little book. My wife is one 
with me, in searching for the bread of life. I am an invalid, have 
been for nineteen years, was wounded badly in the war. Please send 



the Tabernacle Tract, or anything you please to give me. I intend to 
work now for the Master. Your brother, 



R671 : page 1 



St. Louis, Mo. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I am no longer young, but have a strong desire 
to do something in the Lord's vineyard. If I were of middle age, if 
competent, with the present light I would devote probably most, if 
not all, my time to making known the glad tidings. I believe, after 
due reflection, that many years ago I consecrated myself to God, 
but not understanding it, could not realize it as now. I have made a 
great deal of money, but have not so much of it now; it has mostly 
vanished. I never was a worldly man, but a hard worker, much 
devoted to my profession, which is now secondary. I may have 
some means to dispose of for the cause of truth, but cannot see 
clearly how it should be done. I think if your Tract Society had a 
charter, donations and bequests might be made with more freedom. 

R671 : page 2 

Sectarian preaching here is so insipid that I can have no patience 
to hear it. All seem to be busy worshipping the god of this age-the 
devil -in some form or other. Pray the Lord of the harvest that he 
will send more reapers. Please make some suggestions, if you can, 
and may God bless you in your labor of love. 

Dr. . 

page 2 



London, Sept. 2, 1884. 

TO THE PUBLISHER ZION'S WATCH TOWER-Dear Sir:- 
While listlessly looking over an old book stall I met with a small 
pamphlet, published by yourself, "Why is evil permitted," &c. I 
have read and re-read it, each time with increasing interest and 
delight. It affords an advantageous standpoint from which to view 
old truths in a new light, and, as it seems to my mind, puts the 
natural and unstrained interpretation upon the plain gospel 
declaration. It now seems difficult to understand why Christendom 
should for so long a time have distorted the full view by introducing 
many side lights, all tinged with formulas, creeds and traditions. I 
write to know where, in this country, I can obtain further 
publications upon which I and, I am glad to say, not a few friends 
might follow up the great train of thought which the little book has 
already been the means of producing. How fully would I bear out 
the assertion that the more we know of our great Father's plans the 
more our hearts glow with devotion to him, the more life's burdens 
seem lightened, the more manfully can we face a scoffing and 



incredulous world, and the greater our power for influencing for 
good those enthralled in the chains of sectarianism and those 
steeped in indifference. The more these views are enunciated the 
greater the possibility of obtaining ground upon which all who love 
our Lord in sincerity can meet and, by united efforts, work for the 
Master, and instead of sectarian strife, so unedifying to themselves 
and so hindering the influence of the good news to outsiders, they 
can unitedly press on and win the world for Christ. If you don't 
mind sending me a line or two about the expense, and also about 
the medium for getting more light, I shall be grateful to you. With 
my best respects and every good wish, I am, dear sir, 

Your faithful servant, . 

R671 : page 2 

Milford, Conn., Sept. 3d, 1884. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL: -Dear Sir:- I am more than pleased with the 
copy of "Food for Thinking Christians" which you so kindly sent 
me. I wish all my friends here could read this excellent little book. 
Think I could dispose of half-a-dozen copies to very good 
advantage if you could spare them. I should also like for myself 
other reading matter, such as is referred to in the book already sent. 
Have never seen the way so clearly presented, and shall look for 
further light. 

As you advertise these little works to be sent free, may I not ask, is 
there not some way in which friends may assist in this good work? 

Respectfully yours, . 

[DEAR BROTHER: As you will see by this number we have a 
Tract Fund, to which any who may desire are welcome to give. The 
spirit of your letter -desiring and seeking a way to give is akin to 
that of the Lord, and is one indication that you partake of the spirit 
of those for whom the Lord prepared the present feast. As the 
Master sought the sheep and ransomed them unasked, so those who 
partake of his Spirit are ever on the lookout for opportunities to do 
and bear.-ED.] 

page 2 

Hot Springs, Ark. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-- Will you be so kind as to send me 
the WATCH TOWER again? Circumstances have been so hard 
against me that I am not able to pay yet, but I am still wanting more 
truth. In my young years I was for a time a student in the 
Missionary College of Basel, Switzerland. While there I began to 
see into the inconsistencies of creeds. I therefore grew dissatisfied 
and studied a great deal. But finally meeting with so many apparent 
discrepancies, I gave up all study. For many years following I 



regarded the Bible as a structure of man, adapted to the wants and 
wishes of all sects and the gratification of one class, the clergy. Pre- 
election and predestination seemed to be the chief teachings. Yet I 
had consecrated myself to the Lord, and I would occasionally pray 
for light and faith. At last Food for thinking Christians arrived and 
passed through me like an electric current, bringing me to see the 
glorious harmony of God's plan. Possessing no Bible, I could not 
study Food and WATCH TOWER by references, but only by the 
remembering of former reading in German and French text. 

Being desirous to do some good, I let my cup of "Food" pass from 
house to house until I at last lost sight of it. The last person who had 
it was a Campbelite preacher. I would therefore be very thankful for 
another one, also the "Tabernacle and Its Teachings." Could also 
use, say six or eight, to good advantage among inquiring friends. I 
hope the Lord will bless you and all his people, and enable me to 
proclaim his name and praise wherever occasion presents, but I am 
full of fears lest my garments have become so soiled through 
indifference and neglect that another may be about grasping my 
crown. But the Lord can extend his helping hand to me as once he 
did to Peter. Yours in the love of Christ, 



R670 : page 2 

LEGAL INCORPORATION. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, though it has 
already done a great work, and in the hand of God has been a power 
in publishing the truth, the influence which is being felt already on 
both sides of the Atlantic, has never yet had legal incorporation. 
Nor was such incorporation considered necessary by its friends, it 
having already all the powers necessary for the present work and 
similar to that of nine-tenths of other small societies. 

But a new phase of the question has arisen. It seems tolerably 
certain that some of the saints will be in the flesh during a great part 
at least of the "time of trouble," and if so, there will be need of 
printed matter, tracts, etc., as much then, perhaps, as now, and 
possibly will be more heeded, for when the judgments of the Lord 
are "in the earth the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." (Isa. 26:9.) Should those at present prominently 
identified with the work not be the last to be "changed," some 
interruption of the work might result; but this may be obviated by 
having a legal standing, granted by a State Charter. 

Another matter also has been considered: Two or more who had 
already contributed to the funds of the society, suggested that as age 
was coming on and opportunities for earning a living decreasing 
they could not now give more largely without endangering penury 
and leaving themselves a burden on their friends, which they could 
not see to be the Lord's will; yet they are desirous that in some way 



they might be able to put the Lord's money (consecrated to Him) 
into His work. This naturally suggested the idea that there might be 
many others similarly situated and with similar ideas. Such moneys 
or other property donated by "Will" to the society it might be 
unable to receive or dispose of, unless it had a charter. 

From all these considerations it was deemed best to apply for a 
charter; and this has been done. We expect that it will be granted 
without delay, and in that event you will learn more concerning the 
matter in our next issue. 



R67 1 : page 2 

IT was out of the clouds that the deluge came, yet it was upon it 
that the bow set! The cloud is a thing of darkness, yet God chooses 
it for the place where he bends the arch of light! Such is the way of 
our God. He knows that we need the cloud, and that a bright sky, 
without speck or shadow, would not suit us in our passage to the 
kingdom. Therefore he draws the cloud above us, not once in a 
lifetime, but many times. But less the gloom should appall us, he 
braids the clouds with sunshine; nay, makes it the object which 
gleams to our eye with the very fairest hues of heaven.— H. Bonar. 



R67 1 : page 2 

WANTED, AT A BARGAIN. 

The curse with its thorns and thistles, causing labor, weariness, 
and sweat of face, for the earning of daily bread, has tended to 
produce selfishness. In the endeavor to obtain the necessities and 
comforts of this life it seems almost a necessity that we shall 
endeavor to get as much as possible, in exchange for as little as 
possible, or in other words, to drive close bargains. 

While selfishness is a weed always detestable, it is so common and 
so deep-seated in the fallen race, that it is to be found in every 
garden. Often it flourishes most in the heart of the rich and 
comfortably circumstanced, where its greedy fruit is not needed, 
whereas it could be measurably excused in the miserably poor. 

It is not surprising then, that we find this one of the most difficult 
weeds to eradicate when we have become princes —children of the 
King of kings. How great is the inclination even of these to still 
permit this weed and to eat of its fruit. Would that we all could 
realize more fully how unbecoming it is in the Royal family. Oh 
that each of us day by day may become more remarkable in this 
respect before the world. 

The worst form of the evil, however, is that which manifests itself 
toward God —his truth— his favors. Accustomed to getting as much 
as possible for the amount paid, or paying as little as possible for 
the thing secured in daily life, the same disposition often manifests 



itself in dealing with God for the "Crown of Life," for "Glory, 
Honor and Immortality." 

R672 : page 2 

God covenants with those justified by faith in the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus, that if they consecrate and sacrifice 
themselves wholly to his service, He will give them at once, 
"exceeding great and precious promises," and in the future the 
realities. 

Our little all is indeed a meagre pittance. How little remains of our 
threescore-years-and-ten! how little of mental vigor! how little of 
physical strength! how little of money and influence! and yet that 
little all, however great or insignificant it is to you, is all that God 
required in exchange for his great gift. 

We confess that it is a great bargain -such exceeding riches and 
glory for a price so mean as to be not worthy to be compared with 
it, and yet how many, like Ananias and Sapphira are found 
endeavoring to keep back part of the price. 

According to our covenant we should do our best to use in 
Jehovah's service "all our mind, all our soul and all our strength," 
which of course includes the products of these— all our influence, all 
our money and all our time as well. Yet how apt are we in action to 
say to the Lord, "I know it is cheap, but can you not take a little 
less? I think you will. I know you love and think you would not 
deny me the prize, even though I keep back part of the price." 

Thus many desire a crown of life and glory, if they can get it cheap. 
Some would like to know the truth, if they could know it without 
the expenditure of much time and trouble in searching for it as hid 
treasures. Such would hold it very tenaciously, if it brought with it 
earthly honor and respect, and cost no loss of friends, influence, etc. 
But for such bargains you seek in vain. If seeking truth, and through 
it the crown, you must come prepared to pay for them. 

In view of all the circumstances, is not selfishness while detestable 
always, especially so in relation to our covenant relationship to 
God? Let us rather be very ambitious to increase our capacity that 
we may thereby increase our service and sacrifice, saying with the 
Apostle: I count all things but refuse, for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the 
loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win 
Christ,... that I might know him and [experience] the power of HIS 
RESURRECTION [to spiritual being], and the fellowship of his 
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death: If by any 
means, I might attain unto THE [emphatic article in Greek —the 
special or chief] resurrection of the dead, [literal— Out from among 
the dead.] (Phil. 3:8-11.) "They that are with Him are Called and 
Chosen and FAITHFUL." (Rev. 17:14.) 



R672 : page 2 



THOUGHTS. 

BY ALEX. D. M'RAE. 

Thoughts are a powerful factor, either for good or evil, in our 
influence upon our fellow beings. Figuratively, we should do our 
thinking as much as possible in the sunshine. Thoughts which are 
not regarded as wicked or filthy may yet have a most pernicious 
effect. Discontented thoughts may make as much misery for him 
who harbors them, and for his neighbors, as thoughts which are 
viciously impure. I have never known it to be established beyond 
doubt that discontent had actually soured the milk in the cellar, but 
I have seen a great many things in the house decidedly turned by it. 
Content on the other hand, sweetens and brightens all within its 
reach. The cheerful look, the happy, winning smile, the loving word 
and the kindly deed may all be traced to contented thoughts. If we 
have occasion to speak or write to a friend or brother we should 
never begin and enumerate our trials, necessities and woes, or 
bewail our fate, merely for the sake of doing so; better to throw a 
wet blanket on him at once. Let us rather recount God's mercies and 
help our friends to do likewise. Then shall we and they be blest 
with happiness and contentment and glory redound, through our 
thanksgivings, to the Giver of all good. 

That terrible spiritual ogre, Temptation, seldom attacks a truly 
contented mind, for we are "tempted when drawn away of our own 
sinful desire and enticed." 

Discontent can even have hard thoughts of the devil if he is not on 
hand with some first-class temptation when wanted. 

It may be asked, Can we control our thoughts and keep them in the 
proper channel? Can we prevent evil thoughts from coming into our 
minds? Apropos to this, my mother used to tell me, "You cannot 
hinder the birds from flying around your head, but you need not 
allow them to build nests in your hair." 

Paul, who kept his body under by the aid of a pure and vigorous 
mind, and by the spirit of grace, speaks of bringing every thought 
into captivity to the obedience of Christ. We can keep our minds 
pure and free by constantly putting pure, clean food for reflection 
into them. As a sack filled with wheat has little room for chaff or 
other refuse, so the mind that is stored with good things cannot 
harbor evil thoughts. 

The Lord has surrounded us with good things in which we may 
labor, of which we may read and converse, and about which we 
may exercise our thoughts. 

Therefore, "whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely 
and of good report: if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things."— Dawn of Morning. 



R672 : page 2 



LIVING FOR OTHERS.-It is ten thousand times harder to live 
right than to die right. It is not difficult for a man to give his life up 
through the chamber of death. But to give this life while you hold 
it, yes, and to use it so that it is a perpetual benefaction all through— 
that is hard, and that is the special Christian duty. To live in such a 
way that, as from the moon by night and the sun by day, light and 
guidance are issuing, from you shall proceed an influence that 
comforts, cheers, instructs and alleviates the troubles and sufferings 
of life— this is the true following of the Lord Jesus Christ.— Sel. 



R672 : page 2 

TWISTED TOGETHER.— Our word strength comes from a word 
signifying twisted together. "The Lord is the strength of my life;" 
"God is the strength of my soul." Then my life is twisted together 
with the Lord. God and my soul are as two strands twisted together. 
One may have no strength at all, but while twisted together with 
one that is infinite, the weakest shall not fail. Then with what 
confidence we may say, "The Lord is the strength of my salvation." 



R673 : page 3 

LIFE ONLY THROUGH CHRIST. 

"Pray, what is your life? It is even a vapor, 
Appearing a moment, then passing away 
Full soon it is gone, like the light of the taper, 
Or melts like the stars at approach of the day. 

Yes, such is your life; and no promise is given 
That sin blighted man shall forever endure; 
For ever since he from the Garden was driven, 
Endurance of days is reserved for the pure. 

And purity only is yours through the Savior, 
No merit nor work of your own can make clean. 
The stains of your wayward and evil behavior 
Are still on the robe of self-righteousness seen. 

If hope, then, of living forever you cherish, 
Acknowledge at once it is hope in the Lord, 
Apart from the Saviour each sinner must perish: 
The life is in Him, as revealed in His Word. 



Since present existence is truthfully likened 

To vanishing vapor, or grey morning mist, 

'Tis clear to conclude that the men who are quickened 

To life everlasting— obtain it in Christ." 

G. P. M. 



R673 : page 3 

MORTAL AND IMMORTAL. 

These words are usually given a very uncertain meaning. Wrong 
ideas relative to their meaning produce erroneous views of subjects 
with which they stand connected in general and in Scripture usage. 

The definition of MORTAL is, a state or condition of being liable 
to death. Not a condition of death, but a condition in which death is 
a possibility. 

The definition of IMMORTAL is, a state or condition not liable to 
death. Not merely a condition of freedom from death, but a 
condition in which death is an impossibility. 

The common, but erroneous idea of MORTAL is, a state or 
condition in which death is unavoidable. 

The common definition of IMMORTAL is more nearly correct. 

The word immortal signifies not mortal; hence the very 
construction of the words indicates their true definition. 

It is because of the prevalence of a wrong idea of the meaning of 
the word mortal, that so many are confused when trying to 
determine whether Adam was mortal or immortal before the 
transgression. 

They reason that if he was immortal God would not have said, "In 
the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die"; for if 
immortal it would be impossible even for him to die. To this we 
assent; it is a logical conclusion. 

On the other hand, say they, If he was mortal [their idea of mortal— 
a state in which death was unavoidable] wherein could consist the 
threat or penalty of the statement, "Thou shalt surely die"? since if 
mortal (according to their idea of the term) he could not have 
avoided death anyhow. 

The difficulty, it will be perceived, is in the false meaning given to 
the word mortal. Apply the correct definition and all is clear and 
plain. Adam was mortal, [i.e., In a condition in which death was a 
possibility.] He had life in full and perfect measure, yet not inherent 
life. His was a life sustained by "every tree of the garden" save the 
one tree forbidden, and so long as he continued in obedience to, and 
in harmony with his Maker, his life was secure —the sustaining 



elements would not be denied. Thus seen, Adam had life, and death 
was entirely avoidable, yet he was in such a condition that death 
was possible-he was mortal. 

The question arises then, If Adam was mortal and on trial, was he 
on trial for immortality? The general answer would be, Yes. We 
answer, No. His trial was to see whether he was worthy or 
unworthy of life. Since it was nowhere promised that, if obedient, 
he should have a prize, we are bound to leave all such speculations 
out of the question. He was promised a continuation of the 
blessings then enjoyed so long as obedient, and threatened with 
destruction if disobedient. 

It is this false idea of mortal that leads people in general to 
conclude that all beings who do not die are immortal. Under this 
head are classed Jehovah, Jesus, angels, and all who are saved of 
mankind. We claim, however, that this is an error; that the great 
mass of mankind, those saved from the fall, as well as the angels of 
heaven, will always be mortal; that they will, though in a condition 
of perfection and bliss, always be of that mortal nature which could 
suffer the wages of sin-death-if they should commit sin. The 
security of their existence will be conditioned as it was with Adam, 
upon obedience to the all-wise God, for whose justice, love, 
wisdom and power, to cause all things to work for good to those 
who love and serve him, will have been fully demonstrated by his 
dealings with sin at the present time. 

Nowhere in Scripture is it stated that angels are immortal, nor that 
mankind restored will be immortal. While, on the contrary, it is a 
quality which is ascribed only to the DIVINE NATURE- to 
Jehovah, to Jesus in his present highly exalted condition, and to the 
Church, the "little flock," the "Lamb's wife" and "joint-heir," when 
glorified with him. And not only is this true of the English word 
"immortal" and its corresponding word "incorruptible," but it is 
equally true of the original Greek terms which these translate. Let 
every student prove this to himself by using his "Young's 
Analytical Concordance." 

Not only have we the foregoing evidence that angels are not 
immortal, but we have proof that they are mortal, in the fact that the 
chief of their number is to be destroyed. (Heb. 2:14.) The fact that 
he can be destroyed proves that they, as a class, are MORTAL. 

Thus considered, we see that when all sin and misery and evil are 
blotted out, immortal and mortal beings will live in joy and 
happiness and love. The first class possessing a nature incapable of 
death-having life in itself, (Jno. 5:26), the latter having a nature 
susceptible of death; yet, because of perfection of being and 
knowledge of the evil and sinfulness of sin giving no cause for 
death, they being approved of God's law shall be everlastingly 
supplied with those elements necessary to sustain them in 
perfection, and shall never die. 



R672 : page 3 



HOW HE CAME TO SEE IT. 

Some years ago a dear friend of mine in Yorkshire wrote to me, 
saying he heard I had taken hold of some strange views regarding 
the doom of the finally impenitent, and he would like to know what 
these were. I replied that it was quite true that my mind had been 
changed on this sad subject. I no longer believed in the eternity of 
future torment, but held that the wicked would be cut off 
everlastingly after the Judgment of the Great Day.* I said that this 
light that had broken out upon me from God's Word had made our 
Father in Heaven dearer to me than ever, and the Bible a clearer 
book than it had been before. 

My friend immediately answered that he was satisfied with the 
Orthodox belief upon the matter, and he was sure I ought to be. In 
order to win me back to the old path he would like to have a debate 
with me by correspondence. And as I much appreciated his 
candour, kindness and Biblical knowledge, I at once asked him to 
begin the discussion by proving from the Bible the natural 
immortality of man. This would be the right course, I said, as he 
was going to take the side of Orthodoxy, and that affirmed that all 
men live forever. 

In a day or so a note came, informing me that my proposal was 
accepted; that there were many passages in God's word which 
stated man was an immortal being, and that he would prepare a list 
of them for me. I knew full well that he could not produce such a 
list; however, waited patiently to see what he would further say. 

About a fortnight after I received a letter inviting me very urgently 
to go and see my friend, for he found himself in dreadful difficulty 
regarding the task he had thus undertaken. Being able to arrange it 
soon, I paid the requested visit; and never shall I forget his look 
when he said that, to his amazement, he could not find a single 
verse in all the Book which declared man to be immortal: on the 
contrary, in his search many turned up which taught the mortal 
nature of mankind. 

He further said that the few passages which at all gave plausibility 
to the ordinary view of future punishment appeared now most 
unsatisfactory to him: and a little further conversation revealed to 
me the fact that he already had received the truth of Immortality in 
Christ alone. 

HOW HAD HE COME TO SEE IT? 

Simply by searching the Scripture on the subject. "These," said 
Jesus, "testify of Me." My friend had gone to them with the theory 
that he had received from the instructors of his childhood, and had 
searched for it in vain. Throwing all prejudice then overboard he 



had sought for Truth, and was rewarded. He was by the truth made 
free from former error. 



G. P. MACKAY. 



*The Millennial Day. -ED. 



R673 : page 3 

INFIDELITY VERSUS ORTHODOXY. 

We make the following extracts from Mr. Robert IngersoU's 
lecture delivered in Boston, Mass., May 1 1th, 1884, as published in 
the Boston Herald of the day following: 

Ladies and Gentlemen: It is inconceivable that any man who 
believes in the Christian religion should attack it, for if he believed 
in it, he would believe he puts in peril the eternity of his soul. But it 
is conceivable that, in a country where the orthodox religion is a 
reward for hypocrisy, thousands pretend to believe who do not. The 
man says to himself: "If I tell my honest thoughts, I can have no 
office— I can never be President." He says: If "I attack this religion, 
I cannot keep my wife and children. " I tell them, "Don't dress your 
children in rags for the sake of expressing your thoughts. Do not try 
to improve your fellow-men, they are not worth it, Go to church 
and say 'Amen' at the proper time if you happen to be awake, and I 
will do the attacking for you." 

There was a time when the astrologer said he could read the stars, 
but now he has gone and the astronomer has taken his place. There 
was a time when the soothsayer held a place, but he has been 
superseded by the priest and the parson. They are the fruit of the 
same tree, born of fear and ignorance. Now the preacher must go 
and give place to the teacher. They die hard, but what else can they 
do? We have done with the supernatural. There was a time when 
the prophet foretold the future, but the philosopher has taken his 
place. The supernatural is dying from this world, and let me tell you 
that everything is liable to death excepting demonstrated truth. The 
allopath who first bled his patient near unto death and then tried to 
bring him back to life is a thing of the past, but he died hard, and 
for years you could have seen in some place or other some ancient 
members of his profession looking for a patient whom he could 
bleed. There is to-day the same warfare between orthodoxy and 
science as existed between the old stage-coach and the railroad. But 
the coach had to give way, and the religion of our fathers, with its 
cruel hell and tyrant God, must die— it is not for this day and 
generation. They tell me it dies hard because it is of supernatural 
origin. Let me whisper in the ear of the Protestant, Catholicism dies 
hard, because the people are ignorant and the priests are cunning. 
Let me whisper in the ear of the Catholic, Protestantism dies hard 



because of the same thing. Let me whisper to both that Judaism 
died hard although thousands of years older, and Mohammedanism 
dies hard because intelligence is a plant of slow 

R674 : page 3 

growth. Let me whisper to you all, infidelity is increasing every 
day. 

We are past midnight. If the ministers would tell their honest 
thoughts, you would find that they do not believe much more than I 
do, or know much more of the subject. Do you know why the 
clergy dislike me? They know that I know that they know what they 
do not know. They have been telling me for years that I am fighting 
a man of straw; that the church does not believe what I have been 
saying of them, and that I have been misled in reading their creeds; 
that I have been misled by taking the Bible as it appears to me. I 
used to hope that I was mistaken, and that they believed what they 
said. A little while ago the Congregational churches appointed a 
high joint commission, composed of professors. They came 
together and recommended a creed to the churches. These were 
men of advanced thought, the ablest of the time, who pretended to 
know the sciences, and to have read Darwin and Huxley. I read 
their creed, and I found I was right. I was not fighting a man of 
straw. The orthodox churches still believe it is necessary for you to 
believe something you do not understand. They say: "We believe in 
one God, one Father Almighty, maker of heaven and of earth, and 
of all things visible and invisible." But nobody knows if that is true, 
or whether there is a God. They say he is maker of everything, but 
nobody knows it. What was he doing before he started? What does 
an infinite personality mean? 

In the orthodox creed there is but one living and true God, 
everlasting, without body, parts or passions, but I defy any man to 
know it, and no man can write a better description of nothing. This 
God walked in the garden and talked face to face with Moses, and 
he loves the children of men who believe his book and damns to 
eternal flame of fire the man who expresses his honest thought. 
There may be such a God for all I know, for this is the only planet I 
was ever on. There may be another world, but if the ministers know 
no more of it than this, it is hardly worth mentioning. 

The next thing in this wonderful creed is the providence of God, 
which is over all events of the world. Here is an infinite and wise 
God, the governor of this world; but what evidence have we that 
this world is presided over by this infinitely wise God? How do you 
account for Russia and Siberia? That means all the human heart can 
suffer. How do you account for all the horrors of slavery? How do 
you account for the holy martyrs? Why should God allow men to be 
burned for believing in him? What is such a God worth! Why does 
he allow all these ills in the world? He who allows it, having the 
power to prevent it, is criminal. Who is responsible? He who makes 
man as he pleases- God. A man told me a little while ago that there 



was a special providence in his life. He was going to sail on a ship, 
but he was delayed, and he did not go, and that ship went down, 
and he really thought that God had looked out for his poor little 
withered life and let five hundred go down to the depths. What did 
he suppose the other five hundred thought about a special 
providence? Why, only the other night in Washington the lightning 
struck the Young Men's Christian Association building, and in the 
same block with my office, too. Special providence. What 
nonsense! 

The Congregational churches believe in the resurrection of the 
body. How they can, I do not know. My God shall be my reason. It 
is the only torch nature has given me in the sad night called life. I 
will go where that light leads me and take the consequences, not 
only in this world, but in all others, no matter where. 

I also find that this creed says: 'We believe that Jesus Christ came 
to establish among men the kingdom of God, the reign of truth, and 
love of righteousness and peace.' That may have been his object, 
but what did he do? What has been the result? All the cunning 
instruments of slaughter have been invented by Christian nations. 
Born of "universal forgiveness" is the Krupp gun throwing a ball of 
two thousand pounds weight. How do you account for the thirty 
years' war in Europe; the war in Holland, the persecution of 
Scotland and Ireland by England? At the bottom of nearly all is 
superstition and heartlessness born of this religion. They tell us in 
the creed that they believe in the ultimate prevalence of the 
kingdom of Christ over the earth. Is it so? You only convert a few 
thousand of the fifty millions born each year. Are you going to do 
this by your missionaries? You never converted an intelligent 
Chinaman or Hindoo. You cannot do it unless you go there and 
board them. 

R674 : page 4 

When the money stops, your Christianity ceases. 

"They say when a man dies nothing remains but to damn him if he 
is not a Christian. Congregationalism makes hell as hot as ever. If 
their doctrine is true, Benjamin Franklin is in hell. He wanted to 
break chains here; he is a convict there. Thomas Jefferson has gone 
to his reward, as he did not believe in the doctrine. Nearly all the 
revolutionary heroes had not been born but once, and they are there. 
Old Ethan Allen adds to the joys of hell. The soldiers of 1812 went 
to hell long ago, and nearly all the soldiers of our civil war are in 
God's prison, compared to which Andersonville was a paradise. 
'Great tidings of joy.' Every idiot goes to heaven, and the less brain 
you have the better your chance. Such men as Humboldt are in 
prison forever. They are damned long ago. They are crying for 
water. Any civilized man ought to be damned who subscribes 
another dollar for such preaching. 



"They say I take away consolation when I try to put out the fire of 
hell. If all believed really in 'orthodoxy' this world would be a vast 
madhouse. 

"Priests collect toll from fear and ignorance, and know nothing of 
an hereafter. I leave the dead under the feeling of hope, and I HOPE 
FOR JOY FOR THE WHOLE HUMAN RACE." 



R674 : page 4 

TRUTH VERSUS ORTHODOXY AND INFIDELITY. 

Such sentiments as the above are the natural conclusions of many 
a truly noble soul whose faith in the religion of the Bible has been 
destroyed by unfaithful professors of religion who are first and 
loudest in their denunciations of the open and avowed unbeliever. It 
is surprising, indeed, that there is not more infidelity than there is; 
but we apprehend that there is a great deal more infidelity in fact, 
than finds open expression. 

But the time is rapidly approaching when all those who are really 
infidel will plainly declare it; and there are thousands of them 
within the nominal church, as well as out of it. The very same thing 
that keeps many who have seen much of the truth of God's Word 
and the errors of so-called orthodoxy from openly declaring their 
convictions, also keeps many who have not seen the truth, but who 
do see the errors and inconsistencies of orthodoxy, from openly 
declaring their infidelity; and that is the popularity and worldly 
influence of the nominal church— an influence which very largely 
affects both business and social interests. 

Many dogmas are advanced as truth and enforced upon a credulous 
people on the asserted peril of eternal torment which have not the 
slightest foundation either in the Scriptures or in our God-given 
reason. And not only so, but there are thousands of those who 
profess to be guided in their daily life and conversation by the high 
principles of Christianity, while beyond a mere profession and 
appearance, there is nothing of it, and the unrenewed dispositions of 
a depraved nature have nearly full sway. 

Those who claim to be the living epistles of God are known and 
read of men before they think of reading the written epistle, and if 
the world becomes disgusted and indignant with the former, it is not 
likely that they will esteem or consult the latter. Many a son goes 
out from a home whose inmates are professing Christians, but 
whose unbridled tempers, avarice, selfishness, pride and unholy 
ambitions, have proven to him the falsity of their claims and 
confirmed him in unbelief. And who can justly condemn such if 
they choose what seems to them a more excellent way? if they take 
as their guiding star the most noble power which they see— their 
reason-and follow where it leads and take the consequences? 



We honor the man who is true to his convictions and to the highest 
principles of action of which he is aware. We believe, with Mr. 
Ingersol, that the so-called orthodox religion of to-day has outlived 
its usefulness; that orthodox Christianity is a sick man. Yes, it is 
dying, but it dies hard. Why? "Because the people are ignorant and 
the priests cunning." 

We also believe, with Mr. Ingersol, that "We are past midnight, "- 
the midnight of superstition, ignorance, want and woe. But we do 
not arrive at our conclusions in the same way, nor from such 
uncertain data. He sees human reason struggling for freedom from 
oppression, and hopes, against a great barrier of doubt and 
uncertainty, for the good time coming when right and reason shall 
prevail and bring about a better order of things than we see at 
present. 

If the barriers which unfaithful professing Christians have 
themselves erected could be entirely removed, reasonable and 
unbiased minds might see with us the satisfactory evidence 
contained in the Scriptures that it is a positive and unmistakable 
fact that "we are past midnight" and that a better day is beginning to 
dawn. 

Mr. Ingersol, with thousands like him, stand away on the outskirts 
of God's great plan, too remote to see or hear the great Commander, 
and even doubting that there is a commander; yet they 

R675 : page 4 

note the direction in which the current of events is tending; and 
though they see not the almighty hand that moulds and shapes 
them, they realize that the tendency is toward a better state of 
things: that is a better time for future generations, but beyond a 
faint hope and desire, they know not that they also shall have part in 
it. 

But, as sons of God, we have been privileged to know not only that 
He is, but that he is working all things according to the counsel of 
his own will. And while Mr. Ingersol may take his reason which he 
believes to be the only torch which nature has given him to light 
him through this dark night called life, (and a blessed God-given 
torch it is); and while by its glimmering light he can leave his dead 
under the feeling of hope; and while his benevolence can reach out 
beyond his own kindred and "Hope for future joy for the whole 
human race," thank God the Bible reveals the blessed fact that in 
due time this hope will be realized in the glorious restitution of all 
things; for that time the whole creation is groaning and waiting in 
ignorance. Yet not without hope do they groan and wait, who heed 
the light of reason's torch. (Rom. 8:22,19.) 

But let us say to all such, If you can surmount the barriers in your 
way and throw away your prejudices, the faithful following of that 
very torch (God-given) will lead you straight to the Word of God, 
who says: 



"COME, LET US REASON TOGETHER. " 

Let us do this. Here is a book which claims to be a revelation of 
God's will and purposes concerning man. How do we know its 
claim is true? 

First, we would say that if it is true, we should expect it to bear the 
evidence of its truthfulness within itself, since, if it is the Word of 
God, in the very nature of things there could be nothing higher to 
bear witness to it. Outside evidences may and do corroborate its 
truth, but on its own internal evidence it must stand or fall; and we 
should bear in mind that nothing can be properly considered 
evidence which does not satisfy our reason. That is not faith, but 
mere credulity and superstition, which accepts as truth things 
contrary to all reason. Such a faith meets neither the reward or 
approval of God. 

The Word of God was given to us through human agency, those 
agents being under the special direction of God. That we might be 
sure that it was not a scheme devised by men or under the direction 
of man, it was written by different men scattered over a period of 
two thousand years. Each writer supplies an important part of the 
great chain of truth, and all are in perfect harmony with each other. 
The book complete tells the one story— the purpose of God 
concerning men. Some of the writers tell it in types, some in 
symbols, and some in prophetic utterances which cannot be 
understood until the events prophesied actually transpire. And, 
standing where we do to-day, when by far the greater part of 
prophecy has passed into history, the plan of God becomes clearer 
than it ever appeared before. 

While we agree with Mr. Ingersol in some things, we cannot agree 
with him when he says that the soothsayer of the past has been 
superseded by the priest and the parson, and the prophets of the past 
by the philosophers of the present. No, we think the soothsayer has 
been superseded by the philosopher who follows the torch of 
reason, while the prophet, divinely inspired to foretell the future, 
has been superseded by the historian recording the fulfillments. 
And it is the blessed privilege of our day to read them both by the 
combined light of reason and revelation. 

The New Testament writers while adding their important links to 
the great chain of truth, also instruct us as to how, by comparison of 
scripture with scripture, history with prophecy, types with their 
antitypes, and reason with revelation, we may come to such an 
understanding of the truth as was not possible in earlier ages. Surely 
no other book can claim such authorship; and if reason in other 
things teaches us that for every effect there must have been an 
antecedent cause, we must conclude that the wonderful harmony of 
this wonderful book, written under such diverse circumstances, and 
by writers so remote from each other in time, must have been under 
the special direction of some master mind whose length of days is 
more than three score years and ten. 



The Bible claims that its Author is also the Author of nature; that 
by his power all things were brought into existence, and that by the 
same power all things are sustained in existence. If this be true we 
should expect the testimony of nature and the testimony of 
revelation to agree perfectly when both are understood. If one 
reveals an author of benevolence and goodness, we should expect 
the other to do the same; and if some things in nature seem to be 
out of harmony with nature's general design, we should expect the 
clearer light of revelation to vindicate the wisdom and power of its 
Author in the permission of such lack of harmony. 

And just so we find it. The general testimony of nature is that God 
is good, benevolent, loving, wise, and powerful; yet there are some 
things which seem strangely out of harmony. And as we turn to the 
written word we find that testimony repeated with emphasis and 
proved beyond the shadow of a doubt. It also shows that those 
things which seem out of harmony with the principles of 
benevolence, goodness, etc., are so because of sin; that the natural 
consequences of sin-suffering and death- are for a time to be 
permitted, that men may learn a needed lesson from bitter 
experience, and that when that lesson is fully learned by the whole 
human family, all evil will be forever banished, and those who have 
suffered in gaining the experience shall be restored to life to reap 
the benefit of it. 

Yes, it stands to reason that creatures of three-score-years-and-ten 
cannot understand the facts of the present, as they stand linked with 
the plan of God which began thousands of years before we had an 
existence, and reaches on into the distant future, unless he comes 
with a teachable spirit to the study of the written revelation. And it 
also stands to reason that we should expect such a revelation from a 
God who is wise and good. 

But though Mr. Ingersol lays much stress upon reason, and 
promises to follow where it leads, we think that sometimes he 
forgets his torch and blindly stumbles into many foolish and absurd 
errors. For instance, he says, "Nobody knows whether there is a 
God." But how does he know that nobody knows? Perhaps he does 
not know, but why should he so confidently assume that others 
know no more? or why should he be in ignorance. 

Reason never showed effects without competent causes. Mere 
chance was never known to produce anything but disorder and 
confusion, but we have spread out before us continually, worlds and 
systems of worlds, moving with perfect and exact precision 
according to fixed laws which admit of no variation or mishap. The 
elements of nature that surround us are beautifully adapted to 
human needs and human happiness, and with unerring finger every 
element in nature points to the great cause of all things. Who can 
think reasonably even of his own body, so wonderfully made, and 
conclude there is no God? Yes, nature's book alone, gives evidence 
conclusive that there is a God, powerful, wise, and good; and those 



who discard its testimony are without excuse, and should forever 
keep silent about "reason." 

The taking of life which God commanded under the Jewish 
economy, as we now understand it, was a part of that great typical 
Object Lesson which in due time will be made clear to the world as 
it is now being made clear to the saints. God had a right to do this. 
Man's life was forfeited anyhow, and in a short time these must 
have perished in some way; if not by the sword, by wasting disease. 
If the purpose of God for the future good of mankind could be 
better served and the object lesson made clearer by taking them 
away with the sword, pestilence, etc., than by natural decay, who 
has a right to object? Even so he took away the Sodomites as he 
"saw good," (Ezek. 16:50.) In all these things God had a wise 
purpose, and in his own time he will make that purpose manifest to 
all, as he even now makes it manifest to his saints. 

Again, Mr. Ingersol seems to think the idea of an infinite God a 
very absurd one, and says: "They say he is maker of everything, but 
nobody knows it. What was he doing before he started? What does 
an infinite personality mean?" 

To this question we answer, All we know about it is what the Bible 
and reason teach. The Bible says that God is from everlasting to 
everlasting (Ps. 90:2); that he is immortal— self-existent— not 
dependent on any other being, conditions, or circumstances; and 
though our finite mind cannot grasp and comprehend the infinite, 
our reason says, It must be so. Causes must always precede effects, 
and back of all the inanimate causes, such as nature's laws, etc., 
there must be an INTELLIGENT FIRST CAUSE. Our reason 
unaided by revelation would name that intelligent first cause "a 
mighty one"— a God, and even more, the All-mighty. 

If God had a beginning, then he must have been produced by the 
operation of some laws of nature that preceded him, and those laws 
would also indicate an intelligent designer, and that designer would 
be God the first cause of all. And so if we follow reason alone, we 
cannot escape the conclusion not only that there is a God, but also 
that he is infinite. 

And here he seems to have forgotten his other conclusion that his 
God should be his reason; for again he says, "the universe is God." 
This seems a little mixed, and we fear the gentleman would have 
some difficulty in harmonizing the statements. We prefer that he 
should stick to his torch and by-and-by we will hope for better 
conclusions. 

R676 : page 4 

As to what he was doing before he began his work of creation, we 
presume that since he has not told us, it is none of our business. 
And if in future ages he ever gratifies our desire to know more of 
him, we will reverently hear. As to the orthodox teaching that God 
is without body, parts, or passions, which we admit is a fair 



description of nothing, we have simply to say that in this as in many 
other things, they attempt to be wise above what is written. When 
we come to the end of what is written, it is better to stop and say, 
We do not know, than to indulge in speculation. 

But further. If, as reason teaches, there is a God, we should 
conclude even without a written revelation that his ways are higher 
than our ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts (Isa. 55:9). In 
other words, we have every reason to have faith in the supernatural. 
To presume that the mighty God who created all things is limited 
and confined in his power merely by those laws of nature which our 
human understanding can see and comprehend is absurd in the 
extreme. 

As to God's providence, which Mr. Ingersol thinks is such a 
ridiculous thing, we would say that in it we have unbounded 
confidence. As it is represented by Orthodoxy, however, it does 
appear no less ridiculous than Mr. I.'s illustration shows. But 
leaving Orthodoxy and 

R676 : page 5 

taking the Scriptural standpoint, viewing the wonderful plan of 
God, spanning the ages past, and reaching on through the ages to 
come, we gain an idea of his Fatherly providence which comports 
with the highest idea that reason can give us of God. (See "Food for 
Thinking Christians," and "The Chart of the Ages.") And while 
God's providence is thus over all his works, for special reasons 
(heretofore given) the Gospel Church is now the special object of 
his care. 

"The whole creation is his charge, 
But saints are his peculiar care." 

Mr. Ingersol seems to think that the Orthodox Churches make a 
great mistake when they claim that he is 

FIGHTING A MAN OF STRA W, 

but we think that is the principal thing he is doing. He thinks he is 
fighting the Bible, and supposes it to be as their creeds (and in 
many instances their practices) represent it— a very bad book, a 
teacher of superstition, falsehood, and hypocrisy; but his principal 
effort is against the errors of so-called Orthodoxy, which the Bible 
itself show to be stubble which the wind shall drive away; and he is 
only helping to raise the breeze that shall do it; but the blessed old 
book shall not be moved. Whatever of truth men may have, whether 
they are in or out of so-called churches, will stand, but error must 
go down whether it be ignorantly or wilfully cherished. The selfish 
idea of God's providence which prays, "God bless me and my wife, 
my son John and his wife; us four, and no more," is bound to go 
down, together with that blasphemous falsehood against the 
character of God— eternal torment— when the wide range of God's 
loving providence shall be more clearly manifest. 



The absurd idea of a resurrection of a body with the same identical 
atoms of matter that had been wasted by disease, eaten by worms, 
wild beasts or cannibals, burnt by fire, or which had entered into 
vegetable or animal life, must go down before a reasonable study of 
the subject of the resurrection as presented in the Scriptures. And 
God's purpose in the permission of evil for a time, when made clear 
to all, as it has been made clear to us, will amply vindicate the 
glorious character of our God. 

Of course men who are so mixed and uncertain in their views of 
God, and so ignorant of the character of his Word, however well 
informed they may be concerning other matters, and so blinded and 
deceived by misrepresentations of it, we cannot expect to 
comprehend the great scheme of redemption planned by Jehovah 
and wrought out in Christ. But we thank God that the mists are 
being rolled away— that chronology and the march of foretold 
events, already prove, what Mr. Ingersol supposes, that already "we 
are past midnight." Soon the Sun of Righteousness shall rise with 
healing in his wings, and the blind eyes shall be opened and the 
deaf ears unstopped, and the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth. But until then we, with the lecturer, leave the groaning 
creation under the feeling of hope, KNOWING that a glorious 
future awaits the whole human race in God's due time. But this 
blessed hope finds no support save in the Word of God which 
abundantly proves it to reasonable, unprejudiced minds who will 
give it the necessary study. 



R676 : page 5 

RECONCILED AND SAVED. 

"If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the 
death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by 
his life."- Rom. 5:10. 

The misunderstanding and misrepresentation of the at-one-ment, 
or reconciliation Jesus effected between God and man by his death 
on the cross, have been fruitful sources of error and repulsive ideas 
of God; these have made an orthodox hell possible, instead of 
death, as the wages of Adam's sin, and the blood of Jesus a 
necessity to satisfy the wrath of God, instead of a substitution of his 
life in death for the forfeited life of the world: thus orthodoxy says, 

"Jesus Christ who stands between 
Angry heaven and guilty men 
Undertakes to buy our peace." 

Such a representation of the "God (who) so loved the world that he 
gave his only begotten Son," is so abhorrent and revolting that it 
has had the effect of driving some to other extreme and equally 
false theories; among whom we may cite H. W. Beecher, who gave 
expression to his belief on this subject in a sermon preached before 



the Cornell University, on June 1st, published in the New York 
Herald of June 2d, viz.: "Christ's work on earth was not to restore a 
lost race-a fallen one-but to carry forward and upward a sinful 
one. He did not suffer in man's place nor mend a broken law and 
make it honorable. The conception that Christ came into the world 
to suffer for sinners is monstrous. He came to benefit a miserable 
race by making known the supreme idea of a God of love." 

If Christ's work on earth was to carry forward and upward a sinful 
race, instead of to restore a fallen one, man must have been at 
creation worse rather than better than he now is, and therefore there 
never could have been a fall. But how did he become miserable and 
sinful? he could not have made himself so if he never fell. Did God 
make him as he now is, or worse? If Mr. Beecher is right, God 
cannot be other than the author of all man's sin and misery, and 
being therefore, the author of sin, he would undoubtedly be evil 
himself. In this view of the case, what was "the supreme idea of the 
God of love," and in what way did Jesus make it known? How Mr. 
Beecher can preach this God as a God of love, a great and good 
being, we cannot understand; but it is written, "The wisdom of their 
wise men shall perish and the understanding of their prudent men 
shall be hid" (obscured). (Isaiah 29:14.) Paul says, "Through one 
man sin entered into the world (in whom all sinned) and through sin 
death; so also death passed upon all men." (Rom. 5:12.— Diaglott.) 
Therefore, these men cannot be right and God's word true; one or 
the other must be wrong. But the time has come "when they [the 
people] will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts 
[desires]... heap to themselves teachers having itching ears, and they 
[teachers] shall turn away their ears [understanding] from the truth 
and shall be turned unto fables" (2 Tim. 4:3,4), and "denying the 
Lord that bought them shall bring upon themselves swift 
destruction" (2 Pet. 2:1). 

Every law, human or divine, must have a penalty attached to its 
transgression, otherwise it is no law, lacking force; the law of God 
demanded as a penalty the life of the transgressor, and Adam 
through disobedience having incurred this, all his posterity are heirs 
of death-life being forfeited. Therefore indeed as through one 
offence "sentence came on all men to condemnation (condemning 
all to death) so also through one righteous act (of Jesus) sentence 
came on all men to justification of life (justifying their living 
again)." Rom. 5: 18. -Diaglott. "If one died for all, then were all 
dead" (2 Cor. 5:14). And "as in [through] Adam all die, even so (to 
the same extent) in [through] Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 
15:22). 

If, therefore, through one man and one offence, sin and death 
entered the world and passed upon all men there must have been a 
fall, and mankind is now in a fallen condition, and if by one 
righteous act of the man Christ Jesus judgment, decision or 
sentence came, that all men should be justified to life, or justly 
entitled to life, i.e., raised up from the fall- resurrected-we ask 



what one act of Jesus could have accomplished this if not his death 
on the cross? The penalty, as we have seen, was death, not torment; 
therefore, he need not give more, nor could he give less; not only 
so, but it was because of his "obedience unto death— the death of the 
cross— that the Father hath highly exalted him."— Phil. 2:8. 

There is, however, a marked distinction between the death of Jesus 
and that of other men, and this distinctive feature is 

R677 : page 5 

not in the mode of death, but in the degree of life possessed by him. 
"In him was life" (John 1:4); not a deathless life, which could not 
die, but life everlasting, so that he would not die, had he not laid 
down his life. All other men are in bondage to corruption, and have 
no life in them by nature, but he being a perfect and sinless man, 
was not liable to sin's penalty— death; therefore, he could say, "I lay 
down my life,. ..no man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of 
myself; I have power (right) to lay it down." (John 10:18). 
Previously the "Jews sought to take him to put him to death," but 
"no man laid hands on him, for his hour was not yet come" that he 
should be put to death "the just for the unjust, that he might bring us 
to God." 1 Pet. 3:18. He commenced the sacrifice of his life at 
baptism, but had it not been completed in death, as it was on the 
cross, when he cried, "It is finished," all the rest would have been 
valueless, for "without shedding of blood is no remission," And 
when he said, I lay down my life, he immediately added, "I have 
power to take it again." Surely he could not have meant he had 
power (right) to take again the sacrifice of his life from baptism to 
the cross; this would be withdrawing his consecration to the will of 
the Father. Besides, how could he do this? Nor did he mean that he 
would take again the same condition of life-flesh and blood-to do 
this would be to undo the atoning sacrifice and take back our 
ransom price; but, thank God, he gave his life-parted with it 
forever on the human plane and was made alive on the spirit plane. 

He was "put to death in the flesh." (1 Pet. 3:18) not to pacify divine 
fury against sinners, nor to mend a broken law and make it 
honorable; it did not need this; but he vindicated the justice of the 
law and satisfied its claims upon us by giving himself as our 
substitute, flesh for flesh-his life for the life of the world. If, 
however, he had been of the divine nature as he now is, he could 
not have laid down his life, for "Christ being raised from the dead 
dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him" (Rom. 6:9); 
and if he had been a spiritual being under cover of flesh he could 
not have given his life for man, because his real life would be spirit, 
and therefore it would not be as required an equivalent or substitute 
for man. 

That he did exist, a spiritual being with the Father, and that all 
things were made by (through) him, and without him was not 
anything made that was made (John 1:3) is evident, but he left- 
gave up the glory he had with the Father and "was made (became) 



flesh." (John 1:14.) Why should it be any more incredible that 
Jesus' nature was transformed from the spiritual to the human 
without retaining his former nature under cover than that the 
Church "shall.. .put on immortality" (1 Cor. 15:54) and yet not 
retain the flesh and blood nature? for "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the kingdom of God." (1 Cor. 15:50.) 

Then, while we were yet "enemies, we were reconciled to God by 
the death of his son." (Rom. 5:10.) Reconciliation for the sins of the 
whole world was made (Heb. 2:17) for "he died for all," but all 
have not yet accepted the reconciliation through faith that they may 
be "saved by his life." "In due time," soon, we trust, the redemption 
and consequent reconciliation "shall be testified to all"— all shall 
"come to the knowledge of the truth" and to appreciate the precious 
redemption: and when they do, may we not reasonably infer that 
nearly all will accept the glad tidings and come into harmony with 
God? We have good ground to hope that the majority will be 
"saved by his life," as all were "reconciled by his death." 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 



R677 : page 5 

IS FAITH THE GIFT OF GOD? 

"By grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves; it 
is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast."— EPH. 
2:8,9. 

From this scripture it is generally presumed that faith is the gift of 
God, and that this is what the Apostle here meant to teach. And so, 
we often hear of Christians praying and waiting and expecting God 
to increase their faith, while they entirely ignore the means he has 
provided for its increase. As well might we fold our hands in 
idleness and expect food after praying, "Give us this day our daily 
bread." 

We wish, therefore, to consider, first, whether this is the true and 
logical inference to be drawn from the Apostle's words; and, 
secondly, what is faith and how obtained? 

It should be evident, we think, that Paul is not here speaking 
directly of faith, but of salvation. He is affirming that salvation is 
the gift of God; that it is not received as the reward of works, but 
that it is purely of God's grace and favor; and that though it is not 
procured by works, it is received "through faith." Yes, salvation is 
the gift of God, granted by his grace or favor, and grasped by us 
through FAITH; for actual salvation is not yet— now "we are saved 
by hope." This, we think, is the only logical inference which can be 
drawn from these words and their context. 

Let us then, inquire, What is faith, and how may it be obtained? To 
have faith in any statement or doctrine is to have confidence in its 



truthfulness, and this should only be based on clear evidence. To 
have faith in any thing without evidence is foolishness; and it is 
equally foolish to be lacking in faith when the evidence produced is 
clear and convincing. To have faith in a statement or doctrine, then, 
it is only necessary to examine the evidence on which it claims to 
stand, and, if reasonable, accept the conclusion— have faith in it. 

To have faith in a person is to have such a knowledge of his 
character, of his principles of action, and his controlling motives, as 
to warrant us in believing that those principles will always govern, 
and then to repose confidence in that knowledge. 

In order, then, to have faith in a person, it is necessary to become 
thoroughly acquainted with him. The more thorough our 
acquaintance, the stronger will be our faith, if he is true. If we 
would "have faith in God," it is also necessary to acquaint ourselves 
with his character as expressed in his two harmonious books- 
Nature and Revelation. 

The Apostle tells us that "without faith it is impossible to please 
God," and it is equally impossible to have faith without knowledge. 
It, therefore, becomes our duty to acquaint ourselves with God. We 
should be constant students of his character. God has sufficiently 
revealed his character to us to enable us to clearly discern the 
governing principles in all his actions, and, therefore, we may 
safely and confidently trust him, knowing from the evidence given, 
not only in his present and past dealings, but also in the statements 
of his word relative to his future purposes, that the Judge of the 
whole world will do right. 

Faith is an act of our own, and the only way in which our faith can 
be strengthened by another, is by their supplying the necessary 
evidence on which to base it. Hence, we do not need to pray for its 
increase, but to pray and search for knowledge out of which it will 
grow, and for grace to resist pride and prejudice, that we may 
receive the truth into honest minds. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R660 : page 5 

THE Roman Catholic Church was not organized, it grew. Many of 
its peculiar doctrines date back from a comparatively late epoch. 
Thus Papal infallibility was not claimed until about the eleventh 
century, nor dogmatically asserted by Council till the nineteenth; 
the celibacy of the clergy was not adopted till after the fourth 
century; penances were introduced about the middle of the third 
century; indulgences in the fourteenth century; there is no trace of 
the worship of the Virgin Mary prior to the fourth century, and it 
has been ever since then growing in extent; the very word 
transsubstantiation had no existence till the beginning of the twelfth 
century. Thus it will be seen that so far as Romanism is a system of 



doctrine, it does not in its present form date from the Apostolic 
days.— Christian Union. 



R678 : page 6 

OPINIONS OF EMINENT THEOLOGIANS. 

TAKE YOUR CHOICE. 
MODERN VIEWS. 

Talmage, D.D.:- 

"I would that I could break up your sadness and halt the long 
funeral procession of the world's grief by some cheering and 
cheerful view of the last transition" (death). 

"It is high time that the "King of Terrors" were thrown out of the 
Christian vocabulary. A vast multitude of people talk of death as 
though it were the disaster of disasters, instead of being to a good 
man the blessing of blessings." 



Beecher, D.D.:— 

"Do we, when we die, remain in a sleep till the general resurrection, 
or appear at once before the face of the great Jehovah?— There is no 
definite answer to these questions." 



Beecher, D.D.:— 

"Shall we know each other there?— I suppose so; but it is nowhere 
expressly stated." 



Beecher, D.D.:— 

"Christ's work on earth was not to RESTORE a lost race— a fallen 
one— but to carry forward and upward a sinful one. He did not 
suffer in man's place, nor mend a broken law and make it 
honorable. The conception that Christ came into the world to suffer 
for sinners is monstrous. He came to benefit a miserable race by 
making known the supreme idea of the God of love." 



Beecher, D.D.:— 

"The Bible is not an inspired book. It is a history of inspiration. It 
tells what is wrong in man himself. The theological Bible is fast 
giving way to the Bible of common sense, moral sense." 



APOSTLES AND PROPHETS. 

Paul— "By one man sin entered into the world and death BY SIN, 
and so death passed upon all men." (Rom. 5:12.) 

"The last ENEMY that shall be DESTROYED is death." (1 Cor. 
15:26.) 

"The sting of death is sin." (1 Cor. 15:56.) 

Jesus shall "destroy him that has the power of DEATH, that is the 
devil." (Heb. 2:14.) 

"THEN shall be brought to pass the saying which is written: Death 
is swallowed up in VICTORY! O death, where is thy sting? O 
grave, where is thy victory?" 

"Thanks be to God who giveth us the victory [over Death the king 
of terrors, our captor] through our Lord Jesus Christ. " ( 1 Cor. 
15:54,55,57.) 



Paul— "I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning 
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which 
have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even 
so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him." (1 
Thes. 4:13,14.) 

"We [the Church here addressed] shall not all sleep, but we shall all 
be changed.. .and the dead [the sleepers] shall be raised." (1 Cor. 
15:51,52.) 

Daniel- "Them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake." 
(12:2.) 

Jesus— "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go that I may awake him 
out of sleep. Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep he shall do 
well. Howbeit Jesus spake of his death, but they thought that he had 
spoken of taking rest in sleep. Then said Jesus plainly, Lazarus is 
dead." (John 11:11.) 

Solomon— "There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest." (Eccl. 9:10.) 

Job— "Now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shalt seek me in the 
morning [of the resurrection], but I shall not be [being or existence 
having ceased in death, nevertheless he adds] Thou shalt call and I 
will answer thee" (i.e. I will spring into being again, at thy word). 
(Job 7:21 and 14:15.) 



Paul— "Then shall I know, even as also I am known." (1 Cor. 
13:12.) 

Jesus— "Ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the 
prophets in the kingdom of God." (Luke 13:28.) 



Peter and all the prophets testify that there shall be "times of 
restitution of ALL things," which necessarily includes the 
restoration of friend to friend and their mutual recognition. (Acts 
3:21.) 



Peter— "And he shall send Jesus Christ which before was preached 
unto you, whom the heaven must receive until the times of 
restitution (RESTORATION) of all things, which God hath spoken 
by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." 

Paul-"Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 
15:3.) 

"As by ONE man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by 
the obedience of ONE shall many be made righteous." 

"By the offence of ONE judgment came upon all to condemnation, 
even so by the righteousness of ONE the free gift came upon all 
men unto justification of life." (Rom. 5:18,19.) 

Peter— "Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God." (1 Pet. 3:18.) 

Isaiah (42:21)— "He (Christ) will magnify the law and make it 
honorable." —[i.e., Christ kept the law in its minutest and in its 
widest sense, and proved it a just and perfect law, which a perfect 
man could keep, thereby proving the fault to be in man and not in 
the law.] 

John (4:9,10)— "In this was manifested the love of God toward us, 
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world that we 
might live through him. Herein is love that he sent his Son to be the 
propitiation for our sins." 



Paul (2 Tim. 3:16)— "All Scripture divinely inspired is indeed 
profitable for DOCTRINE [theological instruction]... that the man 
of God may be thoroughly furnished unto every good work." 



R679 : page 6 

TWO BAPTISMS. 

Although this subject has already been treated at length in our 
columns, the many inquiries from new readers make its 
consideration again necessary. 

Immersion or baptism (Greek— dipping) in water, as practiced by 
John the Baptist and afterward by our Lord and his disciples, had a 
different significance at first among the disciples from what it came 
to have after the Spirit dispensation was fully opened and its 
teachings understood. 



John came and his disciples, preaching repentance of sins, and used 
immersion as a token or sign of the putting away of sin by the 
repentant one. Not that the immersion put away sin, but it 
illustrated it. Jesus' disciples did a similar work among the people 
(John 4:2). And after Pentecost, even, the Apostles, for a time at 
least, used the emblem in this same way. For instance, Acts 
2:38,41; 8:12,13,38. In each of these instances open sinners 
symbolized the putting away of their sins, and this, indeed, is the 
usual significance of the ordinance among Christians to-day. 

But baptism came to have a new and very different significance to 
the Apostles, under the guidance of the Spirit, as they came to 
discern its deeper meaning as illustrated both by the words and act 
of Jesus. In Jesus' case, surely, it did not typify a putting away of 
the filth of sin, for the question he put, but which his opponents 
never answered, was, "Which of you convinceth me of sin?" and 
the record is that "in him was no sin." 

Jesus' baptism or immersion into water typically expressed his 
death, into which he voluntarily went as a ransom for our sins. It 
represented the full consecration of his will to the Father's purposes 
and plans for our redemption. Jesus was baptized when he "began 
to be about thirty years of age" -manhood according to the law- 
and therefore, the proper time for him to sacrifice his fully- 
developed manhood. His baptism represented in the one act of 
going down into the water and rising from it, his going down into 
death, and his trust in the Father's promise that he should not be left 
in death, but should have a resurrection. (Psa. 16:10; Acts 2:31.) 

When Jesus presented himself to John -regarding it, and properly, 
as the symbol of repentance and reformation— John was surprised, 
and said, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to 
me?" He recognized Jesus' sinlessness and knew that he needed no 
repentance. Jesus answered, "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it 
becometh us (the Church of which he was the Head) to fulfill all 
righteousness." (Matt. 3:15.) His death, which his immersion 
symbolized, was indeed the fulfillment of all the righteous demands 
of justice against the condemned race of Adam. 

That which was expressed in that brief, symbolic act, was fully 
carried out in the three and a half years of his ministry -for during 
that time he died daily, or was continually giving his life strength- 
sacrificing himself-for the sake of the Lord's truth, the Lord's 
children, and humanity in general. The act of immersion meant in 
symbol all that sacrifice which, commencing at Jordan, was 
completed at Calvary, and also his triumph as a new creature in the 
resurrection. Baptism into death signifies sacrifice and suffering 
unto the end, both to Jesus and his followers-all who would share 
the present sufferings and the final glory. 

To all who would share the heavenly glory, the question comes as it 
did to James and John, "Are ye able to be baptized with the baptism 
that I am baptized with?" (Matt. 20:22.) And if we have indicated 



our willingness, we have the promise that the ability shall be 
supplied, for our leader is our surety. And again, Jesus says: "I have 
a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened until it be 
accomplished." (Matt. 20:22; Luke 12:50.) All must see that not the 
watery-symbolic death, but the reality, is here referred to. 

After Pentecost, under the leading of the Spirit, the Apostles came 
gradually to apprehend this deeper and more forcible significance 
of baptism when applied to Christians-to those who sought to 
follow the Master's footsteps of self-denial and crucifixion of the 
flesh to heavenly glory— the first resurrection. If they would know 
him and the power of his resurrection (to spiritual conditions) it 
must be by means of knowing experimentally the fellowship of his 
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death. (Phil. 3:10.) 
They came to see that to be baptized with his baptism meant much 
more than John's- much more than the putting away the filth of sin; 
that it now meant consecration —to sacrifice— of that which already 
was justified in God's sight, cleansed from sin by the "precious 
blood of Christ." Hence it is, that we find Paul so ably teaching and 
exhorting believers, who were already justified from sin by faith in 
the Redeemer, to put on Christ by baptism; to become members of 
the "little flock"-"members of his body" —by being immersed into 
Christ. We quote his words: 

"Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ, were baptized (immersed) into his death? Therefore, we are 
buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised 
up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should 
walk in newness of life"— walk as those having heavenly, not 
earthly, hopes and aims. How different is the meaning to the saints 
from that conveyed by John's baptism? So different, indeed, that the 
Apostles soon came to see that John's baptism, though the same in 
outward form, did not at all represent a baptism into Christ, and 
some who had been once baptized with the idea of putting away 
sin-filthiness were commanded to be baptized again, and thus 
express the new and deeper meaning to baptism. (Acts 19:1-5 and 
10:48.) 

From these few brief testimonies we hope that all will be able to 
recognize the two baptisms (two in import; one in outward form). 
All may add to the evidence by the use of Bible references or a 
Concordance. And let all clearly distinguish between the heart- 
work which is the real, and the watery-type, which is the shadow. 
All should see, too, that the outward form has even greater weight 
and is the more proper to be observed by those who see the reality. 
We must not only believe with the heart, but also make outward 
profession of our consecration and our consequent hopes. 

Immersion, as typifying the death of the human nature, we regard 
as being no longer proper, except for those who, in heart, had 
already made the consecration -presented themselves living 
sacrifices-but may not before have seen the significant beauty and 
propriety of the symbol. But immersion, as practiced before the 



Gospel dispensation— called John's baptism, or the baptism unto 
repentance, as indicating a change of life, and thereafter a putting 
away of the filth of the flesh, is now in order again, as illustrating 
the very consecration that natural men should make to come into 
full harmony with God. 

Our reason for thinking baptism into the body of Christ by baptism 
into his death no longer proper is briefly stated in another column 
under the caption, "Harvest Work Misunderstood." 

Does Paul dissent from this statement concerning two baptisms 
when he says, we have "one baptism"? No, he addressed the 
Church, those following in Jesus' footsteps, being baptized, not 
unto John's baptism, but into Christ— into the anointed company of 
which the anointed Jesus is the head. 

Some have inquired, Who may properly administer the ordinance? 
We answer, Any one, it matters not who, but all our preferences 
would naturally lead us to desire that the administrator should be a 
brother in Christ. The formula of words, which it is our custom to 
use toward those being immersed into Christ, is as follows: Brother 

or Sister , "In the name (by the authority) of the Father 

and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, I baptize thee into Christ." 
Our formula for those now covenanting to renounce sin and pursue 

righteousness is, Brother or Sister , "In the name (by 

the authority) of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, 
thy sins be forgiven thee: walk henceforth in newness of life." 



R678 : page 6 

THE DAY OF ATONEMENT. 

Monday, Sept. 29th last, was, according to the Hebrew calendar, 
"the tenth day of the seventh month"— the day of Atonement for 
sins. To the Jew it is the most solemn day of the year, and to all 
those who appreciate this feature of their law, and see its significant 
import, the day and its ceremonies are full of valuable lessons. 

When God selected Israel to be his specially favored nation, 
through whom he would make types and illustrations of his 
gracious plans for the world and the Gospel Church, we find that he 
so arranged all their ceremonies and laws as to illustrate higher 
things, as a fulfilment is always higher than a type. 

R679 : page 6 

Because the removal of sin, and its consequences, was in God's 
plan the most important thing to be done for man, therefore, those 
ceremonies which illustrated and typified it, were the most solemn 
and momentous. More than any other type, the work of the Day of 
Atonement showed the process by which sin would be removed, 
and a consequent blessing come upon man instead of the curse 
which will be removed, and as a result the harmony and 



communion between God and man, lost at the threshold of Eden, 
will be restored. 

The poor Jew busied in making the type saw not the typical nature 
of the work he performed. He saw not that their Priesthood 
represented the Little Flock of the Gospel age— the Royal 
Priesthood, whose Chief Priest is Christ Jesus, and that they as a 
people for whom the typical sacrifices making satisfaction typically 
for their sins, were offered, represented the world of mankind for 
whose sins Christ was set forth to be a propitiatory covering. They 
saw only the type and mistook it for the reality. 

We cannot to-day step into their synagogues and see the ceremonies 
of the Day of Atonement performed, for nowhere in the world are 
they performed to-day as enjoined in their law. True, they observe 
the day by strict self-denial, fasting, abstinence from all business 
and pleasure. (Afflicting their souls. Lev. 16:29.) But since the law 
made the Temple or Tabernacle part of the type, it follows as a 
necessity that the Jew being without either cannot perform the type 
as specified in the law, hence must not attempt any part of it. 

Looking back to Lev. 16, we find the detailed account of how the 
typical service was observed. And thank God, we, looking at the 
type lighted up with the revelations and instructions of the New 
Testament, can see the real, the antitypical Atonement Day, the 
anti-typical "sacrifices for sins," and the anti-typical priests 
performing the sacrifices, and the people in distress under sin. And 
by faith looking into the future, we can see the priestly garments of 
sacrifice changed for robes of glory and beauty, and the 

R679 : page 7 

coming forth of the Great High Priest with every member of his 
body [church] complete and the great blessing and raising up of the 
world, the atonement sacrifice for whose sins will be fully complete 
with this Gospel age— this anti-typical Day of Atonement in which 
not only Jesus [the bullock] dies for sin, but the priesthood in 
general [the Lord's goat] fill up, that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ. 

In view of the fact that to suffer with Christ is not a necessity but a 
privilege to which is attached the grand hopes of wearing with him 
the glorious garments of honor and dominion, and of blessing 
fleshly Israel and through them all the families of the earth, "Let no 
man beguile you of your reward"! Let no man take thy crown"! 
Faithfulness- "even unto death," is the condition upon which our 
exceeding great and precious promises hang. We are in the closing 
hours of the great anti-typical Atonement Day, and we beseech you 
by the mercy of God that you neither lose your hold upon your 
share in Jesus' atonement sacrifice nor relax your effort to fulfill 
your covenant to sacrifice with him, by presenting your bodies 
living sacrifices to God, on behalf of others. 



R680 : page 7 



TEMPTED, LIKE AS WE ARE. 

And Jesus being full of the Holy Spirit, returned from Jordan, and 
was led of the Spirit into the wilderness, being forty days tempted 
of the devil. (Luke 4:1.) 

It would seem a reasonable assumption that Jesus, under the 
guidance, leading, or inspiration of the Spirit just received, retired 
to the wilderness for study and meditation relative to the great work 
to which he had just consecrated himself, represented in his 
baptism. Doubtless he there quietly searched the Scriptures, which 
after his anointing, would open before him deeper truths than ever 
before seen. He then probably saw more clearly than ever before 
the nature of the work before him, and this study opened the way 
for the presentation of temptations to do the work in some other 
way than that indicated in the Scriptures. 

In the account of Jesus' temptation, we cannot presume that the four 
points of temptation mentioned cover every trial to which he was 
subjected during those forty days, but that of all the temptations of 
those days these that are mentioned are illustrations. 

A careful examination and comparison will show that the Master's 
temptations are our besetments if followers in his footsteps. 

When the devil had showed Jesus the kingdoms of the world he 
said: "All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them: for that 
is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I give it. If thou wilt 
worship me, all shall be thine." This people generally regard as a 
sham temptation, and say that he offered what he did not possess 
and could not give; that Jesus knew this, and hence the temptation 
was a mere farce. 

But such reasoners are in error, because they hold that all the 
kingdoms of the world and the glory of them already belonged to 
Christ and were already ruled over by him. That such a view is 
erroneous is readily proven, not only by Scriptures, which speak of 
Satan as "the prince of this world," "the god of this world," "the 
ruler of this world," etc., and which speak of Christ's kingdom as 
future, a kingdom to "come" when he shall "take to himself his 
great power and reign," but the very facts of past and present 
history are sufficient to prove beyond a doubt that not a gracious 
God, but a fiend, a devil, has been working in and ruling over the 
nations. In no other way could we possibly appreciate the character 
and history of nations written as it is in blood and crime and 
injustice. Satan is now the prince and ruler of the nations, and gives 
the glory and honors of them to such persons as best suit his 
purposes. At the time in question Satan saw before him the perfect 
man Jesus, just anointed and imbued with the Spirit power from on 
high, and whose work as a Redeemer and Saviour he probably 
understood. 



But even recognizing Satan's authority and power over the nations, 
the force of the temptation upon Jesus might be overlooked unless 
we remember other circumstances in connection with it. Some 
might ask, How would Jesus possibly be tempted to bow the knee 
and worship Satan? We reply that the thought is not of adoration 
and prayer, but of service-to follow Satan's directions —as though 
Satan had said to Jesus: I remember you before you became a man, 
when you were my superior in rank; I know why you became poor, 
taking a human nature, but Jesus you are laboring under a delusion. 
As your friend and well-wisher, let me tell you that you can never 
accomplish your object in the way proposed. You have come into 
the world to die for men, and thereby redeem them and restore them 
to perfection. But you never can do this; you may give your life for 
them, but it can never benefit them, for it would be impossible to 
restore beings once destroyed in death. Remember, too, that you 
lose your own life by the operation; for though God has promised to 
raise you from death again, that, I assure you, is an impossibility. 
Remember that no one who ever came under the power of death 
ever escaped from it entirely. 

Now, hear my advice: I, as well as yourself, have felt sorrow at the 
misery and trouble humanity is experiencing, and would be glad to 
assist you to such a place of influence and power among men as 
will enable you to establish REFORMS both moral and physical. 
And for such a work of reform among men you are eminently 
qualified, being a perfect man. You can thus accomplish for the 
world what no other man can do, alleviating much of the present 
distress and suffering. Thus by moral reform you could lead the 
race gradually back to the original perfection. 

Now, Jesus, I have shown you the impracticability of your plan of 
dying to redeem men and the reasonableness of my plan, that you 
live and reform them and thus restore them, and I appeal to your 
judgment, is not my way the most reasonable, most sure and most 
hopeful way to the object you have in view- man's restoration? 

Here was a strong temptation-all the appearances favored Satan's 
theory; yet Jesus walked by faith and held fast to God's promise of 
resurrection of himself and of mankind through him, and answered: 

"Get thee behind me, Satan. It is written, Thou shalt worship the 
Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." Thus Jesus escaped 
this temptation not by arguing with Satan that God's plan was as 
reasonable, but by simply relying on the fact that it was right to 
obey God and wrong to disobey under all circumstances. 

As we look about us and seek to see which temptations common to 
the followers of Jesus most resemble this one endured by the Head 
of the Church, we are struck with the similarity of the adversary's 
methods now and the great success he meets with in assailing saints 
from this standpoint, viz., temptation to turn aside from God's 
appointed course —self-sacrifice— and endeavor to begin the work of 
blessing before the appointed time. 



It was this same temptation which beset the infant Church during 
the first five centuries, and which finally was successful. The 
persecuted and weary Church was beset by the adversary saying, 
Come, not so; I will show you a far better way than suffering, and 
tribulation, and persecution to accomplish your desires. Follow my 
wise counsel and all these kingdoms of earth and the glory of them 
shall be thine. The offer was accepted, and Satan, faithful to his 
promise, exalted the nominal Church, [the few who resisted the 
temptation being considered heretics and outcasts,] which resulted 
in placing over the world the Church of Rome as the head of both 
civil and ecclesiastical government. 

When this handmaid of Satan became very vile and low, and her 
methods and shams very apparent, and as a consequence a 
Reformation movement came about naturally, Satan, equal to the 
emergency, presented the same temptation to the "Reformers," and 
again with success. His argument, successful upon Luther, Calvin 
and others, was: Your reform is a great and grand work, but now 
you must beware of fanaticism. Get about your great work 
systematically, so that it will be a success and abide and have a 
powerful influence in the world. First, then, the IMPORTANT 
matter is to secure the support and sympathy of the world-of its 
empires and its great and wise. In deference to public opinion, you 
must have an organization and a very sharply-defined creed, and 
you had best distinguish your church by some name; and since you 
are the organizers and originators of your church, you surely have a 
right to call it what you please. 

Your Church must first of all recognize these governments of mine, 
and must call them Christian governments, no matter how un- 
Christlike may be their rulers and laws. Thus you must aid them in 
maintaining their hold upon the people, and they in turn will aid 
you, support you and protect you. Beware also that the long 
cherished traditions and theories of the Roman Church settled 

R681 : page 7 

by her ancient councils and firmly engraven by her upon the minds 
of the people be not in any wise tampered with, else your entire 
power and influence with the people would go and you would fail 
to make your Church the great one you so much desire. 

Thus again power, dominion and the glory and pleasure and ease of 
them, allured the Reformers and nipped in the bud the Reformation 
which needed to be very thorough. Since then, various servants of 
God stirred by a zeal for truth, have broken over some of the 
barriers and again attempted a continuation of Reformation work, 
and invariably they have been met with the same temptation, by the 
same wily tempter; and in their day, or soon after, all reformation 
was swallowed up by the desire to please the world, sail smoothly, 
and to be great and influential. 

But while this has been and is true of companies of men, it is true 
also of individual Christians. To us as individuals, this same 



temptation is one of the most difficult to withstand. It presents itself 
thus sometimes: It is useless for you to waste your time and 
influence advocating and helping to spread those unpopular 
doctrines, even though they be true. Associate yourself with some 
large and influential organization, and don't be eccentric and 
peculiar. Thus your influence among men will be greater, and more 
good will be accomplished than by advocating the truth and 
associating yourself with it. Alas ! how many yield to this who 
should say to the tempter as Jesus did in his similar temptation: It is 
written: Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God and him only shalt 
thou serve. Nothing else under any consideration shall claim my 
attention or attract my service; his will, his plan and his truth must 
have my little ALL. 

Sometimes the temptation is: Why spend time and effort in 
preaching that which is unpopular, yields small results and much 
persecution, rather let me engage in some other service, such, for 
instance, as the TEMPERANCE CAUSE, to do men good at once 
by moral and legislative reform. Why not seek by political agencies 
to relieve present troubles, rather than be thought a fool for 
preaching and preparing men for a coming reign of Christ when all 
these evils shall be remedied and all the race blessed. The 
temptation thus presented is often successful in removing from the 
ranks of the truth-bearers many of those who were anointed to 
preach the glad tidings. Others are tempted to think that they can 
serve God's cause and truth best by spending their best energies and 
talents in acquiring wealth, to be spent in spreading the Gospel. 
Deceitful snare! the getting of the wealth so enlists their best talents 
that they become dwarfed spiritually, and the wealth never reaches 
the object originally purposed. Thus Satan is successful with this 
class. He says, serve God and bless mankind and spread the Gospel, 
but do it my way, you will find it the most successful and most 
congenial way. But to heed is to reject God's way and to fall into 
the snare of the devil, and be led his captive and hindered from 
gaining the great prize. 

COMMAND THAT THIS STONE BE MADE BREAD. 

Another temptation presented to Jesus was, that he should use 
power just received at his baptism for his physical (personal, 
human,) gratification by making a stone into bread. To some it has 
appeared that there could have been no sin in so doing, and hence 
no temptation. For a man to use any or all his powers to satisfy 
hunger, would certainly under ordinary circumstances be no sin. 
But the circumstances were peculiar: Jesus had just consecrated 
himself as a man, and as a result of that consecration had special 
power conferred upon him in the anointing of the Holy Spirit. It 
was this newly acquired power that Satan sought to have him use 
for fleshly gratification, whereas it was given for a totally different 
purpose. To have bartered or used it for purely selfish ends would 
have been misuse— sacrilege indeed. 



How many of Jesus' followers have temptations placed before them 
of a similar character, viz.: Use your consecrated talents and 
powers, and your office as God's children and representatives, in 
such a manner as to further your "bread and butter" interests. Are 
you a public minister and under-shepherd? —seek the flocks with 
the golden fleece, and especially procure and maintain the goodwill 
of the bell-sheep of the flock; and with all your service of God, be 
sure you use your office so as to first of all secure a bountiful 
supply of earthly comforts. Many a public minister has yielded to 
this temptation, and obtained the bread that perisheth, while he 
starved spiritually. 

Are you a private servant and soldier in the Lord's hosts, whose 
service is less public? You are not, therefore, exempt from this 
temptation. The Adversary will, in some manner, present the 
thought that, by using your religious profession in a certain 
channel— by associating with a popular church system in Babylon, 
your bread and butter interests will be advanced. 

All pilgrims following in the Master's footsteps, should meet this 
temptation as he met it, viz., by saying: "It is written, Man shall not 
live by bread alone. " I am not afraid of starving, God has more 
ways and means for sustaining my life, than food; if I am faithful to 
my covenant, I can afford to trust the matter fully to his wise care. 

Another thought comes with these words— one especially applicable 
to the sisters: In your daily life remember, that "Man shall not live 
by bread alone," and, therefore, that all your energies should not be 
spent in merely gratifying the palate. Undoubtedly, very much 
valuable time is thus spent by the Martha's a part of which, at least, 
might be profitably spent after Mary's example, attending to the 
words of Jesus— either receiving or giving to others, spiritual food. 

CAST THYSELF DOWN. 

The third temptation was, to recklessly and boastfully risk his life 
in an attempt to answer a banter. Satan took Jesus to the highest 
part of the temple. (Probably, the central part of the royal portico, 
which was very high and overlooked a deep ravine; of it, Josephus 
says: "The pillars of that portico were a hundred cubits high, and 
the valley below four hundred deep.") Here Satan suggested that 
Jesus should prove himself the Son of God, by leaping from this 
eminence, Satan intimating that thus he could at once prove his 
claims before devils and men, if he escaped injury. 

But Jesus answered, "It is said: 'Thou shalt not try the Lord thy 
God.'" Such an act would have been reckless presumption and 
daring, and not the faith in God proper to all who put their trust in 
Him; hence for Jesus to have yielded would have been sin. 

With the followers of Jesus, not infrequently the desire comes to 
make some show before the world, and thus to convince the 
ungodly instead of by the Lord's plan— simply the preaching of 



R681 : page 8 



"the Gospel to the MEEK." It is this temptation which sometimes 
leads men to call upon God loudly, to come down in power and 
convert fifty sinners here this evening— convert every sinner in this 
house, and such like petitions. Such prayers are an attempt to force 
God by prayer to interfere and do by miraculous power what he has 
arranged shall be done by other means— by preaching— teaching. 

It is worthy of notice that finding Jesus able to quote Scripture, and 
to answer his previous temptations, Satan this time backs his 
temptation with a quotation from Scripture. Let this be a reminder 
to God's children that the adversary can use Scripture, and does use 
it often in the presentation of error. The quotation of a few words of 
Scripture should not be considered sufficient, but the context should 
be examined to see that it is properly applied. Truth misapplied is 
error. 

The Scripture here quoted by Satan is part of the 91st Psalm, and at 
first glance the application seems correct. But in the light of the 
present unfoldings of God's word we see that it applies not to the 
feet of the man Jesus, but to the members of the feet class, or last 
members which complete "the body of Christ, which is the 
Church." 

Throughout this Gospel age, the Church, the body of Christ, has 
been guarded by the angels of God: "Are they not all ministering 
Spirits sent forth to minister for those who shall be heirs of 
salvation"? But it is in the present "Evil Day," speaking of which, 
Jesus said, "Who shall be able to stand"? when thousands are 
falling at our side, that the body of Christ, now represented by the 
last members-"the feet of Him" needs to be specially helped. It is, 
then, with reference to the protection of the class of saints now 
living, that it is written, "He shall give his angels charge over thee 
to keep thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any 
time thou dash thy foot against a stone." 

If then, we are the feet, what is the stone over which there is danger 
of stumbling? It is the chief corner stone of the true TEMPLE 
Jesus. Of him it was written, "He shall be for a stone of stumbling 
and for a rock of offence" to both the houses of Israel." We 
remember that the first or typical house— Israel after the flesh 
stumbled over that "stone of stumbling," in that they did not 
recognize his presence among them, and rejected his sacrifice as the 
basis of justification, holding instead to their own righteousness 
which in God's sight was as filthy rags. See Isa. 8:14; Rom. 9:32; 1 
Pet. 2:6. 

The very same stumbling-stone is NOW in the close of the Gospel 
age causing many to stumble, which caused so many to stumble at 
the close of the Jewish age, viz.: an unwillingness to be saved from 
the Adamic penalty by the redemption or purchase accomplished by 
Jesus. To-day everywhere, this question of salvation by faith in 
Christ's finished work is being contested. Numbers 



R682 : page 8 



of influential ministers and religious papers, under the guise of new 
light are endeavoring to show that Jesus did not give himself a 
ransom (Greek-antilutron, AN EQUIVALENT PRICE) for all, but 
was our example only. They talk about justification but know 
nothing of justification through his blood, and are not really 
justified. Wherefore? Because they seek it not by faith [in the 
ransom] but as it were by works of the law-their own works of 
righteousness. They stumble at the stumbling-stone. But whosoever 
believeth on him shall never be put to shame (stumble). 

The context shows (Ps. 91:3-8) that there will be a great falling 
away from the truth, the pestilence of error, the arrow of sarcasm, 
and the destructive plague of infidelity, shall unsettle and overthrow 
the faith of thousands; yet in it all we are assured that all the truly 
consecrated, all the true, covenant-keeping members of the body of 
Christ-THE FEET, shall be kept by the power of God, through the 
ministration of his messengers, and delivered. And, finally, of the 
whole body it is written: Because he has set his love upon me, 
therefore I will deliver him: I will set him on high [exalt to glory] 
because he hath known my name, I will deliver him and honor him, 
with long life [everlasting] I will satisfy him and show him my 
salvation. 

R677 : page 8 

In God I have found a retreat, 
Where I can securely abide; 
No refuge, nor rest so complete, 
And here I intend to reside, 

I dread not the terror by night, 
No sorrow can harm me by day; 
His shadow has covered me quite, 
My fears He has driven away. 

The pestilence walking about, 
When darkness has settled abroad, 
Can never compel me to doubt 
The presence and pow'r of our Lord. 

The wasting destruction at noon, 
No fearful foreboding can bring; 
With Jesus, my soul doth commune, 
His perfect salvation I sing. 

A thousand may fall at my side, 
Ten thousand at my right hand; 
Above me His wings are spread wide, 
Beneath them in safety I stand. 

His truth is my buckler and shield; 
His love He hath set upon me; 



His name in my heart He hath sealed; 
E'en now His salvation I see." 

"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation, for when he is tried 
he shall receive a crown of life." 



R682 : page 8 

HARVEST WORK MISUNDERSTOOD. 

A brother writes among other things: "Are you quite sure that the 
evidences warrant us in believing that the first seven years of the 
harvest was the limit of time during which the overcomers were 
separated and glorified? Is this implied in "FOOD," page 1 19?" 

Dear Brother: We answer this portion of your letter through the 
TOWER in hope of thus benefiting others who may have the same 
queries. 

Your understanding of the teaching of "FOOD" is in the main 
correct, but not so when you understand it to teach that the saints 
would be separated and changed to spiritual beings during the first 
seven years of the harvest. ("Food" was not published and 
circulated until the close of those seven years.) 

The thought we wish to convey is, that the gathering, or separating 
of wheat from tares, is part of the harvest work and may be 
accomplished early in the harvest before the "fire" or judgments of 
that time come upon "tares," etc. When the ripe wheat is garnered 
or brought under the special care and labor of the Master, it requires 
some threshing, winnowing, etc., to fully prepare it for his service. 

To our understanding, the seven years which ended in Oct. 1881, 
with the close of the Jewish sacred year, marked off the limit during 
which the harvest work and that of sowing of seed for the Gospel 
harvest, progressed together. In other words, while the harvest work 
was commencing and in progress, the "call," (Matt. 20:16; 2 Pet. 
1:10,) to the "Divine nature" through opportunity to sacrifice, 
continued to go forth; and up to that time any believer in the 
ransom who presented himself a sacrifice to God was "acceptable," 
and reckoned a member of "the body of Christ," and a joint heir in 
the coming kingdom. But in October, 1881, we understand that the 
"acceptable year of the Lord" closed, and that the "call" to sacrifice 
and its promised reward is no longer authorized. 

Not that sinners may not still turn from sin to righteousness and 
come into full reconciliation with God, for this is the very work of 
the Millennial age just dawning. But their call is to obedience, and 
faith in the ransom with its reward of continued, everlasting life— as 
human beings, but not to sacrifice and FILLING UP of the 
afflictions of Christ, which will be filled up by the Church which is 
His Body, already selected. 



Again, while 1881 marked an important point in the harvest work, 
it has not completed the work for, much of the wheat already sown 
and ripening has yet to be reaped, threshed, garnered, etc. Since 
October, 1881, we understand that two distinct classes of work are 
in progress: One with the world, leading them to Faith healings, 
etc., etc., engaged in by many; and the work of perfecting of the 
saints, assisting those who have already consecrated, to realize their 
obligation more fully and thus leading them out of Babylon and 
bondage and darkness into the glorious light, liberty and enjoyment 
of their birth-right as heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord —if so be that they suffer with him that they may be 
glorified together. (Rom. 8:17.) 

All branches of the Lord's service are grand, honorable and blessed, 
but to those who appreciate the plan, and who see that the fullness 
of blessing to the world will follow the completion of the Church 
and its exaltation to power, the force of the Apostle's words, 
"especially to the household of faith" will be apparent. 



R682 : page 8 

ADDED BECAUSE OF TRANSGRESSIONS. 

Please give an exposition of Gal. 3:19: "Wherefore then serveth 
the law? It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should 
come to whom the promise was made." What I want to know is— 
What law was added, what was it added to, and on account of what 
transgression was it added? 

The context shows that the law referred to is the law given to Israel 
at Sinai. (Compare verse 12 with Lev. 18:5, Ezek. 20:11 and Rom. 
10:5.) It was added to the Abrahamic covenant under which they 
had been placed four hundred and twenty years previously. (See 
verse 17.) 

As originally created, man was in God's image and had his law 
written on his heart— to appreciate right and to do right were natural 
and easy to the first perfect man, until sin blighted, blurred and, to a 
great extent, effaced the law and likeness of God. Adam having 
passed his trial and, being found unworthy of life, was condemned 
to death, and all his posterity was involved with him. Since all his 
children have inherited an imperfect organism, both morally and 
physically, it follows that it would be useless for them to hope that 
if they, in their present imperfect condition, were placed on trial 
under God's law, they would be able, so to obey that law as to be 
faultless before it, and thus worthy of its blessing— life everlasting. 

God foreseeing the impossibility of man's ever bringing himself to 
a position of worthiness of life, had provided a way for his relief in 
"the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world" —"the 
Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world"— and this, God's 
plan, was referred to in his covenant with Abraham. God, 



foreknowing his own plans that he would in due time justify the 
heathen, made known beforehand the glad tidings to Abraham, 
saying: "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 

Thus we see that, under the conditions of this covenant, Israel and 
all other men had promise of a blessing. But because of inherited 
sin, not only Israel was unfit to be the "seed" that should BLESS, 
but all the members of the Adamic race were unfit. 

But while God knew of their unfitness, it was not so apparent to the 
fallen race, and God undertook to prove to Israel and, through their 
experience, to prove to all the world that man was unable 

R683 : page 8 

to recover himself, or to give a ransom for himself or his fellow, 
(Psa. 49:7), that thus all might recognize in Jesus and the ransom 
price he gave for all, the only hope of blessing, and that there is no 
other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be 
saved ("blessed") than the name of Jesus. 

So, then, the law of Sinai was added to the promise to Abraham 
because of and to convince men of, their sinful condition, and thus 
point them forward in expectation of the real Seed which should be 
perfect and able to keep the law and be approved of it as perfect- 
Jesus. 

It may be asked in this connection, Are not the saints of the Gospel 
age as well as Jesus counted to be of this "seed"? And if so, in what 
sense can they be approved of the law who, by nature, are as 
condemned and fallen as the Jew? 

By birth, by nature, we were children of wrath and condemnation 
and disapproval, even as the Jew and others, but all who are of that 
seed have their sins "covered"— "washed away," "blotted out" by the 
precious sin-offering presented on their behalf— "by faith in his 
blood," who bought us with his own precious blood. Their sins 
were imputed to Jesus, and he died as the unjust for them; his 
righteousness imputed to all who believe in him and accept of his 
sacrifice, constitutes "a propitiatory covering" for all those 
transgressions of God's law resulting from Adamic sin and 
weakness, so that the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us who 
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. 



R682 : page 8 

CHRISTIAN CHARACTER A GROWTH. 

It matters not if you cannot tell just when you became a Christian. 
If we sow a handful of wheat in our garden, we could not tell, 
though we watched ever so narrowly, the exact moment when it 
germinated. But when we see waving grain in the autumn we know 
it did germinate, and that is all we care for. The young disciple 
should not expect too much light at once. It will grow brighter with 



every Christian duty he performs. The Christian life is a sort of 
mountain path; and the higher one climbs, the clearer the 
atmosphere and the sooner he will see the morning sun. To the 
adventurous traveler who has ascended to the summit of Mount 
Blanc, the sun rises earlier and sets later, and the night is therefore 
shorter than to the peasant who lives down in the valley at the base. 
So it is in the Christian life. Clearness of vision, and firmness of 
foot, and beauty of prospect, come only to those who have 
struggled up the heights— to the heavenly places in Christ Jesus. 
Conversion may be the work of a moment, but a saint is not made 
in an hour. Character, Christian character, is not an act, but a 
process- not a sudden creation, but a development. It grows and 
bears fruit like a tree, and like a tree it requires patient care and 
unwearied cultivation.-Sel. 



R682 : page 8 

"WE cannot keep darling sins and work out salvation. We cannot 
harbor impure thoughts and then repose on the bosom of the All- 
pure. We cannot gratify our lust and attain to holy living. We 
cannot roll in the mire and then enter into the company of those 
who walk with him in white because they are worthy." 



R683 : page 1 

VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER, 1884. 
NO. 3. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 44 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



R683 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Many of the household of faith looking out can see the storm 
coming upon the world— the "time of trouble such as never was 
since there was a nation, even to that same time." (Dan. 12:1.) They 
can see the various brigades preparing for "the battle of the great 
day of God Almighty." There are the Socialistic "Regulars," and to 
their army is being added daily "Volunteers" from among the 
honest, well meaning mechanics, and laborers, of every kind, called 
together by various circumstances and with hopes of maintaining 
present advantages, or bettering their condition. 

On the other hand as opposed to this organization, are the 
established governments, who seek to perpetuate their honors, 
titles, revenues, etc., by maintaining control over the people; and to 
these and their armies of paid soldiery dependent upon them, are 
being added volunteers also: The rich of this world see that their 
interests are closely linked with those of present governments to 
whom they must look for the protection of their interests. 

The members of the true Church (whose names are written in 
heaven) imbued with the spirit of justice— the Spirit of Christ— can 
behold both of these gathering armies, see the wrongs of each, and 
the rights of each, and can pity and sympathize with both. They can 
sympathize with the poorer classes, those who have little, and have 
never had much, of this world's goods, and who under the clearer 
light of increasing knowledge on every subject, are beginning to 
believe that, all men were created free and equal, and to inquire 
why there is so unequal a division of the honors, power, and wealth, 
of the world as at present exists. They see that some men own tens 
of thousands and hundreds of thousands of acres of land, which, 
(notably in Europe) under the Landlord system, is rented out to the 
masses for as much as they are able to pay; and they inquire 
whether if the earth is a gift of the Creator to all men, some have a 
real right to so much more than they use, while others have none; 
and whether the land should not remain as free as God's other 
common gifts, air and water. 



They see that something is wrong, and that the present arrangement 
is not entirely just and equitable. The study of their rights and the 
rights of others, lead them to the inquiry: How came our Landlord's 
right to ten thousand acres while we have none? The answer comes, 
it was handed down from father to son for several generations; and 
looking into the pages of history he finds that the present landlord's 
great-great-great-grand-father took it by force-or stole it -from his 
great-great-great-grand-father. Is it any wonder that he expects a 
restitution of some part of it? As surely as the earth is the Lord's 
and the fullness thereof-as surely as he gave it to the people in 
general, so surely when he whose right the dominion is, shall take 
his great power and reign, there shall be Times of RESTITUTION 
of all things, spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began. (Acts 3:19-21.) 

But they know not what steps to take to obtain rights, privileges, 
and comforts, which they believe are God-given. They see little 
hope of their condition bettering -rather, they fear that as 
mechanical inventions increase, the result will be merely to make 
the rich richer, which with the increased competition among skilled 
and common laborers, will result in bringing down wages and 
making the poor poorer-which means less honor, less power, less 
comfort. 

In this condition men are easily led, by political demagogues and 
Socialistic enthusiasts, onward to the conflict of the "great day." 

The true Church can sympathize also with the "kings, rich men, 
mighty men, and chief captains," in their view of the conflict. The 
kings and rulers of earth have so long felt themselves to be superior 
to their fellow men, that they find it difficult to believe that God 
"hath made of one blood all nations of men." (Acts 17:26.) 

Did not "BABYLON THE GREAT" acknowledge their right to 
rule the people? Did not the Popes in crowning their ancestors, 
declare that they acted as God's representatives, and that really God 
had crowned them? Did they not declare that their reign was "by 
the grace of God" -a mark of God's favor to the people? Have not 
all the DAUGHTERS of "Babylon the Great" (all denominations of 
so-called Protestantism) endorsed this policy of the "Mother of 
Harlots and abominations"? Do not all religious people recognized 
as "Wise" according to the course of this world, endorse and 
support the same theory? Why then should these great ones give up 
the privileges which they esteem far more than life? Rather they 
will reassert and exert their power, and drive back the "common 
people"; if necessary, restraining them yet more, by restricting 
present liberties. 

Surely in the conflict they will have the support of Babylon— mother 
and daughters, for not only are they committed to the support of the 
kings of the earth whom they have declared to be of God's 
appointment, but they are bound by closest ties of common interest 



to mutually support each other. Are not the nominal churches of 
Europe supported directly by the kingdoms of Europe? 

The great and rich men of all countries are naturally led to join this 
same side in the battle. Their wealth, both in money and lands, has 
been accumulated by methods approved both by the governments 
and the nominal churches, whom they in turn support with it, and 
from whom they expect both moral and material support and 
protection now. They have, perhaps, inherited their lands and the 
income from them for many generations, and while they have no 
ill-will to the tenants, they have come to consider them as semi- 
slaves who belong to the land. If they are manufacturers they can 
truthfully reason that they run risks in business and have the trouble 
and anxiety of its management, which should entitle them to a 
greater proportion of the profits than the laborer who uses his 
muscle only and is free from responsibility. For these reasons the 
rich will be on this side of the battle. 

But the true Church stands separate from both these armies- 
sympathizes with the feelings of both, but joins neither. But she has 
an interest, nevertheless, in their conflict, and instructed out of the 
Word of the Heavenly King, she realizes what few others do, that 
this conflict is "The battle of the great day of God Almighty," and 
that "the mighty man shall weep there bitterly." (Zeph. 1:14.) It will 
be a day of wrath— "The great day of his wrath." He will overthrow 
the throne of kingdoms. (Hag. 2:22.) It is the day in which the 
delusions with which earth's rich men, and chief captains, or kings, 
and the mighty men of the nominal churches who have deceived 
themselves in their own favor, will all be swept away, and true 
rights, full liberty (to do right) and progress need no longer be 
fought for inch by inch, but will be firmly and forever established 
by earth's new King, who, at this time, takes possession of the 
dominion under the whole heavens. (Dan. 7:27.) 

Unknown to men, he has for some time past been holding back the 
winds —preventing the conflict until the servants of God were 
sealed in their foreheads (Rev. 7:3)-given an intellectual 
knowledge of the things coming and their relation to the plan of 
God in the establishment of his kingdom. The Lord reserved until 
its due time that which he had previously declared through the 
prophet, the means and agency in the overturning of the thrones of 
kingdoms —"knowledge shall be increased." 

R684 : page 1 

When ready to have knowledge increased, and through knowledge 
liberty, the Lord brought to men the art of printing, to which, more 
than any other perhaps, the overturning of every form of evil and 
oppression among men is traceable. 

We see the various battalions now making ready; the battle-line 
becomes more and more apparent, and the hosts are marching to 
their respective positions, and soon the engagement will be general. 



But what about the true Church? Has she no share in this conflict? 
Will she have no part in this battle of the great day? Ah! here is a 
weak point with many: while interested in watching the world's 
preparations, they neglect proper attention to their own share in this 
battle. 

"Are there no foes for us to face?" 
"Sure we must fight if we would win." 

Yes! yes!! Awake! the battle is already upon you. It begins with the 
house of God real, extends to the house of God nominal, and ends 
with the world. Be sober, be vigilant; for the fiery darts of the 
enemy are even now falling thick and fast about you. The battle of 
the great day has already commenced. The grand efforts of the 
adversary now, is to disarm us of our faith in the cross of Christ as 
the power of God unto salvation, and if possible to convert us into 
enemies of the cross. The alarming extent to which he has already 
succeeded should bid every saint that thinketh he standeth take heed 
lest he fall. Never, by the grace of God, never let the banner of the 
cross be torn down. Evidently the "offense of the cross" (Gal. 5:11) 
has not yet ceased. Still, it is to the Jew [and the nominal Christian] 
a stumbling-block, and to the Greek [all the worldly wise] 
foolishness, that the death of Christ bought for mankind life and 
liberty. Up, soldiers of the Cross- 

"Lift high the royal banner, 
It must not suffer loss." 

The preaching of "Redemption through His blood-the forgiveness 
of sins" (Eph. 1:7) has always been opposed by the adversary, and 
he has ever found able assistance but never with such persistent and 
deceptive effort as now. 

It is well that we all should clearly see the Enemy's plan of attack. 
His soldiers appear clad in garments of light; they even wear aloft 
the name of Christ, and are divided into various companies, 
prominent among these being "Spiritists" and "Progressive 
Christians" so called, but all and everywhere they may be discerned 
by their opposition to the Cross. Some are more open and some 
more wily and mild in their opposition, but all deny the ransom- 
deny the very foundation of real Christianity-that we "were bought 
with a price" even "the precious blood of Christ." (1 Cor. 7:23; 1 
Pet. 1:19.) 

Will the battle be hot-will many fall? Alas! yes, a thousand shall 
fall at your side and ten thousand at your right hand. (Psa. 91:7.) A 
thousand to one is a very heavy slaughter, and marks the severity of 
the battle, but evidently pictures what we may expect before our 
share in the battle is complete. The thousand falling to one who will 
stand, is as real and truthful as the statements of the same prophet 
relative to the trouble coming upon the world. 

Do you ask the cause of so many falling, and the means by which 
the few shall stand? We answer that they fall because the Apostles 



words have not been heeded— "Take unto you the whole armor of 
God that you may be ABLE to withstand in the evil day." (Eph. 
6:13.) Alas! how many in the ranks have nothing but the shield of 
faith. The shield is very valuable, and if we could have but one 
piece of armor it would doubtless be the most valuable, but unless 
we have more we must surely fall as this conflict progresses-we 
will not be "able to stand" without more armor. Ah! how much we 
need sandals, the preparation of the Gospel which leads us to 

R684 : page 2 

expect and enables us to endure the sharp difficulties of the narrow 
way unflinchingly, as good soldiers. How much we need to be girt 
about with truth, with the precious promises of God's word, lest we 
become weary and faint. How much we need to have well in hand 
the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God, that we may be 
able to keep the adversary at a respectful distance. How much need 
there is also for the breastplate of Christ's righteousness- his merit 
recognized as covering our life, our vitals. How much need too, for 
the helmet, an intelligent hope of salvation— a head-cover. 

Those who are negligent about putting on the armor, and are relying 
solely upon their shield of faith, to meet every attack of the enemy, 
are making a great mistake-As the enemy's arrows ["bitter words," 
sarcasm, sophistry, etc.,] are showered upon you and he presses you 
close, you may lower your shield for a moment to note his position, 
and then unless you have an intellectual apprehension of the truth- 
a helmet— the enemy will be sure to succeed in striking you with an 
arrow of sophistry. Or if very guarded about your head, and busy 
seeking to protect your intellect by your shield of faith, you lift high 
the shield your breast will be exposed, and there the arrow of no 
ransom will strike, unless you have on the breastplate of Christ's 
righteousness. 

Even armed with the whole armor you will barely be able to stand- 
so fierce the assault. With all the armor on there are chinks and 
openings of various sizes in our helmets (intellectual 
apprehensions) which demand that we still be on our guard and cast 
not away our shield. 

Let every soldier of the Cross put on the whole armor and see well 
to it that it is true steel and not mere polished tin. See that it all 
bears the imprint and marks of the Royal Armory— the Word of 
God. 



page 2 



EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Walton Co., Fla. 

C. T. RUSSELL:— Dear Brother:— Please accept my thanks. I wish 
I could only tell you all I feel, but I cannot. The teaching of the 
TOWER seems to me to be the truth, and yet, so different from 
what I have been taught. I read, and am amazed and delighted, and 
frequently I am led to exclaim, Surely, surely, this must be the 
truth! My Father in heaven knows how I long to know the truth— I 
have prayed to be kept from error. 

For some time I have not been satisfied with so-called orthodox 
teaching. It didn't seem to me to harmonize with God's Word, and 
although for a time I tried to keep "in the lines," I finally broke 
through and preached what I believed to be the truth. I have in 
consequence been persecuted and denounced as unsound in the 
faith. I became so disheartened that I meditated leaving the Baptist 
church. But where to go I knew not. When I came to examine, they 
all seemed to be afflicted with the same disease, and some worse 
off than my own denomination. Just then (it seemed an accident), a 
friend handed me, at meeting one day, a couple of Z.W.T., with the 
remark that as I was unsound, they would not hurt me to read them. 
Oh! how they stirred my very soul! 

I am studying hard; if I become perfectly satisfied, I am done with 
sects and creeds. I have been lending the papers and circulating 
them about. Some of the strict ones are watching me. A storm is 
brewing for me, and I am all alone; but blessed thought, God will 
help. Yours in Christ, 

Brooklyn, N.Y. 

VERY DEAR BROTHER:— I am going to write you a few lines. 
More and more I esteem your special work. I have been feasting on 
"Food," and it is rich, spiritually. When first I read of the doctrine 
of the presence of Christ, it was too much for me— so contrary to all 
I had learned in days past— but now, after months of study and 
meditation, I see the truth, and it is a power to the believer. Your 
letter of April 1 1th has been perused over and over, and has been of 
great help to me. I again thank you. The one serious and important 
question, if you remember, was as to how much time I should give 
to the Lord and how much to business. Since then, the subject has 
been constantly in my mind, having given it the cool and careful 
consideration you advised (also my method), desiring to do exactly 
right in the matter, desiring above all to please our Lord, and to so 
decide that I should gain spiritually and be enabled to do the best 
for others. 



Well, business takes the second place, and I will give more time in 
studying the Word and gaining from the Lord spiritual light and 
direction. The Lord is revealing himself to me more and more. I 
pray that I may so understand him as to do the most I can to honor 
him in this life, to do good to all men, and "to live and move and 
have my being in him. " I pray for wisdom, direction and blessing 
for you, often. 

With sincere regard, your brother in Christ, 
Clay Co., Dak., Oct. 14. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-May the Lord bless you, in your 
work, spreading the joyful tidings of our dear Master's presence. "O 
Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with 
strength; say unto the cities of Judah, behold your God." I have 
often thought of writing to you; but being a foreigner, the English 
language don't come as natural to me. Have had the TOWER in our 
house for two years, and it has been the means of opening my eyes. 
My heart is full of gratitude to my heavenly Father. How gloriously 
the dawn is breaking after such a long night of darkness ! For the 
last five years I have been earnestly looking for the coming of Jesus 
my Bridegroom. My path has often been narrow and difficult. 
Thanks to God, I can see it clearly now. What a great privilege it is 
to suffer with him here and share his glory there. When your paper 
and Food first reached me, it seemed to me I was like Peter, who 
was out along with the other disciples, fishing the whole night and 
caught nothing. When morning came, Jesus stood on the shore and 
they knew not that it was Jesus, but John was the first to recognize 
him, and told Peter, and we know the result. So it was with me, 
when you told me, "It is the Lord." I believed the John class, and 
swam ashore. Will you please send me three copies of each number 
of the SWEDISH WATCH TOWER; I would like to send them to 
Sweden, to some persons whom I know for sure are thinking 
Christians and Bible students. The mite enclosed ($5.00) will help 
pay some of the debt you are in for expense of the Swedish paper. I 
wish it could be more, but I am sure the Lord is able to provide in 
due time. "Be of good cheer," the help will come where we least 
expect it. I hope that some of my countrymen, or the Swedish 
saints, may be able to comprehend the glorious truth, and take an 
interest in the Swede TOWER. I know but two or three that really 
understand-they are old pilgrims. May God bless you abundantly, 
dear brother and sister Russell, is my daily prayer. 

Your sister in Christ, . 



Orangeburg, S.C. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-I am glad to tell you that I am cheerfully 
holding on to what I have learned of "the good (not spurious) Word 
of God," and am still anxiously reaching for more. I receive so 



much comfort from the teachings of the TOWER that I read the 
different issues over and over again. Indeed, so helpful is the paper 
to me, in the understanding of God's Word, that I look for it every 
time as I would for a dear friend. It is next to the Bible. I am alone 
as yet, but the light is certainly making some impression. Babylon 
is visibly unstable and corrupt; her corruption is becoming so 
enormous, that thinking men cannot much longer submit to it; she is 
actually closing her eyes and ears to known filth in her ministry, as 
well as laity, and her order is to "hold the fort" against the light now 
streaming from the Word. 

Delta Co., Tex. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-Some time ago, a copy of the 
WATCH TOWER accidentally (?) got into my house. I read it and 
became interested very much; have received several numbers since, 
and "Food for Thinking Christians." Well, what of it? I hardly 
know whether to accept it or reject it; in fact, I can't reject a part of 
it without rejecting the Word of God. I determined many years ago 
not to accept or reject any theory until satisfied that the Word of 
God sustained it. I need not tell you this motto has made me a little 
"weak-kneed" on some things in my church. 

I have read all you sent and am thirsting for more. I handed some of 
the papers to friends, though that voice, "Let no man deceive you," 
makes me tread cautiously; yet, "by their fruits ye shall know them" 
partly dispels the fear. I shall be glad if you will answer this by 
letter, and answer the following questions: First. Should I become 
convinced that yours is the true Church, and wish to join it, how 
should I proceed? Second. In other words, would I have to 
subscribe to a certain set of doctrines, the mode and design of 
baptism included? Third. If you have a set of doctrines your 
ministry are bound to subscribe to and teach, what are they?- 
especially with reference to baptism, its mode and design, and the 
conditions of pardon? I think, from what I can gather from your 
book and papers, that we are agreed on these things-I hope so. Can 
you arrange for us to have preaching on these subjects? This is, I 
should think, a good field of labor. Our people are ready to hear and 
test by the only infallible guide-the Bible. Will you please to send 
us, as per offer, more reading matter, especially, "The Tabernacle 
and Its Teachings," and whatever else you think would be good for 
me. 

With respect, &c, I am yours in Christ, 

[Answers to the above questions will be found in the following 
articles of Z.W.T.:-"The Ecclesia," Sept., '84; "Our Sect," Oct., '83; 
"Justification Defined," Sept., '84; "The Two Baptisms," Oct., '84; 
"The Episcopal Church," this issue. When evidence is seen, "Be not 
faithless, but believing"- then courageous and faithful.] 



Palmyra, 111. 



MRS. C. T. RUSSELL: -My Dear Sister in Christ:-I have longed 
so often to write to you, but have refrained from anything only 
short letters to the TOWER, on what seemed necessary. But it is 
almost a year since I left the M.E. Church, and myself and husband 
were buried in baptism. It has been such a year of rest that I must 
write and tell you. Of course, we have had trials; those that once 
spoke well of us now say strange things, but you know all about 
that, for all are treated alike. We have stood on the "sea of glass" 
almost a year, and we are not tired yet! The Word tastes just as 
good-yea, it grows sweeter all the time. I do wish I knew some 
word to write that would express my intense love for the precious 
Word of God, precious because it is the revelation of himself. 
Several years ago I promised my Lord to do whatever I should see 
to be duty, regardless of others' opinions, and the Lord always gave 
me strength to do whatever he required. As to knowledge of 
Scripture, I had none only the most simple; I clung to what I had, 
but was afraid to try to learn more. I read my Bible just exactly as a 
Catholic counts his beads, in reverence and in ignorance. I was 
afraid to study it, because friends of mine commenced studying 
long ago, and, seeing the error in the church, left it, and left all. 
They saw the error in the church, but did not see the glory in true 
religion; they saw the failure of man, but did not see that God has a 
religion that is not, and cannot be defiled by man. I feared to study 
my Bible, lest I should deny the Lord that bought me, and then, of a 
sudden, I saw that I might study— yea, I could go down into the 
depths of the wisdom and knowledge of God, and he would aid me, 
and there was no fear of infidelity! Could I be disobedient to the 
heavenly vision? nay, nay, but I could praise him continually for 
the great joy he has given me, the unspeakable joy of knowing him. 
I wish we could oftener find listening ears, for it seems so selfish to 
have all these precious truths and not feast our friends too; but they 
are suspicious of us, it is seldom they will listen, and I find it a 
severe trial to be quiet and learn so much and say so little. We 
esteem the WATCH TOWER most highly, but I cannot tell you that 
we swallow them all instantly; sometimes we get too large a dose, 
and have to wait a while and apply the test, but we search the 
Scriptures daily, to see if these things are so, and it is wonderful 
what feasts we have, how could we have read the Bible so long and 
not know anything about it? 

And now, dear sister, I have written this to you, because I love to 
commune with one of like precious faith, and hoping that it might 
prove a slight encouragement to you, if your arms are weary. I 
would help to hold them up, but the Lord will sustain you. We do 
not know each other, but we do know the same precious Saviour, 
and together we will praise him. 

Your sister in the Lord, . 



R706 : page 2 



NO OTHER NAME. 

The healing of the lame man at the Beautiful gate of the temple, 
the wondering crowd which it excited, and the rulers who were 
enraged about it, and the more so because they could not deny the 
genuineness of the cure, all combined to afford the Apostles some 
rare opportunities to preach to the people. It was quite another thing 
to seize upon and make use of the opportunities which the miracle 
afforded. The Apostles, under God's power and guidance, were 
equal to both demands. This time it would seem as if God had 
guided the thoughts of the offended rulers to just those utterances 
which would prepare the way for the Apostles to give voice to some 
of the most fundamental and important truths they ever proclaimed. 
"By what authority and in what name have ye done this?" "In the 
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth," came the answer. And then, as if 
forgetting the lame man and his cure, the people and their 
amazement, the rulers and their anger, together with all temporal 
and temporizing considerations, Peter swept on in thought to that 
larger, grander power of the crucified Nazarene to save men from 
the maladies and deformities of sin, and uttered those words that 
come ringing down to us through the ages. "Neither is there 
salvation in any other for there is none other name under heaven 
given among men whereby we must be saved." Hear it, all ye that 
need salvation. Accept him, and learn that he is able to save to the 
uttermost all who come to God by him.— Selected. 



R684 : page 2 

HOLY COURAGE.— Holy courage characterizes every true life. 
The possessor of this life looks at the right, and says, "With God's 
help I will do it." He never for a moment asks himself the question, 
"Will it affect my material interests?" but only, "Is it right?" If the 
reply to this question is "Yes," he moves right on in the sacred path 
of duty, though it leads through a "burning, fiery furnace," or a 
lion's den. The frowns of friends, or the threats of foes move him 
not. His position is taken, and from it he will not be driven. When 
he approaches the portals of the tomb, he exclaims, "I have fought a 
good fight" ; and when he is lowered into the grave, the very 
remembrance of his heroism calls forth the word, "There he lies 
who never feared the face of man." Such are the men who triumph 
over every foe, and are more than conquerors through him that 
loved us.-Sel. 



R694 : page 2 

COMMUNION with God must ever hold a higher place than 
service for God. Do we realize it? 



HAVE FAITH IN GOD. 



When the stormy winds are blowing, 
And the angry billows roll, 
When the mighty waves of trouble 
Surge around the stricken soul, 
Have faith in God, 
Who reigns above; 
Trust in Him, 
For He is love. 

When the way is rough and thorny, 
Danger all along the path, 
When the foe is ever planning 
How to crush you in his wrath, 
Have faith in God; 
His loving care 
Shall keep you safe 
From every snare. 

When your eyes are dim with weeping, 

And your heart is full of woe 

For the loved that now are sleeping 

In the cruel grave so low, 

Have faith in God; 

The dead shall rise 

To meet the Savior 

By and by. 

Are you filled with eager longing 
For the night to pass away? 
Are you weary of the watching 
For the dawning of the day? 
Have faith in God; 
He is our stay; 
Soon will come 
The perfect day. 

Are you hoping and rejoicing 
In the presence of the Lord? 
Are you waiting for the kingdom, 
And the glorious reward? 
Have faith in God; 
Our King is here, 
And soon his glory 
Will appear. 



R685 : page 3 



TO WHOM WAS IT PAID? 

"Jesus died and paid it all; 
All the debt I owe." 

We live in a day when the wherefore and why are sought on every 
question. It is, therefore, to be expected that when the grand old 
doctrine of a ransom for sin is being attacked and scoffed at, those 
who hold the doctrine should not only be required to give a "thus 
saith the Lord" on the subject, but also that when asked to prove the 
reasonableness of the statement, and show how, and why, and by 
whom, and to whom, and on what account the ransom for sins was 
given, we should be ready to show it. 

While it should be to all saints, and is to us, SUFFICIENT that 
God's Word declares that we were "bought with a price," 
"redeemed with the precious blood of Christ," ransomed "from the 
grave" by Him who "gave himself a ransom for all," etc. Yet it is 
gratifying to us that we are able to "give an answer to every one 
that asketh" on this important subject. 

Let us bow before the statements of Scripture, and let us also see 
that they prove logically 

How firm a foundation ye saints of the Lord 
Is laid for our faith in his excellent word. 

Our opponents in an endeavor to make the ransom look 
unreasonable, ask and answer as follows, viz.: To whom can it be 
claimed that this ransom sacrifice of Jesus was presented or paid? 
To God? Surely God delights not in blood and death. God is love, 
why should the loving Jehovah need to be propitiated? (See 
"Propitiation" in July TOWER.) Was it presented to release man 
from death?— then it should have been presented to 'Him that hath 
the power of death, that is the devil.' (Heb. 2: 14.) Did Jesus present 
the ransom sacrifice to the devil?" 

By such questions and suggestions it is sought to ridicule the 
ransom, and thus to turn some from the plain statements of the 
Word. Before giving a solution of these queries, let us see how 
shallow is this method of reasoning. Suppose we did not know, and 
could not answer to whom the sacrifice of Jesus was offered, would 
that disprove the fact that he "was once offered to bear the sins of 
many?" (Heb. 9:28,) or the statement made by Jehovah that his was 
a "sacrifice for sin," "a propitiation for our sins, and not for ours 
only, but also for the sins of the whole world?" (1 John 2:2.) Surely 
not, ignorance of reasons or causes is no argument against facts in 
any sane mind. 

If you were asked to give a full explanation of the power and 
agencies which hold this world in order while revolving in space, or 



of any other fact the philosophy of which you imperfectly 
understand, would you be obliged to disbelieve and deny the 
FACTS because you could not explain them fully? So with the 
doctrine of RANSOM. Is it sensible or reasonable to ask any child 
of God to disbelieve the plain statements of God's Word because he 
cannot fully explain its every reason in detail? You believe that a 
grain of corn grows when planted. You do not understand and 
cannot explain fully, how and what the process, but do you 
therefore deny the fact? 

Let it not be forgotten either, that some of our opponents desire to 
seem to hold fast to the Scripture, and hence sometimes use and 
quote the word ransom in such a manner as to leave the impression 
with some that they are in harmony with the Scripture where it 
occurs, but they have never yet defined the word, nor explained the 
texts in which it occurs with the context. Beware of such deceitful 
handling of the Word of God. 

Now we come to the questions. Let us consider them in the reverse 
order: Was the ransom-sacrifice of Jesus presented to "Him that 
hath the power of death, that is the devil?" We answer, No, 
assuredly not. Satan's power, though willingly exercised by him, 
could not be exercised were it not permitted by the great Supreme 
Jehovah. And Jehovah would have permitted Satan's power and the 
great calamity to be inflicted upon man, had it not been that by sin 
he had brought it upon himself as the penalty of Jehovah's violated 
law. 

Hence Satan's power, like that of a hangman, is a delegated "power 
of death." The hangman is merely the servant of the Law to execute 
its penalties. And Satan as the servant of the Law laid down by the 
Supreme Judge of all creation, permitted and used for a time as the 
executioner of the sentence pronounced: "The wages of sin is 
death," "Dying thou shalt die." 

If a prisoner's ransom or fine was to be paid, it would not be offered 
to the Jailor or Executioner, but to (the clerk of) the Court whose 
law demanded it. So likewise the ransom for sin should not be paid 
to Satan the executor of the penalty, but to the power which 
condemned sin, made the penalty, and ordered the execution of the 
guilty. 

Thus we have already suggested the answer to the first question- 
Was the ransom- sacrifice presented to God? Yes. Not only as above 
shown is it reasonable to say, that the sacrifice for sin should be 
presented to the one whose laws were violated, but we shall now 
offer scriptural proof that Jesus did present his sacrifice to God. 

The sacrifices for sin, under the Law, were sin-offerings unto 
Jehovah. See Lev. 4:3,4,23,24,27,31,34 and 35; Exod. 30:10; Lev. 
5:11,12 and Lev. 9:2,6,7, and 2 Chron. 29:7-10,20-24. These were 
but shadows and types of the true sacrifices for sins by which the 
Lamb of God taketh away the sin of the world, putting away sin by 



the sacrifice of himself, and presenting himself without spot unto 
God. (John 1:29, Heb. 9:26; 1 Pet. 1:19; Heb. 10:4-9.) 



The same thought is taught inductively by the following scriptures, 
Deut. 32:17; 1 Cor. 10:20; Psa. 68:20 and Rom. 12:1. 

Having thus established by scriptural testimony, the fact that there 
was a ransom-sacrifice, and that it was presented to God, let us 
notice the objections implied in the question. Did God require 
blood as a satisfaction or propitiation for human sin? We answer, 
yes: and if Christians could take larger and fuller ideas of God and 
see the perfection of each of his attributes as well as the harmony of 
them all, the matter would appear perfectly clear and plain. 

It is because Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power are all imperfect in 
us, that we are not quick to notice the perfect operation of these 
qualities in our Heavenly Father. In the fallen race Justice, Wisdom, 
Love and Power are continually antagonizing each other, but not so 
with our Father in heaven. With Jehovah, Wisdom first surveyed 
the field and laid out the best plan, Justice, Love and Power 
consenting to it, fully. Under Wisdom's direction man was placed at 
once, under a Law the penalty of which was the forfeit of his 
existence, and all the train of woes accompanying death. Wisdom 
foreknew man's FALL through inexperience, but felt justified in 
view of beneficial results— lessons, etc. 

When man disobeyed, JUSTICE stepped forward, drove him from 
Eden and delivered him over to Satan to be buffeted by evil 
circumstances that the FULL PENALTY of the violated Law might 
be inflicted— "dying thou shalt die." While the Justice element of 
God's law (and character) was dealing with man, the Love element 
was not indifferent, but it was powerless for two reasons: first, it 
could not oppose Justice, and secondly, it could not at first relieve 
man by satisfying Justice and providing a ransom-sacrifice for sin, 
because that would have been in opposition to the plan marked out 
by infinite Wisdom: hence Love moved not to man's relief, except 
to encourage and instruct through promises and typical sacrifices, 
shadowing forth its future work. Thus was Love employed while 
awaiting the auspicious moment when under Wisdom's direction it 
might act. 

Finally that moment came. It was in "the fullness of time" (Gal. 
4:4,) and in the "due time" (Rom. 5:6) that God sent forth His Son, 
"that he by the grace [favor, love, bounty] of God should taste 
death, for every man." (Heb. 2:9). Herein was MANIFESTED the 
Love of God, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for the 
ungodly." (1 Jno. 4:9, Rom. 5:8). 

Love, because exercised in harmony with the Law of God was not 
in conflict with Justice. Love's method was not an attempt to 
overrule and oppose the sentence, nor to interfere with its full 
execution, but to provide a substitute or ransom for man. By 
meeting for man the penalty inflicted by Justice (death,) Love 
forever releases mankind from the Adamic curse (death) inflicted 



by Justice. This was Love's triumph no less than the triumph of 
Justice. Its triumph was in the offering of the acceptable ransom- 
sacrifice which Jesus presented to Justice-the element of God's 
character which enforces his righteous decree and penalty. 

But Love's triumph was not yet complete, Wisdom had marked out 
a course which not only should thus redeem man, but by which he 
should be lifted back to perfection, and that under circumstances 
favorable to his everlasting continuance in well doing. 

The plan was no less than the selection from among the redeemed 
ones of a "little flock" which through much tribulation and severe 
trial should be "accounted worthy" to be associated with Jesus in 
the work of restoring mankind to its original and perfect state. 
Hence, Love is still at work and soon, aided by the Power of 
Omnipotence, will in the Millennial age, complete its work in the 
resurrection, restitution, blessing, of all the families of the Earth. 

Thus it is seen, that in our Father's plan all his attributes take their 
proper part and place, and the result will be a grand triumph of all, 
demonstrating to angels and to men that His Justice, Wisdom, 

R686 : page 3 

Love and Power are each infinitely perfect and that together they 
work out harmoniously His benevolent designs. 

Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take; 
The clouds ye so much dread 
Are big with mercy, and shall break 
In blessings on your head. 

Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 
But trust him for his grace; 
Behind a frowning providence 
He hides a smiling face. 

Deep in unfathomable mines 
Of never-failing skill, 
He treasures up His bright designs, 
And works his sovereign will. 

His purposes will ripen fast, 
Unfolding every hour; 
The bud may have a bitter taste, 
But sweet will be the flower. 

Blind unbelief is sure to err, 
And scan His work in vain; 
God is His own interpreter, 
And He will make it plain. 



R686 : page 3 



A RIVER THAT MAKES GLAD. 

"There is a river the streams whereof shall make glad the city of 
God, the holy place of the tabernacle of the Most High. God is in 
the midst of her; she shall not be moved. God shall help her, and 
that right early. "-Psa. 46:4,5. 

The preceding and succeeding words of this Psalm indicate a time 
of great and wide-spread trouble and distress, which is here very 
graphically described in symbolic language: the earth is removed, 
the mountains are carried into the midst of the sea, the waters 
thereof roar and are troubled, and the mountains shake with the 
swelling thereof. 

These things were not true, either in a symbolic or in a literal sense, 
in the day in which it was written, nor is it yet fully accomplished. 
The writer spoke as moved by the Spirit of God, and, like the other 
Prophets, uttered many things which he did not understand, they 
being written for our admonition and instruction, in whose day only 
the application is due. 

The great bulk of prophecy was dark and mysterious, alike to Jew 
and Gentile, until Jesus and the Apostles, under the direct 
inspiration of the same Spirit that dictated them, gave us the keys to 
unlock their hidden meaning, never designed to be understood until 
God's "due time" should come; and then only by the consecrated in 
Christ Jesus. These will give their consecrated time and labor and 
patient thought in applying the keys to the various locks, and these 
alone receive the rich reward— the meat in due season. 

We find that earth, in symbol, signifies human society as at present 
organized; that sea is a symbol of the unrestrained and uncontrolled 
masses of mankind not submissive to either civil or religious 
control; that mountains symbolize the great ruling powers of earth— 
the kingdoms of this world. We find that this interpretation of these 
symbols is applicable throughout the Scriptures wherever these 
terms are used symbolically. 

In order to get the idea conveyed here, let us read verses 1 to 3, 
using the interpretation instead of the symbol: "God is our refuge 
and strength, a very present help in trouble; therefore will we not 
fear, though the present organization of society be dissolved, and 
though the kingdoms of earth be overthrown and swallowed up by a 
revolution of the people who will refuse to be longer ruled by 
them." 

If a literal mountain were cast into the midst of the sea, it would 
quickly be swallowed by the sea; so will it be with the kingdoms of 
earth when overthrown by the turbulent masses of discontented 
people who are now mustering their hosts and disseminating their 
revolutionary principles under names now universally recognized- 
Communism, Socialism and Nihilism, etc. 

This revolutionary spirit has not yet reached its climax; the earth is 
not yet removed; nor are the mountains yet carried thus into the 



midst of the sea: but the events of verse 3 have come to pass. The 
waters of the sea [the discontented peoples] roar and are troubled. 
We hear the roaring of the troubled waters from every quarter of the 
globe, and truly the mountains [kingdoms] shake with the swelling 
thereof. There is not a government on earth that does not realize 
that these are perilous times, and in consequence of this fact, each is 
taking special precautions to protect itself against the rising power 
of its own subjects-the roaring, troubled waves of the sea. 

This is the extent to which the events foretold in prophecy have at 
present ripened, and the rising storm will, from present indications, 
require only a few years to reach its terrible climax, overthrowing 
and swallowing up in anarchy and confusion all the kingdoms of 
earth. A few more years and the prophecy of verse 2 will find its 
complete fulfillment, just as surely as we now realize the fulfilling 
of verse 3. 

But who is it that finds a refuge of peace and safety in the very 
midst of the shaking and dissolving kingdoms? Evidently it is the 
class spoken of in verse 4 as "the city of God," dwelling in "the 
holy" of the tabernacle of the Most High. In symbol we find that 

R686 : page 4 

city represents a church, an ecclesiastical kingdom, true or false. 
The city of God, then, means the kingdom of God— the Church. As 
referred to here, it is not the kingdom set up and glorified, else it 
would be represented as in the Most Holy. [See "Tabernacle 
Teachings," pages 5 and 11.] But it is the kingdom of God-the true 
Church, in its present condition— the wholly-consecrated children, 
not the mere outward professors. "There is a river," a river of truth, 
the blessed streams whereof makes glad this city of God. 

How many of us have been refreshed, especially of recent years, by 
these blessed streams of truth! Though we hear the roaring of the 
troubled sea, the murmuring and threatening of discontented and 
oppressed people, and feel the shaking of the kingdoms with the 
swellings thereof; and though we know that the dreadful result will 
be universal anarchy and the complete overthrow of all 
governments, yet we fear not, for "God is our refuge and strength, a 
very present help in trouble." 

But our peace and composure, in view of these things, is not a 
selfish condition which rejoices in its own security regardless of the 
woes of others. Ah no; for the streams of truth have brought to us 
the blessed assurance that 

"Sweet accord shall grow at length 
From out this clash of earthly discords." 

Men fear and tremble as the storm approaches, and will be in utter 
dismay when it bursts, yet the Church [all truly consecrated saints] 
shall not be moved. "God shall help her, and that right early." Even 
now she is being strongly fortified with the truth which shall protect 
her. The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. 



In verse 8 the Prophet carries us down to the time, and bids us view 
the scene, when these things will have been actually accomplished, 
saying, "Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he 
hath made in the earth. He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the 
earth; he breaketh the bow and cutteth the spear in sunder; he 
burneth the chariot in the fire." 

What! is it the Lord that thus makes the earth desolate? Yes, Isaiah 
also expresses it so, saying, "Behold, the Lord maketh the earth 
empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and 
scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof." (Isa. 24:1.) 

But have we not just seen that the trouble and destruction is to be 
accomplished by a general uprising of discontented and 
ungovernable people? by such a revolution as Communists, 
Nihilists and Socialists contemplate? Yes, as verse 6 states it, "The 
heathen [lit., nations] raged," and as a consequence "the kingdoms 
were moved." "He [God] uttered his voice; the earth melted." 

Truth on every subject, however, or by whomsoever uttered, is the 
voice of God. And it is the dissemination of truth, the voice of God, 
among the masses of mankind, that is awakening them to a keen 
sense of the inequalities existing under the present social 
organization, and this prompts them to assert their equal rights with 
their fellows and to make desperate efforts to obtain them. 

But human effort will not be able to accomplish that which is 
desired. The dreadful result will only be anarchy and wide-spread 
confusion, the earth will melt, organized society will be dissolved. 
And when human effort has spent itself, and men realize their own 
inability to rightly adjust affairs among themselves, God speaks 
through his prophet, saying, "Be still, and know that I am God." 
And wearied and discouraged at their own efforts, men will hear, 
for, it is written: "When the judgments of the Lord are in the earth, 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." (Isa. 26:9.) 

R687 : page 4 

Then, too, they will learn that "The Lord of Hosts is with us," and 
that Christ is present to rule and reign, and he will be exalted 
among the nations, he will be exalted in the earth. They will realize 
that the God of Jacob is their only refuge. 

"And many people shall say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of 
the Lord [let us seek protection and render obedience to the 
kingdom of the Lord], and he will teach us of his ways and we will 
walk in his paths." (Isa. 2:3.) 

While the message, "Be still, and know that I am God," will have a 
special application to the world at the time just referred to, it is 
applicable to the Church now. Amid the clashing creeds of the 
many great organizations claiming to be the Church, and claiming 
the support of the Scriptures for their various theories, and yet 
denying and mystifying their teachings, God's voice comes to his 



consecrated children, saying, "Be still, and know that I am God: I 
will be exalted among the heathen; I will be exalted in the earth." 

Those who obey, who bid their own wills, their prejudices, etc., be 
still, are learning now from God's word the blessed truth that the 
Lord's Anointed is even now present to set up his kingdom under 
the whole heavens, enforcing the will of God on earth as in heaven 
by abolishing evil and restoring the race to fellowship with God. 
Then all may partake freely of the river of truth, the streams 
whereof, even now, make glad the city of our God— the saints. 

Another thought is suggested by this Psalm, viz., that some at least 
of the little flock who are to be joint-heirs with Christ will remain 
in their present condition, in the flesh, until the now threatening and 
rising storm shall have at least partially accomplished the 
overthrow of the present kingdoms— until the mountains be carried 
into the midst of the sea. This is also in harmony with what we have 
learned with reference to the part the same class take in pouring out 
the seven last plagues of Rev. 16. See, Z.W.T., of June and July, 
1883. 



R687 : page 4 

THIS PERSUASION. 

This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you. ...But he that 
troubleth you shall bear his judgment.— Gal. 5:8,10. 

To persuade is to convince or teach. Every Christian should "be 
fully persuaded in his own mind"; that is, he should exercise his 
mind in the study of God's revelation, so as to know just what he 
believes, and the scriptural reason for his belief. Thus the Apostle 
responded and testified concerning "the kingdom of God, 
persuading men concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, 
and out of the Prophets, assisting the willing ones to make up their 
minds, and to recognize in Jesus the crucified, the one typified in 
the sacrifices of the Law, and referred to in the Prophets— the Lamb 
of God who taketh away the sin of the world— putting away sin by 
the sacrifice of himself, being delivered for our offences, but raised 
for our justification, in which risen and glorified condition, he shall 
soon fulfill all the prophetic declarations of glory and blessing. 

After summing up the evidence of God's love as revealed in the fact 
that "He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all" 
and that since "It is Christ that died" for our sins, and thus became 
our ransom price from sin's penalty, the Apostle says no one has a 
right to condemn us, for surely God who has justified us through 
this offering of his Son, would not now condemn us. Then he 
concludes his strong argument by saying, "I am persuaded that 
neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, 
nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the LOVE OF 



GOD which is in Christ Jesus." (Rom. 8:38.) All God's love and 
mercy and blessings come to the race in and through Jesus and his 
work— "through whom are all things, and we in him." 

But in the Scripture under consideration, the Apostle refers to a 
teaching or persuasion which was being advanced in the Church, 
which he assures them is not of God. This shows the necessity of 
guarding our judgments, so that we be persuaded only of God, and 
not by the adversary, even though he should present his persuasion 
through some of those who have been recognized as teachers in the 
Church. 

Let us closely examine this evil persuasion here referred to, that we 
may judge whether it is being now used to "trouble" the Church. 
The Apostle's argument as shown by the preceding context, is not 
against the Law. No, that is the common way of viewing the matter, 
but an incorrect view. The law was the law of God, hence could not 
be bad. It was the same law, of which the same Apostle declares: 
The law is just and holy and good. (Rom. 7:12.) It is manifestly 
incorrect then to suppose that he is here opposing the law. His 
argument is, that because of inherited condemnation and weakness, 
the law could not justify any to life: that is to say, no one would be 
counted worthy of everlasting life on account of right doing, 
(keeping the law,) because all are imperfect and sinful by inherited 
nature and none could keep the law perfectly. 

It was because the keeping of the law could not justify (declare just, 
or righteous, or pure) any one, but on the contrary, reproved and 
condemned all, that Jesus came and gave himself a ransom for all, 
to thus redeem us from our inherited curse. Hence while the Law is 
good, it was useless as a justifier of sinners, for it condemned 
totally all who did not harmonize with it perfectly. 

The Apostle was writing to Christians at Galatia, some who had 
been heathens. They had originally received the correct idea, that 
"Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures," and that 
through his blood we have redemption [from the curse of sin] even 
the forgiveness of sins. (Gal. 3:1 and 1:4.) But their early trust in 
Christ's redemptive work had been disturbed by some Christianized 
Jews, who, while calling themselves Christians, were denying the 
very foundation fact of Christianity, viz.: that Jesus' death cancelled 
the sins of all who accepted of him as their Redeemer and Saviour. 

They did not deny Jesus, else the Galatians would have been 
unmoved by their teachings. But calling themselves Christians, and 
confessing that Jesus was a notable and worthy EXAMPLE, they 
denied the ransom-they denied that there was "redemption through 
his blood, even the forgiveness of sins." (Col. 1:14.) They claimed 
that Jesus' example was good, yet if any would be saved, they must 
accomplish their salvation by good works, and observance of the 
law -circumcision, etc. That these were the facts, is evident from 
the Apostle's language throughout this epistle. 



The very first chapter makes it very prominent: "I marvel that ye 
are so soon removed from him that called you INTO THE GRACE 
OF CHRIST unto another gospel, which is not [really] another 
[Gospel] ; but there be some that trouble you and would pervert 
[turn] the gospel of Christ." (Gal. 1:6,7.) We should note the fact 
that the Apostle clearly and distinctly shows here that the true 
gospel was that of grace or favor through Christ. 

The gospel says, Here, take salvation as a gift, a favor of God 
through Christ. Jesus has made of himself a propitiatory sacrifice 
for our sins; he died the just for the unjust and now presents us with 
the fruits of his sacrifice-free, for the taking of it. That which you 
could not win by your own service and merit, you may have free, it 
is the Lord's bounty or grace, a "free gift," purchased for you with 
his own precious blood. This was indeed glad tidings. 

But this other gospel to which some invited them, Paul assures 
them was not really glad tidings at all; it was simply the Jewish law 
of salvation by merit and obedience, supplemented by the name and 
example of Jesus. But, as all may see, this would do little good, for 
the name of Jesus is nothing except as it means a Saviour from sin 
and its penalty. (See Matt. 1:21.) Jesus' example as a perfect man 
was so far beyond their ability to follow, that thus they must come 
short, for his example was nothing less than the fullest expression 
of their LAW, under which, their experience as well as the 
Apostle's words, proved that none could be justified to life. Hence it 
is that the Apostle declares, that merely linking the example and 
name of Jesus to the Law, did not constitute another Gospel or good 
news, for there was nothing in it which could give them life. Under 
it they would still be in their sins; hence still under the death 
penalty. He marvels that they should turn from justification through 
the sacrifice of Jesus, and attempt to justify themselves by 
following his example and keeping the law. 

The Apostle argued against "this persuasion" or doctrine, which 
endeavored to base salvation upon the keeping of the law and 
following Jesus' example, instead of on the merit of his sacrifice 
freely imputed to all who would accept of it. 

To present the matter very pointedly before them, he declares that 
they must choose one of two ways, for God had provided only the 
two and they could not be blended: Either they must hold to the law 
and hope for eternal life through obedience to it, gaining all the 
help they can from the examples of Jesus, 

R688 : page 4 

and prophets, etc., or else on the other hand renounce all these and 
flee to the merit of Christ's obedience and sacrifice alone. His 
words are, "I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ 
shall profit you nothing"— that is to say, the rite of circumcision, if 
practiced, is an evidence that you are hoping to justify yourselves 
by your own works, and not trusting to the merits of Jesus' 
sacrifice; and if not trusting in the merits of Jesus' sacrifice for your 



sins, then you are still under sin and its penalty as much as though 
that sacrifice for sin had not been made; for you are not grasping its 
advantages, and to be had, they must be laid hold of by faith in him 
as your sin bearer. "Christ is become of no effect unto you; 
whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace 
[favor]. (Gal. 5:2,4.) You, who seek by works, to justify yourselves 
and free yourselves of the condemnation resting upon you, are 
relying upon that for salvation, whether you call yourselves 
Christians and follow his example, or whether you call yourselves 
Jews and follow the example of Moses and the prophets. The 
principle is the same. You are turning from and rejecting the grace— 
the favor— THE FREE GIFT of God through Christ, by endeavoring 
to obtain everlasting life without recognizing the ransom which 
God provided, and which Jesus freely gave. 

PRESENT FORM OF THIS PERSUASION. 

We know of none to-day who are turning to the law, as such, 
though they are turning to the law in the sense that they are turning 
to works, to good deeds, self-denials and Jesus' example (which 
was keeping the law and justification to life thereby) as the basis of 
hoped-for future life. They thus turn to an ungiven and unwritten 
law, which they think ought to insure God's favor and blessing of 
endless life, just as these Galatians turned to the Law given to Israel 
with its promises of life. Both these of to-day, and those whom Paul 
addressed, have forgotten or failed to see, that because of sin and 
depravity, we cannot render perfect works to God, and that God's 
great comprehensive law, as well as its brief synopsis given to 
Israel, condemns as unworthy of life— worthy of death— every 
creature which cannot, and does not, fulfill its every requirement 
perfectly. If they realized this, they would see the uselessness of 
presenting to God anything short of PERFECTION, with any hope 
of its acceptance and reward. Hence the Apostle assures us that "By 
the deeds of the law shall no flesh be JUSTIFIED." (Rom. 3:20.) 
This being true, there is no other "way" (John 14:6; 10: 1) and "none 
other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be 
saved," than Jesus, and the way he opened up when he "gave 
himself a ransom for all," and thus opened up a new way to life. (1 
Tim. 2:6.) The way of the Law (works) had been offered to the 
sinful and condemned Jew for 1 800 years, and had never justified 
one of them, hence they should have been ready for the new way 
brought to their attention through the glad tidings, viz., that Jesus 
had cancelled the claims of justice against both Jew and Gentile by 
meeting all its requirements in his own person, on which account 
God could be just when he justified [declared righteous and worthy 
of life] those who, by believing in the ransom, had their sins blotted 
out and Jesus' righteousness imputed to them. (Acts 3:19; Rom. 4.) 

O, thoughtless Galatians, who has deluded 



R688 : page 5 



you? [This might be fitly applied to those of our day who are 
turning from free grace assured by Jesus' ransom, to look for grace 
as the result of their own sacrifices,] before whose eyes Jesus Christ 
was previously represented as having been crucified and for our 
sins. 

Beloved let us not forget that "This persuasion cometh not of Him 
that calleth you," through whomsoever it comes; even though it 
might come through an angel from heaven, it is from the 
Adversary. It "cometh not from him that calleth you." But while 
rejecting "this persuasion," "cast not away your confidence" in 
Christ and the promises which God has made, which have a great 
recompense of reward. Be fully persuaded in your own minds— not 
satisfied to accept of any testimony or persuasion not well sustained 
by the word of the Lord. Then with Paul you will be "persuaded" 
that God is "for us," and that his favor is manifest in that "He 
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up [to death] for us all" 
[as our ransom]. And if we are thus justified by God's own act, and 
through his own arranged sacrifice for sins, He certainly no longer 
condemns us. Who can condemn us while we know that "It is God 
that justifieth" us? Who could condemn us longer, when it is known 
that "It is Christ that died" on our behalf, "the just for the unjust"? 
Nor can anything separate us from such love. 



R688 : page 5 

FAITH AND WORKS. 

The relationship between faith and works is simple and clear when 
seen from a scriptural standpoint, yet very obscurely recognized by 
the great majority. 

Works can never justify us, nor so long as we are under the 
imperfections resultant from sin can God recognize works at all. He 
is perfect, and cannot accept or enjoy that which is imperfect. Since 
of the Adamic race there are none righteous, no not one, it follows 
that Jesus' works only are well pleasing and acceptable to God. 

But here comes in the province of FAITH. Jesus having "died for 
our sins," faith may grasp the fact that he bore our sins in his own 
body on the tree and appropriated to us the freedom from sin- 
justification which results. Thus we are justified and brought into 
fellowship with God, not by our own works, but by FAITH in the 
works which Jesus did for us; and as a result of our faith in the 
thoroughness of Jesus' work and its acceptableness to God as a 
"propitiation [satisfaction] for our sin," we realize that "there is now 
therefore no condemnation" resting upon us in Jehovah's sight. Our 
works alone could not accomplish this result, and to attempt to add 
them to the perfect work which Jesus did for us would be to doubt 
the perfection and completeness of Jesus' work— his sacrifice— and 



thus to lose all our interest in it; for it is imputed to us as a result of 
faith. 

Thus it appears that our works are ruled out entirely, and have no 
share in justifying us to life. What, then, is the value and province 
of works on our part? We reply that when faith has grasped and 
appropriated justification through Jesus' work, then we reckoned of 
God as thus freed from sin, can bear fruit, i.e., perform works 
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. 

The works of many justified ones are really no better, and perhaps 
through a larger share in the Adamic fall and depravity, not actually 
so good as many others, yet from God's standpoint the works of 
those justified by faith in Christ's work are counted absolutely 
perfect, both the works and the person being acceptable to God by 
or through the implied or imputed merits of Jesus. On the contrary, 
he who accepts not of Jesus' ransom is not justified; hence, neither 
himself nor his works would be acceptable to God. He abides still 
under the condemnation [the same word elsewhere translated 
damnation]— that is on the world. (Rom. 5:18; Jno. 3:18.) 

The whole world, as tried representatively in Adam, was found 
disobedient and condemned to the penalty prescribed, viz., 
excommunication from God and final extinction of being. This 
penalty still remains, and is strictly enforced. (Rom. 5:16.) 
Consequently the grand aim of all should be, not to avoid being 
condemned— it is too late for that, all are condemned. (Rom. 5:18.) 
Our object must be to escape [from] the condemnation that is on the 
world. 

There is only one way to escape, and that is an absolutely certain 
and perfect way. God provided it. You cannot escape by your own 
righteousness [truly we have none; yours and mine are only "filthy 
rags,"] even as you were not condemned for your own sin. We are 
condemned on account of another's sin, and a way of escape has 
been provided through a ransom given on our behalf. 



R688 : page 5 

ESCAPE FROM CONDEMNATION. 

We got into condemnation without our choice, but cannot get out 
of it without our choice, but the conditions for escape are so simple 
and easy that all shall be without excuse. It is simply "Believe on 
the Lord Jesus Christ." 

But to believe on him means more than at first appears, perhaps. It 
does not mean that men shall simply believe that such a man lived 
and died, nor even that, in addition, he rose again and is now highly 
exalted; nor that, in addition to these, he was a good man who set 
an excellent example. Nay, it means more. The names here given 
indicate it— Lord, and Jesus, and Christ. The belief which releases 



from condemnation sees him as Lord, or Master and Ruler. It sees 
him also as Jesus, Saviour, Deliverer, for such is the significance of 
the word. It sees him also as the Christ, the one anointed as 
Jehovah's representative. 

R689 : page 5 

Believers only have yet, in any sense, escaped the condemnation 
[damnation] that is on the world. "There is therefore now no 
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus." (Rom. 8:1.) 

Christians frequently say to worldly people, "If you don't stop your 
course and reform, you will be lost," and receive the reply, "We are 
as good and honorable as many you think will be saved," and the 
entire argument is wasted and the truth obscured. Let the world 
know that it is lost-is "condemned already," and that Jesus came to 
seek and save that which was lost to make a way of escape from the 
condemnation already upon mankind. Show them the necessity of 
the ransom given and the real and blessed results of that ransom 
obtainable by faith in the Lamb of God, and it will have a 
convincing effect. 

But does some one enquire, What! have believers actually escaped 
what the world is still under? We reply, They have escaped the 
excommunication, condemnation, which came upon man, and now 
they have access to God and "fellowship with the Father," things 
from which the sinner was debarred as soon as the penalty went 
into execution. Thus we, who had been far off are made nigh by the 
blood of Christ. (Eph. 2:13.) Our access is not complete yet, for 
outward manifestations of God's favor are not yet granted, only that 
which is by faith. But this is precious, and the other will shortly be 
ours. 

Another result of the ransom, another part of the condemnation 
which believers escape, is death. We now by faith only realize on 
the strength of God's word and the evidence before us that Jesus 
bore the penalty of our sins in his death, and on the strength of the 
reconciliation already effected, as one of its results, BELIEVE and 
realize that we are passed from death unto life. Eventually this 
blessing shall be realized in full when we are perfected and like our 
Lord in glory. To this escape from condemnation we may invite all 
in the name of our Lord Jesus and through the merit of his sacrifice. 

But do some enquire, If belief is essential to escape from 
condemnation, how will it be with those who have died without 
faith or knowledge of the redemption which is in Christ Jesus? If 
belief must precede escape, does it not seem that such have no 
hope? 

We answer: Your difficulty arises from too narrow a view of the 
escape from death. You use it as though it meant to raise from the 
tomb, as for instance, Lazarus, Jarius' daughter and others, but its 
use in Scripture is more comprehensive, viz., a full, complete 
escape from all the penalty of sin; this would include the removal of 



pain, sickness, etc., as incidents to death and excommunication 
from God. The "widow of Nain's son" was raised, but not to 
perfection of life; he did not escape the condemnation; hence was 
still liable to pain and sickness, and again passed into Adamic 
death.* 

But in the Millennial Age all the world is to be "raised" in like 
manner, and brought to a knowledge of the truth, and will thus 
reach a basis for faith, by the exercise of which they may escape 
completely from the condemnation, and come into the full 
perfection of being and communion enjoyed by Adam before sin. 

Thus, it is evident from God's plan that all men shall be brought to a 
position where faith in the ransom will be possible, and it is equally 
clear that none will be covered by its "propitiation" who do not 
recognize and acknowledge it, for no man cometh unto [into 
communion and fellowship with] the Father but by Jesus. 



*It is evident that those "raised" from the tomb, when they 
returned to it a few years after, did not experience the "second 
death." Yet, if they had been FULLY lifted out of the first, it would 
have been a "second death." This proves that RESURRECTION, or 
a complete recovery from Adamic death, means a full release from 
all its power, a bringing back or restitution to original perfection. 



R689 : page 5 

THE CLEANSING MAINTAINED. 

If our escape from sin and its condemnation is by a ransom for 
Adam's sin, what shall we conclude concerning errors, omissions 
and transgressions now committed by those who have escaped and 
who have been JUSTIFIED from Adamic sin? Would not the least 
sin on our part bring us again under condemnation? And would not 
this require another sin-offering to ransom us afresh and enable us 
to again escape from condemnation? 

The lack of a reasonable answer to these reasonable questions has 
confused many on the subject of ransom. They say, If God can and 
does forgive recent offences without a ransom, why did he not do 
so with the original offence, the Adamic transgression? 

The answer is simple and very clear: Our Lord's sin-offering 
cancelled fully the Adamic sin and all guilt which came by or 
through it in any way. Sin, as it is in the world, is entirely traceable 
to Adam's sin. The impaired moral and physical nature which you 
received from your parents (and they from them back to Adam) is 
the fruitful source of your besetments to sin, and the open door by 
which you are easily assailed by the adversary. Hence, when you 
would do good, evil is sometimes presented so as to mislead and 
entice your degenerated nature into sin. This sin is traceable to the 



Adamic transgression; hence it is covered by the ransom. 
Whosoever, then, has by faith laid hold upon the ransom and 
escaped condemnation, finds ample assurance in our Father's word 
that the blood of Jesus not only covers the sins that are past, but 
also all those present and future, not willful, but occasioned by the 
inherited weakness of the flesh. 

This grand truth is clearly expressed by the Apostle. (1 Jno. 1:7,8.) 
He is writing of himself and fellow believers, who by faith in Christ 
have been justified and have escaped the condemnation, and says: 
"If we say that we have no sin [i.e., actual sin; if we claim that our 
every word, thought and deed is perfect], we deceive ourselves and 
the truth is not in us." "But if we walk in the light as he is in the 
light, we [and Jehovah] have fellowship one with another [God and 
we], and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all 
sin." 

What a beautiful thought— what a glorious truth! Though still 
actually imperfect, only reckoned righteous, still liable to and 
sometimes overcome by evil because of inherited weakness, yet, by 
walking in the light, we may maintain our communion with God, 
and may realize, on confession, the forgiveness of every sin and 
that the precious blood— the ransom— keeps us clean from every 
stain of sin. Thus, and in no other way, can we "keep our garments 
unspotted from the world. (James 1:27.) Our robes of righteousness 
presented to us by our Lord as the fruit of his sacrifice, our wedding 
garment needful to a place at the marriage of the Lamb, would soon 
be defiled were it not for the continued efficacy of the cleansing 
blood. 

To this, his plan, by which he can be just and yet justify him that 
believeth, God invites us, saying; "Come, let us reason together [I 
will make clear and plain to you how] : though your sins be as 
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be [deep] red 
like crimson [a fast color], they shall be as wool." Yes: "The blood 
of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin." (Isa. 1:18; 1 
John 1:7.) 



R689 : page 5 

RANSOM AND TESTIMONY: WILL THEY 
BECOME CO-EXTENSIVE. 

1 TIM. 2:1-6. 

The writer of this epistle was a large-hearted man. There was a 
special place in his heart for special believers, and another for his 
kinsmen according to the flesh, and room to spare for all other men 
without exception. "I desire (says he), that first of all supplications, 
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men." 
His heart expanded with the right feeling, because his eye was fixed 
on the right model. "For this is good and acceptable in the sight of 



God our Savior; who will have all men to be saved, and to come 
unto the knowledge, of the truth." And that he had the right 
conception of the right model was to him clearly demonstrated in 
the most matter-of-fact way. "For there is one God, and one 
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." It is this 
matter-of-fact proof that God "will have all men to be saved," 
which at present demands the utmost attention. It is comprised of 
two parts— first, the fact and its meaning; and second, the testimony 
which is to be given respecting it. 

I. The Fact and its meaning. The fact is one of our foundation facts- 
-the death of Christ. The meaning of the fact is that he "suffered for 
our sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God"— he 
"died for our sins according to the Scriptures "-or, as here 
expressed, he "gave himself a ransom for all." At this point it may 
be asked,- 

1. What is a ransom? It means the price paid to redeem from 
captivity or punishment. It is something which has been paid for 
something which has been forfeited; and the one is considered to be 
the equivalent of the other. Here another question arises,- 

What was forfeited? To answer this question, we revert back to the 
cradle of our race. Adam, we are told, was "the son of God." He has 
no human father —he derived his life direct from its source. He was 
made in the image or likeness of God; and to him was given 

R690 : page 5 

dominion over all the earth and all that it contained. Head of the 
human race and Lord of its home, he was pronounced by the 
highest authority "very good. " He was placed under law. It was 
plain and positive, and its penalty- death. He broke that law, and 
immediately came under its penalty. The life thus forfeited was not 
his own individual life merely, but being the head of the race, the 
life of the entire race was forfeited in him. Human life then being 
the forfeit, and its extent universal,- 

What of the ransom? It was equal to the forfeit, human life, and its 
extent universal. Every particular in which Adam was different 
from his progeny, Jesus was his equal. He was born of the virgin, 
Son of God, image of God, Lord of earth, federal head, the holy 
from his mother's womb. Here analogy between the two Adams 
seems to end. When tempted, the first Adam fell, and involved all 
mankind in his degradation and punishment. 

R690 : page 6 

When tempted, the last Adam resisted— resisted unto death, even the 
death of the cross, and involved all mankind in his righteousness 
and self-sacrifice. The most unimpeachable testimony was given to 
his sinlessness. He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate 
from sinners," and "without spot" he offered himself to God. This 
was giving life for life-human life for human life-untainted human 



life for untainted human life. This was paying an equivalent price. 
Justice demanded this. It demanded no more. It could accept no 
less. The pre-existence of Christ is not forgotten, any more than his 
present existence, but these are not our present theme. It was not 
angelic life that was forfeited. Nor was it divine life (were that 
possible). It was human life. For this special purpose He took part 
of "flesh and blood:" and the demands of justice were fully met 
when the "Holy One" tasted death for "every man." Some have 
asked,— 

2. How can the death of one man be equivalent to the death of 
every man? We may ask another question: How can the sin of one 
man be equivalent to the sin of every man? The answer to the one 
question will be the answer to the other. We know of only one way 
in which these questions can be answered. These two men— Adam 
and Jesus-were equal. They were federal heads; and the only two 
men who ever occupied that position. Through the sin of the one 
death fell upon our entire race, and through the death of the other 
that dread penalty was exhausted. By the one act the old Adamic 
account was opened, and by the other that account was closed. The 
account now stands square-the engagements on the one side being 
equal to the liabilities on the other. It is true that some of the 
engagements have not as yet matured, but, thank God! they are of 
such a nature that not one of them can fail. This is no human theory. 
There is no truth more plainly stated in the Divine Word. Paul is 
specially strong and clear on these points. "Wherefore as by one 
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death 
passed upon all men, in whom (margin) all have sinned. For as by 
one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the 
obedience of one shall many be made righteous. ...That as sin hath 
reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through 
righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord" (Rom. 
5:12,19,21). Another question arises here: 

3. As the ransom of man has been paid, why do the living continue 
to die, and the dead remain dead? Because the resurrection hour has 
not come yet. In God's plan there is a time for everything. "When 
the fulness of the time was come God sent forth his Son;" "in due 
time" he paid down the price of man's redemption; and when the 
appointed hour comes round he will claim his purchased property. 
"Marvel not at this: for the hour cometh in which all that are in the 
tombs shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have 
done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done ill 
unto the resurrection of judgment." R.V. (John 5:28,29.) "I will 
ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from 
death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy 
destruction." (Hosea 13:14.) Yet another question on this part of 
our subject claims an answer: 

4. Seeing that Christ died a ransom for man, how was it that he did 
not remain dead? By rising again, did he take back the price of 
redemption? If he did, there is no hope for us. But he did not, thank 



God! he did not. The life forfeited was human life— flesh and blood 
life. The life given in ransom was the same. That was never taken 
back. Peter makes this point very plain. "For Christ also hath once 
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to 
God; being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in (R.V.) the 
spirit." (1 Peter 3:18.) Had he been quickened in the flesh, as some 
contend, there might have been the appearance of taking back the 
ransom. But he was not. He was quickened (made alive) in the 
spirit. The Apostles had known Christ "after the flesh," but a time 
came when Paul wrote, "even though we have known Christ after 
the flesh, yet now we know him so no more." (R.V., 2 Cor. 5:15.) 
At his resurrection he became the "first-born" of a new race. On one 
side of his grave he was "like unto his brethren" -flesh and blood, 
and on the other he is "the Lord the Spirit," "a life-giving Spirit," 
and so on. There is no ground here for reasonable objection, doubt, 
or even uncertainty. The ransom paid was equal to the forfeit; and 
having been once paid, it remains always paid. It is for those who 
have not as yet accepted this glad message to welcome it to their 
hearts now. You have no guarantee that ever you will hear it 
repeated; and it is for those who are not obeying "the Lord that 
bought them" to yield to his paramount claims now. No other lord 
has any such claim upon you. "Ye are not your own, ye are bought 
with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, 
which are God's." This brings us up to the other part of our subject,- 

II. The testimony respecting this great fact. The Apostle says, it is 
"to be testified in due time." 

1. What is to be testified? That Christ gave himself a ransom for all. 
That great fact was never intended to remain a secret. In the divine 
plan means were devised for establishing it beyond the possibility 
of reasonable doubt, and for publishing it to all concerned. In the 
immediate context the Apostle writes, "whereunto I am ordained a 
preacher, and an apostle. ..a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and 
verity." As an Apostle, he bore witness to the fact; as a Preacher, he 
proclaimed the glad tidings based upon it; and as a Teacher, he 
expounded its meaning. These are some of the different aspects in 
which the same thing is viewed. To say that this fact is to be 
testified in due time, is, in other words, to say that its gospel is to be 
preached in due time, or that its doctrine is to be taught in due time. 
There are some six, or more, words used by the Apostles, each 
setting forth a different aspect of this one and the same thing. 

2. Who is to testify it? It is sometimes called "the testimony of 
God," and sometimes "the testimony of Christ." Sometimes "the 
Spirit's" testimony, and sometimes that of the Apostles and 
Prophets. It originated in God, it was given in the power of the 
Holy Spirit, and its words were uttered by the Christ, the Apostles, 
and the Prophets. It varies as to time, and manner, and agent, and 
accompaniment, but it never varies as to origin. It is God's 
testimony. Hence John argues, "If we receive the witness of men, 



the witness of God is greater ...he that believeth not God hath made 
him a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave of his 
Son" (1 Jno. 5:9,10). It is well for man that it is God's testimony. 
This not only puts its credibility beyond a doubt, but it makes it 
certain that it will reach every one for whom it was intended. 
Referring to the word which goeth forth out of his mouth, God has 
said, "It shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that 
which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." 
(Isa. 55:11.) 

3. Why is it to be testified? Because the testimony is as necessary as 
the fact itself. Without the testimony the fact would remain without 
any moral result. Physical results you can have without 
information, but to have moral results, information is absolutely 
indispensable. That the man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for 
all, is a stupendous fact; but it has no moral power except where it 
is known. Paul puts this matter beyond a doubt. "Whosoever shall 
call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. How then shall they 
call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they 
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they 
hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they be 
sent?... So then, faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word 
of God." (Rom. 10:13-17.) There are, of course, other effects 
produced by the death of Christ than those to be found in the mind, 
heart and character of man, but the purpose of God in that death can 
never be fully accomplished until man is brought intelligently under 
its saving influence. 

4. To whom is it to be testified? The obvious answer to this 
question is, to whomsoever it may concern. The ransom being for 
all, all are vitally interested in it, and therefore it is to be testified to 
all. Universal ransom and universal testimony are twin-elements of 
one scheme. Limit either of them and the scheme is mutilated. 
Formerly, many limited both. Now many admit the universality of 
the ransom, and deny that the testimony concerning it will ever 
become universal; but the two must stand or fall together. This 
point, however, is not to be settled by any inferential reasoning. The 
question for us is, what saith the Scriptures? and our quotations will 
be of the most familiar description. 

R691 : page 6 

In the preceding verse Paul says God "will have all men to be saved 
and to come unto the knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 2,3,4.) This 
being so, the truth must be preached to all men. How else could all 
men come to a knowledge of it? In a succeeding chapter he says, 
God is "the Saviour of all men, specially of those that believe" 
(4:10). Here faith is the dividing line between all men and a class, 
testimony always precedes faith, therefore testimony must be given 
to all men. In writing to Titus, the same Apostle says, "the grace of 
God that bringeth salvation to all men hath appeared" (2:11). It 
being characteristic of the grace of God to bring salvation to all 
men, and that grace having appeared, it can never disappear until it 



has accomplished its mission. "Behold, I bring you good tidings of 
great joy, which shall be to all people." (Luke 2:10.) The angel of 
the Lord says, that the good tidings shall be to all the people. Who 
is man, and what is he, that he dare say that the good tidings shall 
not be to all people? "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth will 
draw all men unto me." (John 12:32.) This, of course, is figurative, 
but the teaching is plain. Jesus says that he will draw all men unto 
him, men cannot be drawn until they hear of him, therefore, all men 
are to hear of him. "That was the true light which lighteth every 
man that cometh into the world." (John 1:9.) This, too, is figurative, 
and the teaching is equally clear. Jesus is the true light which 
lighteth every man, he cannot be light to any man until he has heard 
of him, therefore, every man is to hear of him. Whether, therefore, 
we appeal to Paul, or to John, to the angel of the Lord, or to the 
Lord himself, the evidence here given only in sample, is plain and 
conclusive. And as the words which are used proving the extent of 
the testimony -"all people," "all men," "every man," and so on-are 
the same as those which are used proving the extent of the ransom, 
the conclusion is inevitable that ultimately the testimony will 
become coextensive with the ransom. 

5. And when is it to be testified? According to the A.V. the apostle 
says, "in due time;" but according to the E.D., the R.V., and other 
authorities, the word rendered "time" is plural; and therefore we 
ought to understand Paul as saying, "in due times, or seasons." 
Those times are partly past, partly present, and partly future. The 
Apostle Peter refers to prophetic testimony given respecting the 
redeeming work of Christ before he appeared in the flesh, (1 Peter 
1:10,11.) God Himself more than once in an audible voice bore 
witness to His Son in connection with his work. And Christ 
himself, while upon the earth, testified respecting it. On leaving the 
earth he spake of other witnesses who were to continue this 
testimony. "When the Comforter is come, whom I will send you 
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the 
Father, He shall testify of Me; and ye also shall bear witness, 
because ye have been with me from the beginning." (John 
15:26,27.) In the plentitude of the Spirit's power given unto them, 
the apostles prosecuted their mission while they lived. Several of 
them sealed their testimony with their own blood, and bequeathed it 
as their legacy to their children in the faith. Since the last of the 
twelve fell asleep, up to the present hour, this testimony has been 
repeated with varying success; and we expect a similar repetition of 
it up to the end of the present age. The question arises here. And 
what after that? Does this testimony end with the present age? We 
cannot believe it. Some tell us that testimony is being given in the 
"intermediate state," only they give us no evidence of its 
possibility; so we only look to the resurrection state for the 
completion of this testimony. Ransom is for all men; that is "to be 
testified in due times." A very large proportion of mankind have 
died without hearing the testimony; they cannot hear it when they 
are dead, and therefore they will hear it after they are raised from 



the dead. The "due times" began when this testimony was first 
given to our redeemed race; they have been going on ever since, 
and they cannot end until every man has heard the gladsome sound. 
"Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless His holy 
name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits." 

III. In conclusion, permit a few words of caution and 
discrimination. First, as to the ransom: 

1. Those who say that Jesus was literally "the son of Joseph," 
"tainted with sin," had to "offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins 
and then for the people's," and so on, should pause and ponder well 
their position. Were those and kindred propositions true, the ransom 
would not be equal to the forfeit, and therefore it could not in 
justice be accepted. 

2. When men teach that Jesus rose as he died— "mortal," their 
doctrines seem to imply that the price paid for our redemption was 
taken back again. Were that so, it would leave us entirely without 
hope, as much so as though Christ had never died. Then as to the 
testimony: 

3. Were the testimony respecting the ransom to end with the present 
age, that would prove the Gospel to be a failure. It cannot be 
shown, so far as I know, that more than one in 150, or one in 140 at 
most, of those for whom the ransom was paid have even so much as 
heard of it. If it is to end so, what else could it be than a failure? Let 
us take care lest we put arguments into the mouths of infidels, as to 
the love, the wisdom, or the power of the Most High. 

4. Affirming that the testimony will ultimately become co-extensive 
with the ransom is no foundation for "Universalism." Sin is 
universal, death is universal, and the testimony will become 
universal, but there is no evidence to conclude that the acceptance 
of the testimony will ever become universal. On the contrary, 
history, experience, and prophecy, all prove that as it was in the 
beginning, it is now, and ever will be- when the testimony is given 
to all, some will accept and others will reject it. 

5. Contending that those who never heard the gospel before death 
will hear it after resurrection is no encouragement to rejecters of, or 
triflers with it now. It does not bear upon their case. We do not say 
who among the present hearers of the gospel are rejecters of it, but 
it cannot be too carefully noted that there is no evidence whatever 
to conclude that any deliberate and wilful rejecter of the gospel here 
will ever have its blessings offered to him hereafter. To all present 
hearers of the Gospel, now is their "due time." "Behold now is the 
accepted time; Behold, now is the day of salvation." 

6. And as to our position generally. It affords— more than any other 
that I am aware of-harmonious views, not only of the justice, but 
also of the wisdom and the love of God. I well remember the time 
when I first heard of "the universality of the atonement." What 
peace and joy it brought with it. And I well remember another time 



when I was worried with doubts and fears as to the possibility of 
the universal atonement being universally applied: and the latter 
well nigh counteracted all the blessedness of the former. Now, 
thank God! both are plain, as plain and clear as anything relating to 
the future can be. This is an unfailing source of peace and joy, and I 
invite all, more especially those who have been harassed as I was, 
to share its blessed assurance. On this position we seem to be most 
in unison with some of the grandest of old prophetic and apostolic 
utterances. "My 

R691 : page 7 

thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, 
saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are 
my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your 
thoughts." "O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and the 
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his 
ways past finding out!" —Joseph Moffit. 



R691 : page 7 

MOSES WROTE OF CHRIST. 

"For had ye believed Moses ye would have believed me; for he 
wrote of me."— John 5:46. 

Moses as both writer and prophet has the endorsement of Christ 
and the apostles. It is doubtless true that Moses wrote a large share 
of the Pentateuch,— the first five books of the Bible,— but we are 
nowhere told by any Bible writer that he wrote all of them. Hence, 
it cannot be against either the genuineness or authenticity of these 
books, because one of them contains a record of Moses' death and 
burial, written, of course, by some one else, after Moses died. 

It seems as applicable now as in the Saviour's day that the 
disbelievers in Moses are of necessity disbelievers in Christ. To 
reject Moses after Christ has endorsed him, is not characteristic of a 
believer in Christ, though there are those in our day who 
inconsistently reject Moses, overlooking or ignoring the 
endorsement. They seem to see no connection whatever between 
the gospel and Moses' writings. For this reason the Jews rejected 
Christ, though they trusted in Moses, while these of our day reject 
Moses though claiming to trust in Christ. Verses 45 and 46 make a 
clear distinction between trust and belief, and make the latter more 
important. To believe Moses, according to this statement of Jesus, 
involved an intelligent view of the meaning of his words. The Jews 
trusted in Moses and accepted the letter of his writings: but had 
they believed Moses, that is, if they had seen the spirit, or deeper 
meaning of his writings they would have accepted Christ. 

This statement of our Saviour is equivalent to saying that in the 
deeper sense 



R692 : page 7 



Moses was a gospel writer. There is, it may be safely said, more 
gospel in Genesis than in Matthew. In this Matthew is not belittled. 
The full gospel covers all the ages until the whole world is saved. 
This fullness of the gospel was given in Genesis, in the sense that 
the undeveloped seed contains all that can be produced from it. The 
fulfillment of the gospel is like the process of development of what 
was before hidden in the seed. Matthew records the beginning of 
the fulfillment of the types and prophecies of the great plan of the 
ages. He tells an important, and fundamental part; but still not the 
whole which the seed contains. 

The depth of Moses' writings, then, is the cause of their modern 
rejection, as it was also the cause in part at least of the Jewish 
rejection of Christ. 

The Jews boasted of being Moses' disciples, and yet their ignorance 
was the ground of their inconsistency. The same inconsistency 
exists now. Does it not have the same cause? It is better doubtless 
to say inconsistency, than guilt, as ignorance is guilt only to the 
extent that it may be avoided, and it is not best for mortals to Judge 
the motives. Jesus did not say they were guilty, though He spoke of 
their ignorance, their inconsistency, and their low moral state,— not 
having "the love of God" in them. His words were not intended so 
much to blame, though severe, as to reprove and enlighten, by 
showing their low condition. Verse 39 is not a command to "Search 
the Scriptures," as is commonly inferred from this rendering. It was 
a statement of fact designed to reprove them. Other versions read in 
substance thus: "Ye search the scripture, for in them ye think ye 
have eternal life, and they are they that testify of me and yet ye will 
not come to me that you may have life." In the light of this 
statement their ignorance and consequent inconsistency of action 
were clearly reproved. 

The moral state of the soul has much to do with the ability to 
receive truth, especially the deeper truth of the word. Jesus said, "If 
ye will do his will, he will know of the doctrine." Then loyalty of 
heart is one of the conditions of clearness of perception and 
understanding. Truth not understood has no saving or exalting 
effect. This makes stony ground hearers. There is no depth of earth. 
But Jesus says, the good seed, sown "in good and honest hearts," 
brings forth fruit. 

The mission of Jesus among the Jews was that of a Divider and 
Reaper. He did not come among them to make proselytes from the 
Gentiles, but to prove and develop the qualities of the good and 
honest among them. These He called His "sheep;"-"My sheep hear 
my voice." These accepted of Jesus because they were in such a 
moral state that they could appreciate His teachings. The Divinity, 
the Father, in Him had an attraction for them, and thus they were 
drawn to Christ by the Father dwelling in Him; and in John 6:44, 
Jesus asserts, what from this standpoint appears a necessary fact, 



that no man can come to Him without the drawing of the Father. 
How then can any person be drawn to Christ who rejects His 
divinity? It should be observed that this was the point at issue when 
Jesus made this statement. Jesus had just asserted that He "came 
down from heaven;" while the unbelievers declared Him to be 
Joseph's son. They used this as proof that He did not come down 
from heaven, as some are still doing. And Jesus said, "Murmur not 
among yourselves. No man can come to me except the Father 
which hath sent me draw him. " They rejected the divinity of Jesus 
for the same reason that they could not see him in Moses' writings- 
the subject was too deep for them. Let us beware lest we fall after 
the same manner of unbelief. (Heb. 4:11.) 

The method by which Moses wrote of Christ, was not direct 
statement, but was by figure, type and allegory. Even in his most 
direct words he did not say Christ, though that was what he meant. 
"Her seed shall bruise thy head," which all admit refers to Christ 
and his work, and is therefore gospel,-it will be observed is highly 
figurative. When a prophet like unto Moses was promised, it was 
based upon a comparison, and, but for later developments, none 
could have applied it to the Lord Jesus. When the promise was 
given of blessing to all nations through Abraham's seed, the 
language was perhaps as direct as nay; but no one could have 
guessed from the wording of the original promise that the "seed" 
meant Christ. In the letter it was Isaac, and in the broadest literal 
sense included the fleshly descendants; but the Spirit in Paul takes 
the cover off and shows us that the seed meant Christ, and in the 
broadest view includes them that are baptized into Christ.-Gal. 
3:16,29. Though the Old Testament did not say Christ, the New 
Testament shows that it meant Christ. What it meant was 
represented or typified by what it said. In this way we see that the 
gospel was covered or veiled by the Old Testament writings. The 
gospel was in the Old Testament as the kernel in a shell; and no one 
can understand those writings and say that Jesus is the Christ but by 
the Holy Spirit. 

One who denies the authority of the New Testament writings has no 
means of proving that Christ is the seed. They should, to be 
consistent, reckon the seed, the covenant, the circumcision and 
everything else on the plane of the flesh, for that is all that the Old 
Testament teaches. But if the New Testament writings are discarded 
there is no proof that Christ has ever come, or that LIFE and 
IMMORTALITY have ever been brought to light. The promises 
and threatenings of the Old Testament are PURELY of an 
EARTHLY and TEMPORAL CHARACTER. Of course we refer 
to the letter of those writings. 

The manner of the unbelief of the Jews was that of failing to see the 
spirit of their sacred writings. To them the truth was veiled, because 
of the veil upon their hearts. The carnal or fleshly state of mind is to 
the spiritual as the letter of the word is to its spirit, because only the 
mind in the spiritual state can discern the deep or spiritual things of 



the word. The more spiritual the degree of mind the greater its 
ability to understand the deep things of God. "The natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are 
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, for they are 
spiritually discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. The same thing is true of all 
writings that have a surface and a deeper meaning, whether in the 
Old Testament or in the New. 

"Light is sown for the righteous," and the love of God shows itself 
in the love of truth and righteousness. Spiritual truth is the test of 
spirituality; and the truth of God is a mine in which may be found 
jewels of all grades, adapted to all degrees of spiritual development, 
and in which the most advanced may dig with the assurance of 
finding inexhaustible treasures. "The letter killeth but the spirit 
giveth life" (2 Cor. 3:6) is a statement by Paul, showing the upward 
and downward tendencies of feeding on the two phases of truth. He 
draws a contrast on this principle between the law and the gospel 
and between the letter and the spirit of the old Testament writings, 
and shows that the bondage of the Jew was in reading the Scriptures 
with veiled hearts. They knew what the word said, but its spirit was 
hidden from them. "The same vail remains untaken away in the 
reading of the Old Testament.. ..But when it shall turn to the Lord 
the vail shall be taken away;" that is, when the real truth, the 
gospel, in those writings is seen, it will no longer appear dark, but it 
will bring light and glorious liberty. "Where the spirit of the Lord is 
there is liberty." The effect of seeing and feeling the fullness of 
God's love for all the world as seen in the Mosaic writings can only 
be beneficial in making the mind like the mind of God. May the 
Lord anoint our eyes that we may see and be free indeed. 



The above, clipped from an Exchange, we can most heartily 
endorse, but it is truly amazing that the writer of the above cannot 
go farther in the same direction and see that Moses wrote of Jesus 
as the ransom for all, to be testified in due time. 

Moses wrote of the RANSOM in every sin-offering enjoined, the 
life of the beast which typified the man Christ Jesus being given as 
a propitiation [satisfaction] for the sins of the people whose sins it 
bore, and to make atonement for which its blood was shed. 

Moses wrote of the RANSOM when he told of how God clothed 
the guilty pair expelled naked from Eden, with coats of skins to 
cover their nakedness instead of their own scanty fig-leaf covering. 
Therein Moses told of the uselessness of man's effort to cover 
himself with garments of righteousness that would not endure, and 
the need that God should do it for him; nay, more, of the fact that 
God would provide a covering, but at the cost of the LIFE OF 
ANOTHER. 



Moses wrote that the one who would "bless" all the families of the 
earth must first redeem them with his own life, in that touching 



narrative of the offering of Isaac, in whom centered the promise, a 
sacrifice upon the altar. 

Moses wrote that the New Covenant must be ratified, made 
operative, sealed, with the blood of the covenant, i.e., by the death 
of him who ratified it, by ratifying the typical covenant with blood 
representative of his own, as the Mediator of that typical covenant 
and type of Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant. 

Moses wrote not only of the value of the blood of the Lamb of 
Passover, but of the necessity that all who would be of the first- 
born spared, must be under that blood of sprinkling AS WELL as 
have 

R693 : page 7 

the Lamb within. Thus he wrote that we must not only recognize 
Jesus as God's spotless Lamb, but must recognize the value of his 
death as our ransom price, and must sprinkle it outside -publicly 
declare the same. 

Moses wrote of the ransom work of Jesus, and, in fact, described 
his whole mission, in the types of the Day of Atonement. There he 
puts the sacrifice of Christ in the fore-front, and makes it the centre 
and basis of all the blessings coming to the people, which he here 
shows to be the fruitage, result or consequence of the ransom- 
sacrifice. The blood (evidence of shed life, i.e., death) was 
sprinkled upon the mercy-seat to make an atonement to God FOR 
the sins of the people. The penalty of man's sin was death; hence 
the death of the animal (typical of Jesus) making satisfaction for 
man's sin. As a result of that giving of his life (typically) a ransom 
for all, the priest was granted the right to go forth to the people who 
were lying in the dust and, pronouncing their sins cancelled, bid 
them arise from the dust and again enjoy communion with God. 

And Moses wrote further of Christ and the results of his ransom in 
the typical Jubilee year, for at that time, when the priest came forth 
from the sacrificial work of the Day of Atonement, he caused the 
trumpet to blow announcing the JUBILEE begun-the times of 
RESTITUTION of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began. 

And what unbiased mind can ignore the fact of a coming restitution, 
if all "the promises and threatenings of the Old Testament are 
purely of an EARTHLY character." All the promises of the New 
Testament which mention anything more than blessings of earth 
and human nature, apply to and limit those superabundant blessings 
to the "Seed" specially selected during this age to be the 
instruments made use of in blessing all the families of the earth 
with the restitution (restoring to a former condition or estate) of all 
things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets. And what 
unprejudiced mind cannot see that this and this alone would be the 
work of Christ as expressed in the declaration: He came to seek and 
to save (recover) that which WAS LOST. 



R693 : page 7 



THE EPISCOPAL CHURCH. 

A sister writes us from New Hampshire that she cannot see why 
we speak of THE CHURCH (Episcopal) as we do of the other 
denominations. She says that they also object to "the sects." She 
wonders why we refer to THE CHURCH (Episcopal) creed as 
"shackles," and assures us that they have only the "Apostles' creed," 
and that she finds every item of it in our teachings. She feels 
indignant, too, that in a recent article we referred to THE CHURCH 
(Episcopal) as having been founded by Henry VIII, which idea, she 
says, was long since abandoned by well-informed people as being 
an "exploded" statement.* 

The sister shows that her interest in the truth and her perplexity on 
the Church question are real, throughout the entire communication, 
saying in conclusion: "I wish your papers could be in the hands of 
every reading Christian, and that they would read them." And 
again, "You have come out and are living as you think you have 
been called to live, and yet whom have you among you? Some very 
nearly as bad as Judas, who deny the Lord that bought them, and 
this state of things is even worse than the first [sectarian condition] 
it seems to me, and your Church is no better than others in its 
mixture of good and bad. Can you not see reason for my 
perplexity?" 

We answer these suggestions through the TOWER, because it is 
quite possible that others are similarly troubled and perplexed, and 
the subject is a weighty one. 

Our objection to the Episcopal Church is the same as to all the 
systems which to-day claim to be THE CHURCH. All Christians 
will concede as a fact that there is but ONE Church of Christ. He 
and his Apostles established only one, hence it must be admitted 
that of all the organizations calling themselves the Church of 
Christ, not more than one can possibly be claiming truly. If this be 
so, it follows that all except that one are deceived themselves, and 
deceiving the world by claiming to be The Church, when they are 
not. 

Going back to the days of the Apostles, we find congregations at 
various 

R693 : page 8 

cities, but all members of the one Church of Christ, whose names 
were "WRITTEN IN HEAVEN." Soon after the death of the 
Apostles various factions sprang up headed by those who wished to 
be greatest. This spirit was noticed even during the days of Paul, 
some saying, "I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I 
of Christ," but this was promptly rebuked. (1 Cor. 1:12,13.) Finally 



the Bishop of Rome came to be recognized by the other bishops as 
a superior in authority; and under the claim that Peter had been the 
first bishop of Rome, and that his apostolic succession gave his 
right, etc., to every successor, authority and power was claimed and 
exercised over all then recognized as "orthodox," though there were 
large parties of the Church which dissented both from this 
authority, and from many of the doctrines then termed "orthodox." 

The Papal system came more and more into temporal favor with the 
Empire of Rome, and under that favor it grew and by its power it 
crushed out all formal opposition, and for a time seemed about to 
restore the original idea of ONE CHURCH. But there were in 
Papacy honest minds, beclouded by her great success, which only 
needed some good reason to induce them to leave her fold. This 
occasion came, about the time Papacy's greatest corruption- 
manifested in the sale of "indulgences," etc. Then some of the 
bolder of the more enlightened ones ventured to protest against her 
doctrines and practices and the "REFORMATION MOVEMENT" 
set in, which has to some extent continued ever since, thank God. 
And though the work has been slow, those who are to-day in the 
work of reformation, are much closer to the doctrines, practices, 
and manners of the Apostles. 

Bear in mind that it was while Papish ideas and doctrines were still 
firmly fastened on men's minds, that their consciences rebelled 
against some of the corruptions and brought about a partial 
Reformation. Hence the reformers had in general the same ideas 
and doctrines as the Mother, and each claimed that there was but 
ONE Church and that THEIRS was that one; that Papacy was the 
corruption of the true, and that in rejecting the corruption, they [the 
Reformers] became the original. It is for this reason and on these 
grounds that most of the older denominations claim that their 
beginning was in the APOSTLES' DAYS; that Jesus and the 
Apostles founded their Church [Episcopalean, Presbyterian, or 
Lutheran as the case may be], that it was corrupted for a time in 
Papacy, but was brought to light again in the days of the 
Reformation. 

We see, then, that the ideas above expressed by this sister that the 
Episcopal Church is THE Church, etc., is the same claim made by 
other sister systems with equal force, for all such claims are false. 
The Apostles neither established the Church of England, nor the 
Church of Scotland, nor that of Germany. They all, as well as that 
of Rome are human fabrications; each contains good and bad 
doctrines and forms of godliness; each claims to be THE 
CHURCH, yet each in some respects opposes the true Church 
whose names are written in heaven, and the true doctrines of 
Scripture, putting a human doctrine and system instead of the true. 
Thus each of these human systems, assists in perpetuating the 
schism, increasing the confusion, and adding to the "perplexity" of 
earnest truth seekers. 



The mistake was started and is kept up, by assuming that the 
"Church of Rome" was THE true Church before she became so 
openly corrupt, prior to the "Reformation." On the contrary, the 
"Church of Rome," as a system, was wrong from its 
commencement— contrary to the doctrines of Jesus and the 
Apostles. It was the "Mystery of Iniquity" from the first, and had in 
it, those errors which developed into the more ungodliness as time 
and opportunity permitted. The system was wrong; names written 
on earth attached to fixed written creeds prepared by men and 
endorsed by councils, are poor and improper substitutes for names 
written in heaven and the Word of God unlimited by man. 

The fact that there are true Christians in all these denominations, 
and that there should be but ONE Church, and that in some sense 
all these really belong to one Church, though separated from each 
other by sectarian names, forms and rules, has long been recognized 
by thinking Christians. The question which they find it impossible 
to solve is, How to accomplish the union. 

To reach this result "Union Meetings" and "Union Church" 
buildings have been attempted in small places, but sectish pride and 
vainglory has always sooner or later hindered and led to disruption. 
To accomplish the same result, The Evangelical Alliance was 
formed, which while claiming to have unified the sects holding 
sound faith, is really a TRUCE between the leading Protestant sects 
by which they agree not to war upon nor against each other, but to 
unite in opposing any views which conflict with their main points 
of agreement, and thus to establish a certain fixed unchangeable 
line of doctrines, good and bad, true and false, outside of which, all 
is branded "heretic," and inside which all is branded "orthodox." 

R694 : page 8 

This is the same result sought and obtained by Papacy at the 
inception of its organization, though brought about in a different 
manner. The several sects, while each is permitted to manage its 
own affairs, are organized or bound into one system and stamped 
"Orthodoxy;" but in (Rev. 13:14) it is called the very "image" of 
Papacy. This is a union on a false basis and hence is as far from the 
ONE CHURCH of Jesus and the apostles, as Papacy was in the 
days of her supremacy. 

No union will succeed, and be productive of good, and favorable to 
growth in grace and knowledge, except it be accomplished in the 
proper manner and on a solid foundation: and the sooner this is 
realized the better for the saints and the worse for the great worldly 
tare-full systems which call themselves THE CHURCH of Christ, 
deceive the world and almost deceive the very elect. 

True union, is not a bondage but a mingling of hearts and minds. To 
accomplish this organization, this union is the work of the Spirit of 
God. Where it rules there will be true fellowship with the Father 
and the Son and with all possessing it. The agency or means by 
which this union is accomplished is the truth-the Word of God. 



Because of the inseparable union between God's Word and His 
Spirit, it is called "The Spirit of truth" and the only way to possess 
the full harmony and union of the spirit is by possessing a 
knowledge of the truth, hence Jesus prayed: "Sanctify them through 
thy truth, Thy word is truth." (John 17:17.) 

This leads us to inquire, Is it not because of lack of knowledge of 
the truth through neglect of the Word of God, and the abundance of 
error, consequent to giving heed to the traditions of the ancients and 
to the various theories framed after and like unto those established 
by the mother of harlots, that Christians to-day find it impossible to 
unite head and heart as well as hands in the common cause? 

This being conceded, it becomes the duty of the hour for every saint 
to not only cast entirely aside every human yoke of bondage, and 
stand free indeed, (Gal. 5:1,) but to assist other saints to the same 
blessed liberty. When thus liberated from sectarian bondage, the 
spirit of truth will be able to lead into all truth: and such only are 
able to follow. Would not the union of heart at once bind all these 
"free" ones? And would not the union of head under the "guide" of 
the Spirit of truth, soon be perfect? And would not union of labor 
be a natural accompaniment? We answer, yes ! So surely as we 
comply with the conditions, we shall have the result follow, as 
promised by the Lord:- "That they all may be one," and then the 
result of this will be also as he expressed it, "That the world may 
believe." (John 17:11,21.) 

If then it is seen that all the present systems are improperly named 
"Churches," improperly organized, improperly bound together, and 
have improperly built upon the decisions of fallible and mistaken 
men, and are thus hindered from growth in grace and knowledge, 
and that these systems are not recognized by God at all, and never 
alluded to in His Word except to condemn them, then, duty is plain. 
"Come out of her my people," will not be disregarded by those 
anxiously seeking guidance, and cannot be disregarded without loss 
in knowledge as well as in favor of God. His sheep hear his voice 
and follow Him, and He leads them to green pastures. 

One trouble which seems to beset many is this, They have become 
so accustomed to a fixed doctrinal fence of narrow limits on every 
side, that to place them in the green pastures of truth with its wide 
range of liberty, bounded only by the great fence of God's Word, 
alarms them, and they fear lest they should get lost with such 
liberty. They have heard that infidels roam in a large field without 
any fence whatever, and fear lest they should be getting into that 
field. Some have written to us saying that they see the error of and 
hindrance from union with systems misnamed THE CHURCH of 
Christ, and desire to come into the liberty, grace and knowledge of 
a larger place, but are at a loss to know what to join when they 
withdraw from present membership. 

Ah! how the adversary would blind us to keep us from light and 
liberty! Can you not see that you, if really a consecrated child of 



God, have already joined the true Church? You joined it when you 
made full consecration to the Lord. It was then that your name was 
"written in heaven" in the "book of life." You were then a member 
of the true Church, the true ecclesia, the body of Christ, of which 
Jesus is the only Head, the true flock of which Jesus is the great 
Chief Shepherd. Can you not realize this? Is this not as plain and 
clear as God's word can make it? 

Getting you to join an institution of men, whose members' names 
are written on earth and which are named after their heads and 
founders, was a snare and delusion by which the adversary has 
robbed you of the use of the liberty wherewith Christ made you 
free, and as a consequence has kept from you, much of the grace 
and knowledge which, as the Lord's freeman and the King's son, 
were yours by right, both to use yourself and to dispense to others. 

Hence, we have no space fenced off into which we invite you but 
into the great field of truth marked and bounded and perfectly and 
harmoniously squared only by the word of God. If we can be of 
assistance in pointing out to you any of the boundary lines, or 
calling your attention to the bountiful provision for your rest, 
encouragement and comfort within those boundaries, it shall be our 
pleasure as well as duty as under-shepherds and servants of the 
flock. Why cannot all come with us into this liberty and this 
untrammeled enjoyment of all that our gracious and bountiful 
Father has provided? There is nothing to hinder except sectarian 
pride, begotten of the adversary and opposed to the Spirit of Christ. 

Some are held back from liberty and obedience to the Lord's call, 
"Come out of her," by a system of false reasoning. They reason 
thus, Surely the great bulk of the nominal church cannot be in error. 
I am at least safe while in the company of so great a majority. This 
is another delusion of the adversary. It was used in the days of 
Noah, Elijah and Jesus, as well as in the days of the (partial) 
Reformation. The great size and influence of Babylon misleads and 
causes many to forget that, though "All men shall be saved [from 
the Adamic penalty] and come to a knowledge of the truth" (1 Tim. 
2:4), and though "a great company" shall reach spiritual conditions 
(Rev. 7:9), yet only a "little flock" of "overcomers" will be 
accounted worthy to share the "divine nature" by becoming the 
bride of Christ, joint-heir with him to the kingdom. 

Do not forget that it was to give us this opportunity of overcoming, 
that God has permitted this great Babylon, anti-Christ system, to 
gain such influence in the world. The overcoming of the beast and 
his image is specially mentioned as among the needful 
qualifications to a share in the Millennial reign. (Rev. 20:4). Let us 
not deceive ourselves. God will never call those overcomers, nor 
reward them as such, who, in spite of his light and truth, "are all 
their lifetime subject to bondage," even though he shall eventually 
"deliver" them, by the complete overthrow of Babylon as a great 
millstone cast into the depths of the sea. (Heb. 2:15 and Rev. 
18:21). Now is the time to overcome. Now is the time when your 



influence will tell most on the side of truth. Soon the Elect Church, 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife, will be complete, so if you are a 
candidate and are running for that prize, "take heed that no man 
take thy crown." (Rev. 3:11). 

In reply to the suggestion that our Church is corrupt and full of 
false doctrines, even denying that the Lord bought us, we can only 
remind you that such are not "OF THIS WAY." If they ever were of 
us, they "have gone out from us." The true Church, as God 
recognizes it, does not include any but the redeemed; and if any 
such put off the "wedding garment" of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, such are cast forth into darkness. (Matt. 22:11-14). 

That some whose names were once "written in heaven" as members 
of the Church of Christ can lose membership in OUR Church— the 
Church of Christ, and have their names "blotted out," is evident 
from the following, as well as other Scriptures, viz.: Rev. 3:5 and 
11, Heb. 6:6, and 10:29-31. Thus it is clear that the true Church is 
kept pure by the great Head of the Church himself blotting out the 
names of any who may fall away and count the blood of the 
covenant wherewith they were sanctified a common thing. 

As a proof that the Church now, as at first, is kept pure by the Lord, 
and that those referred to by this correspondent are not of us, we 
refer you to a similar departure from the faith recorded in 1 John 
2:19. "They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they 
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but 
they went out that they might be made manifest, that they were not 
all of us." 



*The sister is mistaken, the fact remains, so long as history 
remains, and cannot be "exploded." It has, however, been very 
generally "dropped," because those who might refer to it, find that 
their own claims to being "the Church" are best supported by 
acknowledging the claims of "the Church of England." 



R694 : page 8 

"If you wish to do good, do good; if you wish to assist people, 
assist people. The only way to learn to do a thing is to do it; and 
that implies, before you learn to do right you will do wrong. You 
will make blunders, you will have failures; but persevere, and in the 
end you will learn your lessons, and many other lessons by the 
way." 



R695 : page 1 

VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1884. 
NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 



TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



page 1 

WALL CHARTS.-We still have some of these on hand, FREE 
for all who will pay the Express charges on them. See description in 
August issue. 



NOTE the removal of our business office to No. 40 FEDERAL 
ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. There, we will be pleased to receive a 
visit from any of you, when in the city. 



R695 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

It is a common proverb, and one very generally acted upon to-day, 
that, "In union there is strength." Both the Church and the world 
accept the maxim as correct; hence we find men binding themselves 
together in various unions, both social and religious. 

From some standpoints the idea certainly is correct. How could 
labor resist the encroachments of capital, or capital protect its 
interests, without their respective unions? How else could Free 
Masonry and similar institutions have gained present power and 
influence? How could kingdoms maintain their authority and 
dominion? How could the churches, both Papal and Protestant, 
have gained or retained their mighty power, influence and 
authority, had they not each fortified themselves by a union of 
hands? 

Looking out upon these great civil, social, and religious 
organizations, all must acknowledge that through their respective 
unions great strength has been secured. And the strength of each 
great party has helped to keep the other at bay. In other words, one 
uplifted arm of flesh has served to protect itself against another arm 
of flesh, as well as to exchange blows in the struggle for existence. 
And so the world to-day which has been banding its forces for 
centuries, and with increased energy during the last century, stands 



organized in companies of millions on opposite sides of almost 
every question of general interest. 

And what does it mean? Where shall it end? When each great band 
having united its forces, feeling sure that in its union there would be 
strength, now turns to look upon the equivalent strength of its 
opponent, the outlook is truly appalling from every standpoint, and 
men begin to fear if after all, these unions have given them 
sufficient strength to withstand the approaching conflict, now so 
manifest to every reasoning mind. 

While we have remarked the expressions and indications of fearful 
apprehension on the part of the great civil organizations, we also 
note the same indications on the part of prominent exponents of the 
great religious systems. While each secretly trembles for its own 
safety, yet outwardly boasts of its security, they note and delight to 
point out the elements of disintegration at work in each other. 

As evidence of this we quote the following from The Catholic of 
Nov. 15th: 

PAN-PRESBYTERIAN AND OTHER PROTESTANT COUNCILS. 

"With Dr. McCosh, of Princeton, we believe, originated the idea 
of a Pan-Presbyterian Council. The Church of England people went 
through the form of holding a Pan- Angelical Convocation some 
few years ago in London. The Methodists at once followed the 
example set them by their Episcopalian friends, and attempted to 
gather together the representatives of Methodism from every land 
where 'the gospel,' as expounded by Wesley and his followers, had 
been preached, into a Pan-Methodist Conference. This Pan- 
Methodist Council was to be a wonderful affair; Methodism was a 
young, growing and intensely active religious organization; it 
reckoned its followers by the tens of thousands; it had made serious 
inroads, both in England and the United States, upon the older and 
established forms of Protestantism; hence, much was expected from 
the Pan-Methodist Conference that assembled in London a few 
years since. But it was the old story of Protestantism re-told. 
Instead of union and harmony prevailing in the councils of the 
Methodist body, there was a singular revelation of the lack of both 
those qualities so essential to the welfare and stability of the 
organization. There was no authoritive declaration on those 
important subjects of doctrine and polity which had split 
Methodism into different and contending sects. In a word, the Pan- 
Methodist Conference, like the Pan-Anglican Convocations, was a 
signal failure. It did not impress anyone, it may be questioned if it 
did Methodists themselves, with the notion that the Wesleyan 
system was an improvement upon those forms of Protestant belief 
which it had supplanted in many quarters. 

"The idea of a Pan-Presbyterian Council was next taken up at the 
instigation of the President of Princeton, the able and learned Dr. 
McCosh. No sooner was the proposition put forward of holding a 



Pan-Presbyterian meeting, than it was hailed with a "remarkable 
unanimity and with almost universal interest and joy" by the 
Calvanistic Churches. What a pleasing spectacle it would be to see 
the divided followers of Calvin and Knox coming together and 
holding mutual intercourse and counsel upon their common 
standards of faith! Outsiders might be somewhat skeptical as to the 
possibility of a Pan-Presbyterian Council, but a supreme effort 
should be made, through the leaders of that body, to convince the 
world of the 'real and effective oneness' of Presbyterians throughout 
the world. 

"Accordingly a call was issued. And the first Pan-Presbyterian 
meeting was held in Edinburgh in July, 1877; a second in 
Philadelphia, September, 1880; and the third, and quite likely the 
last, was opened in the city of Belfast, Ireland, on the 2nd of July 
past. We have been reading lately some very unfavorable criticisms 
of this Belfast Pan-Presbyterian Council made by Presbyterians 
themselves. A paper was read before the United Presbyterian 
Ministerial Association of Philadelphia on the Belfast meeting by 
the Rev. Mr. Dales, from which we make some extracts. 

"The Rev. Dr. Dales writes: 

'"In looking, however, at the late meeting as we may now after the 
pleasurable excitements and varied entertaining, social and other 
interesting things connected with it are over, some matters may be 
noted which may be considered as grounds of apprehension in 
regard to it and the whole system of Councils as this one and its 
predecessors generally have been conducted— and apprehension as 
to whether any real and lasting good may be expected to flow from 
them— and apprehension also as to the desirableness, or possibly 
even the propriety, of their being continued. 

'"The freedom and boldness with which, as at the meeting in 
Philadelphia and possibly in Belfast, speculative views at least were 
advanced to inspiration, the claims or pretensions of science, 
ritualism and other topics, and which could not be antagonized or 
properly controverted at the time or in the place, lest there might be 
developed some unseemly scene of difference, and, what the 
outside world might say, of strife among brethren of the same 
name. Thus more or less of serious error might go uncorrected and 
unrebuked.' 

"Just so. There are most serious grounds of apprehension in the 
Presbyterian case, as well as in the Anglican and Methodist 
instances, of any "real and lasting good" likely to flow from such 
meetings. The elements are too discordant to be harmonized. And 
this critic goes on to say that 'there has been an unsatisfactory, and 
perhaps ominous, indefiniteness and uncertainty in those councils 
from the beginning.'" 

From all this we gather that Presbyterians themselves do not believe 
in the utility or advantages to be derived from the holding of Pan- 
Presbyterian Councils; that the experiment is a dismal failure; and 



this for the simple reason: that "unless the Lord build the house, the 
labor of the builders is in vain. " The Protestant fabric the Heavenly 
Builder certainly did not contemplate when he laid the foundations 
of the Christian Church." 

Thus the "Mother Church" points out to her wayward daughters the 
error of their course in following the principle for which they parted 
company with her, viz. : the right of private judgment in the 
interpretation of the Scriptures. 

And in their confusion they are beginning to heed her counsel, and 
by degrees are looking for the old paths— not the old paths marked 
by the steppings of Jesus and the Apostles, but for the paths of the 
great apostate church of Rome. 

As evidence of this, mark the spirit of intolerance which 
increasingly prevails throughout Protestantism: the authority with 
which they attempt now to silence private judgment, for which right 
they once contended; the emphasis with which they command their 
people to "stop thinking and go to work;" the effort to bind the 
people by fear, and to lead them to render undue reverence to men 
of like passions and frailties, who have assumed the right to lord it 
over God's heritage; and the indulgence they offer to men of the 
world who will advance their financial interests. Like Catholicism, 
they point to their age, their established clergy, trained and 
educated for their service, and their dignified presumption, as 
evidence of their divine authority. 

In keeping with this growing disposition to admire and imitate the 
"Mother Church," was the proposition entertained in the "Protestant 
Episcopal Congress" recently held in Detroit, Mich., to establish 
Auricular Confession. 

We append the following from the Detroit Evening News, showing 
the favor with which the motion was received and entertained: 

"It must have been a little startling to the majority of Protestants 
hereabouts, to discover the almost unanimity with which the clergy 
of the Episcopal Church Congress favored Auricular Confession. 
Indeed, almost the only arguments urged against it were those of 
expediency and practicability. Its philosophical 

R696 : page 1 

basis was heartily approved, and its scriptural authority conceded. 
The Latin clergy themselves could hardly have spoken more 
eloquently of the benefits of the practice than did the reverend 
gentlemen who appeared as its advocates in the Episcopal 
Congress." 

These and similar indications, manifest to every thoughtful mind, 
show the tendency of human schemes. Men were beginning to think 
they had built the tower of Babylon high enough to reach unto 
heaven, but, lo! the confusion of tongues! the discord among the 
builders! they cannot understand each other, and the various 



sections of the vast condemned structure are disintegrating, settling, 
falling. As an evidence that this is beginning to be realized, we 
quote the following from the Chicago Express which is part of an 
article written by Bishop Foster, of the Methodist Church. While 
traveling in Europe, he took occasion to speak of those forms of 
worship there which are supported by law, and the acts that led to 
such a state of things. He says:- 

"That there is but little real, vital, personal religion in these lands, is 
among the most patent facts. ...I know of nothing more sad than the 
religious condition of Europe, and the saddest part of it is, that it is 
chargeable to the Church itself, and therefore the more hopeless. If 
something is not speedily done, the so-called Christian Church will 
drive Christianity from these ancient lands, if not from the whole 
world." 

In speaking of the primary causes which led to this state of things, 
he says:- 

"Did Constantine make the Roman mind Christian by abolishing 
paganism, and proclaiming the religion of the cross in its stead? and 
did creating the constituted Roman nation into a church, make the 
nation a Christian church? or did he not rather paganize 
Christianity?" 

Speaking still further of the present state of things, he says:- 

"By a false theory, the Church has been taken from the people, and 
converted into a priestly and political machine, and has ceased to be 
a Church of Christ, as much as the papal machine at Rome. ...This 
condition of things is the sad inheritance of the union of Church and 
State." 

The editor of the Express in calling attention to the statements of 
the Bishop, says:— 

"The Church in America has also very largely become a political 
machine, and has been used as a means of raising a campaign fund 
to retain and maintain the party in power, and return men to office, 
who have betrayed the people, and 

R696 : page 2 

sold them to the giant corporations of the land.... How long, we 
would ask of Bishop Foster, does he imagine it will be before the 
Church in America, like the Church of Europe, will be forced to 
seek an alliance with the State in order to sustain itself, because of 
the indifference of the people, who perceive its iniquitous practices, 
and scoff at its pretended Christianity? Already a union of the two 
is a thing openly spoken of as desirable. 

"We have before us at this moment a religious journal, the Sabbath 
Sentinel, which in its leading editorial warns the Church against the 
tendency. The rich men within the Church, who have taken shelter 
there against public condemnation of their crimes of extortion, are 
ready at any time for the union-more than ready. They would do 



with their taxes to the Church as they have done with their taxes to 
the State: frame the laws in such a way that the poor shall be forced 
to pay for them. Every one of the causes which produced the union 
of Church and State in Europe, exists either in full bloom or in 
embryo in this country; and here, as there, 'if something is not 
speedily done, the so-called Christian Church will drive 
Christianity from the land.' Again we say, with the Bishop, 'Let the 
Church of God come out from the world; let it be made of followers 
and disciples of Christ; let it represent righteousness and truth; let it 
cut loose from false and entangling alliances; let its priests be 
clothed with salvation, and its citizens be a holy communion; let it 
demonstrate its divine lineage,-let this be the watch-cry of Zion, 
and then it will be a power in the earth, and will silence the taunt of 
its enemies.'" 

What then shall we conclude? Is there to be no union among 
Christians —shall brother forever stand divided against brother? 
Shall truth forever be so vaguely comprehended that God's children 
may not have full confidence in it? Is there no common bond of 
union? 

Yes, assuredly there is a common bond of union— the spirit of truth 
promised -which is able, through the exercise of our free unbiased 
judgment in the study of God's word, to lead us into all truth, in its 
due season. And all thus led are united to each other and to Christ, 
the great invisible head of the church. And in that union there is 
strength, which no opposing forces can withstand, and before which 
all must fall. 

Therefore, you who thus stand united to Christ, though you may 
stand alone among men, be of good cheer, contend nobly for the 
faith once delivered to the saints, though alone you contend against 
a host. Greater is he that is for us than all they that be against us. 
Babylon's massive walls shall crumble into dust, but the mountain 
(kingdom) of the Lord's house shall be established. Isa. 2:2. 

As an example of a strong church system or union, Papacy is head 
and shoulders above all others. Her principle of teaching the 
infallibility of decrees of Popes and Bishops, and the utter 
ignorance of truth and subservience in all others, is the tried and 
most approved method of having union in error. Because of this, 
Papacy will probably survive the shock of the coming storm longer 
than any other section of Babylon. For the same reason limited 
monarchies will probably fall sooner than absolute monarchies in 
the same conflict between truth and error. Yet truth is mighty and 
shall prevail. 

That union only will be lasting, which is based upon the liberties 
and restraints provided in the Word of God, and which recognizes it 
as the only infallible teaching. 



page 2 



EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Wayne Co., Pa., Oct. 23d, 1884 



MY DEAR BROTHER:-A copy of the WATCH TOWER of 
October, 1883, has just fallen into my hands. There are several 
articles in that issue of such a character that, should the tone of the 
paper for 1884 be similar, I want to take it and circulate it as far and 
wide as possible. I am Pastor of the Christian Church of this place. 
Our people are liberal in sentiment and love the Holy Scriptures. 
Hence any paper containing so much candid research and Biblical 
exegesis as the above mentioned number, will find willing readers. 

Please send me a sample copy. 

Fraternally yours, . 

Ayrshire, N.B. 

SIR:— In the goodness of God I have got a look at your pamphlet, 
"Why Evil was Permitted. " I have been deeply interested in the 
subjects therein presented for some time. Please to favor me with a 
copy of ZION'S WATCH TOWER with the supplement already 
mentioned, and any others of a like description. Christians cannot 
but note to what an extent the power of God is being put forth in the 
calling of one here and another there. In striking contrast is the way 
in which the devil, knowing that his time is short, is using every 
effort in his power, and so the conflict is going on, while the so- 
called Church of God is sound asleep. Let us realize our position. 
By faith having received the blessed Christ and realizing the 
guiding and teaching of the Holy Ghost, may we grow in grace and 
in the love of God. 

Yours, most respectfully, . 

Bellaire, 0.,Nov. 23, 1884. 

C. T. RUSSELL, Dear Sir:— In sending a little order to you, allow 
me to make an explanation of causes that led me to this course. 

A few weeks ago, on a pleasant Sabbath afternoon, I went for the 
first time in my life across the Ohio river here, to Wheeling. While 
visiting churches and other places of interest, I passed, it seemed by 
chance, the State House, where Elder J. B. Adamson was preaching 
to a group on the pavement. I staid so long to hear him that I saw 
little more of the city that day. I heard the Bible explained— I heard 
him "vindicate the ways of God to man," as Pollock says. I got the 
little book, "Food," etc. I felt then, and more ever since, that that 
day was a great crisis in my life. 

Mr. Adamson was in this town afterward, and I "heard him gladly." 
He came, at my earnest request, to my room, and talked to me of 
this mystery— now made clear. Besides, the little volume is 
satisfying my mind wonderfully. 



Please read the enclosed card, and then address it so that it will 
reach Mr. Adamson, if you know where he is. 

Truly yours, 

We give below the "card" referred to in the above. 
Bellaire, 0.,Nov. 23, 1884. 

J. B. ADAMSON:-Dear Sir:-I now send a few lines to tell you 
how fully I believe I have found the truth. I have not quite finished 
the little book "Food," and I have not read much of the paper yet, 
but everything is like the breaking of sunlight on a dark day. The 
darkest problems of my mind, that have confronted me for many 
years, are being clearly solved-so many of them. I tell my 
associates quietly but gladly, that I have found that for which I have 
longed. And I tell my near friends— the dear ones at a distance— that 
I have found peace with God. It was such a revelation to me: The 
Bible, the Saviour, the Church, and the world, all appear to me in 
such a different light from that in which I looked at them before. 
Yet truly my life's experiences have been preparing me for the 
immediate acceptance of these things. I feel that I have long known 
what self-denial is— indeed I have tried hard. Now though I feel how 
unworthy my powers of body and mind, are, I consecrate them to 
God. I am so anxious to attain to the highest and feel sorry to think 
of failing in that. How glad I am that my feet were led that day, past 
the Wheeling State House. May God bless you and your companion 
in your work— Mrs. A. 

Yours in faith, . 

The brother need not conclude that he is too late to attain to the 
"High Calling." Thousands of God's children have given 
themselves to the Lord long ago, who are now being led to more 
fully realize the full import of their covenant. They have learned 
and practiced self-denial, self-sacrifice, and are now being 
quickened by the truth to renewed energy in sacrifice and 
devotedness to God. And it is the privilege of all such to so run to 
obtain. How many sincere hearts have in solemn song or words or 
prayer declared to God- 

"My all is on the altar." 

"And the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance 
was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that 
thought upon his name. And (unless they should forsake or despise 
their covenant John 8:31) they shall be mine saith the Lord of hosts, 
in that day when I make up My jewels." Mai. 3: 16,17. None of us 
understood fully the extent of our sacrifice when first we made it. 
Each added day brings its opportunities for sacrifice, and God's 
word is now making clear to inquiring minds that it must be even 
unto death; and as we daily realize the death struggles of the old 



nature, glorious visions of the new burst upon our spiritual visions 
through the precious word. And thus we are impelled and helped in 
the way of sacrifice-even unto death. 

Let all who see these incentives therefore be earnest in their efforts 
to make them known to other consecrated saints, that they too may 
be likewise inspired to make their calling and election sure. 

Cheshire Co., N.H. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: -My wife has been receiving THE 
WATCH TOWER for several years past, and I have occasionally 
read an article in them without awakening any particular interest in 
my mind until about two months ago. Then my attention was 
especially called to them, and since that time I have read them 
eagerly and with very great delight. 

I have read, also, "Food for Thinking Christians," "Tabernacle," 
etc., and find as a result quite a revolution wrought in my life and 
religious emotions. 

I was in the Methodist ministry seven years previous to the last four 
years, and should probably be there now but for the different and 
changing views of my wife, as she has been a nominal (though not 
a real) Baptist till within a few years past, and now neither of us 
find a resting place in either of these or any of the other churches. 
We find ourselves in sympathy with the most of your writings, 
though I am unable, as yet, to measure fully up to some views you 
put forth. Nevertheless, the doctrines you hold wherein I cannot go 
with you do not concern particularly your main teachings, as I 
understand them. 

My mind is in lively exercise just now as to what my work in the 
Master's vineyard shall be, and how it shall be done. That this "Plan 
of God" for the restoration of the race should be placed before those 
that are prepared to receive it, as also before the probably much 
larger company that would accept it if properly explained, I am 
fully convinced. But it is not so clear in my mind in what way this 
can be done with the best promise of success. "He that winneth 
souls is wise;" and this same wisdom is required in sowing the seed. 
Scarcely elsewhere than in the churches are there any prepared for 
such meat as this, and even there but few; and how even may they 
be best approached is a question. 

I am inclined to start out to teach or in some way to proclaim this 
doctrine. My wife has been pondering this matter for several years, 
and is fully persuaded that it is the genuine teaching of Scripture. 
So she is ready to go out; but I am not so taught as to be confident 
of a qualification for the task. 

In my ministry I professed and preached sanctification, but a little 
over two months ago I experienced an outpouring of the Spirit far 
surpassing anything I had previously known. 



Then my wife, calling attention to the great consolation she had 
received from your writings, I began to see the harmony existing 
between your teachings and the Bible, and forthwith the wondrous 
wisdom and love of God became astonishingly grand and glorious 
beyond any former conception. "O that men would praise the Lord 
for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of 
men." Your brother in Christ, 

[We pray that the Lord may abundantly bless you and use you as a 
channel of blessing to others. We kindly refer you to some hints on 
preparation in our August issue. -ED.] 

New York, Oct. 27, '84. 

C. T. RUSSELL:— Dear Brother:— You have been giving me 
considerable of your thought and time lately, and I appreciate this. 
Your last letter is very strong but perfectly clear to me, and 
accepted, as I know it is according to the spirit of scripture 
teaching. 

Rejoice! I have entered into a new consecration. I have been 
drawing nearer to this for nearly four years, and had given up time 
that according to human foresight belonged to my business, and on 
which my future prosperity very much depends. I have long 
realized that nothing in the world is of much value to me and have 
truly realized all worldly employment or position or name as 
unworthy to be compared with the joy to be revealed to us through 
our Lord. 

I am deeply impressed. I am a thinking man and from past 
experience (in my advancement toward full consecration) know the 
trials and sorrows that will encompass me, and no one with whom I 
am connected or personally acquainted to give sympathy-My 
family opposed. But these things do not hinder me. I have been led 
to look only unto the Lord God Almighty for guidance and 
sympathy and from thence it is unfailing. 

I have given up my business— that is, I am where I am, it seems to 
me, by the will of the Lord, and I see no possibility of change that I 
could advantageously make at present, and I am convinced that 
when a change is to be made the Lord will give me a conviction of 
mind and opportunity to that effect. I have given up my family-that 
is they, as well as everything, stand second to the will of God and to 
his love. 

As far as I know and can judge of my own heart or purpose or 
choice I believe that I truly desire to give my whole time and daily 
life to the Master— wholly for his service. 

The impression on my mind is that he will give me a greater 
knowledge of his truth and then open a way for me to use it yet 
more fully. I really count my life as nothing if I may win Christ. My 



question or thought is not how to avoid trouble or pain, but "what is 
thy will O! God?" 



I am yet lacking in many things, but the Lord will make me better 
and better acquainted with his truth and his will. It takes all my 
faith to keep me, but there is no wavering. I press forward. 

Yours in fellowship and service, 



page 2 

DESCRIPTION OF JESUS. 

The following epistle it is claimed was taken by Napoleon from 
the records of Rome, when he deprived that city of so many 
valuable manuscripts. It purports to have been written at the time 
and on the spot where Jesus commenced his ministry, by Publius 
Lentelus, governor of Judea, to the senate at Rome— Caesar, 
Emperor. It was the custom in those days for the governor to write 
home any event of importance transpiring during his term of office. 

"Conscript Fathers:— There appeared, in these our days, a man 
named Jesus Christ, who is yet living among us, and, of the 
Gentiles, is accepted as a prophet of great truth; but his own 
disciples call him the son of God. He hath raised the dead, and 
cured all manner of diseases. He is a man of stature somewhat tall 
and comely; with a very ruddy countenance, such as the beholder 
may both love and fear. His hair is of the color of the filbert when 
fully ripe, plain to his ear, whence downward, it is of more oriental 
color, curling and waving on his shoulders. In the middle of his 
head there is a seam of long hair, after the manner of the Nazarites. 
His forehead is plain and delicate; his face, without spot or wrinkle, 
beautiful, with a comely red; his nose and mouth are exactly 
formed; his beard is the color of his hair, and thick; not of any 
length, but forked. In reproving he is terrible; in admonishing 
courteous; in speaking, very modest and wise; in proportion of 
body, well shaped. None have seen him laugh, many have seen him 
weep. A man for his surpassing beauty excelling the children of 
men." 



page 3 

The following poem is from a Bible standpoint, beautifully 
expressive of the prospects of the 

R696 : page 3 



GROANING CREATION. 

BY J. G. WHITTIER. 



Across the sea I heard the groan 

Of nations in the intervals 

Of wind and wave. Their blood and bones 

Cried out in torture, crushed by thrones, 

And sucked by priestly cannibals. 

I dreamed of freedom slowly gained 
By martyr meekness, patience, faith, 
And lo! an athlete grimly stained, 
With corded muscles battle-strained 
Shouting it from the fields of death. 

I turn me, awe-struck, from the sight 
Among the clamoring thousands mute. 
I only know that God is right, 
And that the children of the light 
Shall tread the darkness under foot. 

I know the pent fire heaves its crust, 
That sultry skies the bolt will form 
To smite them clear; that Nature must 
The balance of her powers adjust, 
Though with the earthquake and the storm. 

God reigns, and let the earth rejoice! 
I bow before His sterner plan. 
Dumb are the organs of my choice; 
He speaks in battle's stormy voice, 
His praise is in the wrath of man. 

Yet, surely as He lives, the day 

Of peace He promised shall be ours, 

To fold the flags of war, and lay 

Its sword and spear to rust away, 

And sow its ghastly fields with flowers." 



R696 : page 3 

SPIRITS IN PRISON. 

N.B.— Before reading the following four articles the reader is 
requested to carefully re-examine an article in our issue of June last 
under the caption, "Sons of God and Daughters of Men." 



"Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that 
he might bring US to God, being put to death in the flesh but 
quickened [in] spirit. By which also, [in addition to this work done 
for US] he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which 
sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God 
waited in the days of Noah."- 1 Pet. 3:18-20. 



A satisfactory interpretation of this Scripture has long been 
sought, and but few have found a solution perfectly consistent and 
satisfying to themselves. Under the increasing light of the Lamp it 
is now becoming clear, to us at least. 

The two views of the passage commonly held we shall state first, 
and then give our present views. 

The most common view is, that during the time that Jesus was 
entombed he was off on a missionary tour preaching to the 
antediluvians. It is part of this view that the antediluvian sinners 
were suffering torture in a place they call hell. 

If its advocates would consider it, they would find that their 
interpretation favors a view of future probation for the 
antediluvians, a thing which they strenuously oppose. For if Christ 
preached to them it must have been for some purpose, and surely it 
was not to merely mock and deride them; his preaching must have 
been a message of hope-a part of his blessed "good tidings of great 
joy." And if there is a future probation for the antediluvians, why 
may not our position be correct, that in Christ all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed? 

This is the objection which consistency would urge against this 
view from the standpoint of those who hold it. But if we view it 
from the scriptural standpoint, and with the correct idea of death, 
we must reason that if Jesus was really dead during those three 
days, as the Apostles declare, then he could do no preaching, for 
"the dead know not anything," (Eccl. 9:5), and "there is no work, 
nor devices, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave." (Eccl. 
9:10.) Secondly, if Jesus had been an exception to the rule and 
could have preached, the antediluvians could not have heard, for 
certainly they have no wisdom, nor knowledge, in the grave. Hence 
this view is found generally unsatisfactory and out of harmony with 
the Scriptures. 

The second view, and the one which seemed most reasonable to us 
until recently, is to refer the preaching to that which Noah did under 
the direction of the Spirit of God to the antediluvians, who at this 
time are imprisoned in death. The objection to this view is that the 
preaching was not done to men, nor to the spirits of men, but to 
spirits, spiritual beings; and the preaching was not done by Noah, 
nor by the Spirit of God, but by the death and resurrection of Jesus. 

As we at present see the subject, it seems very clear that the spirits 
are those spiritual beings whose disobedience took place during the 
days of Noah, and whom God therefore imprisoned or restrained in 
some of their former liberties and privileges; even "those angels 
who kept not their own principality, but left their own habitation [or 
normal condition] he has kept in perpetual chains, [restraints,] 
under thick darkness, for the judgment of the great day." Jude 6.- 
Diaglott. 



This interpretation seems to meet all the circumstances of the case 
thus far. Now we inquire, In what way could Jesus preach to these 
during the time he was dead? We answer that it is not so stated. It 
was by the facts that he preached, as we sometimes say that 
"Actions speak louder than words." It was by his sufferings, death 
and resurrection that the preaching was done. Thus, as Jesus went 
from step to step in his work, his course was preaching a grand 
sermon to those angels who once had been placed in control of 
man, and had themselves fallen instead of lifting up mankind. In 
Jesus they saw exemplified obedience even unto death, and its 
reward— resurrection —to spiritual being of the DIVINE NATURE. 
Such was the great text, and the lesson from it is stated by the 
Apostle in verse 22, viz., that Jesus was now highly exalted and 
given a name [title] above every name was "gone into heaven, and 
is at the right hand of God [position of highest favor] ; ANGELS 
and authorities and powers being made subject to him." They knew 
Jesus before he left the glory of the heavenly condition and became 
a man. They knew the object of his self-sacrifice as a man. They 
saw him obedient even unto death and then his high exaltation 
came as a reward (Phil. 2:9). They must have felt keenly their loss 
through disobedience, cut off from communion with God, 
restrained as unworthy of former liberty and communion with the 
purer minded of mankind, and their own future an unsolved 
mystery. We can but imagine that sorrow and chagrin filled their 
hearts as they contrasted their course of disobedience and its results 
with Jesus' obedient course and its majestically grand results. We 
can fancy them saying, Would that we had realized before as fully 
as we now do the wide contrast between the results of obedience 
and disobedience. Would that we might have another trial; with our 
increased knowledge our course would be very different. 

A clear distinction should be borne in mind as between Satan and 
these angels. Satan evidently sinned against great light, so that 
infinite wisdom finds no place to do more for him. His was not a 
temptation to sin from bad example in others, as was the case with 
the "angels who sinned" in the days of Noah, being led into evil by 
their contact with fallen man, for Satan is the father of lies and was 
a sinner prior to man's fall, and was man's tempter. With reference 
to Satan nothing is stated in Scripture to indicate a future trial; but, 
to the contrary, it is expressly stated that he is to be "destroyed." 
Heb. 2:14; Rom. 16:20; Rev. 20:10. 

Here we start the inquiry: Is it possible that there may be probation 
for these spirits in prison who were formerly disobedient in the 
days of Noah, led into sin through man's bad example? We 

R697 : page 3 

answer that God's loving care over and for man, while we were yet 
sinners, and his impartiality would lead us to hope that he might as 
well have some provision for the spirits imprisoned in death. 
Though because of the different penalties upon the two classes the 
means of recovery may not necessarily be the same in all 



particulars: for instance, these angels not being condemned to death 
need not to be redeemed from death. 

If those angels which sinned are to have a future trial— during the 
Day or age of judgment [or trial], it follows that there is hope for 
them. If then under the able instruction and assistance of the 
glorified church they forsake sin and lay hold upon righteousness, 
they shall be accounted worthy of everlasting life and happiness. 

If we find no Scripture statement contradictory of this— no 
statement telling of their destruction, may we not have hope for 
them and search for some Scripture statements favoring that hope? 

We find but two statements apparently contradictory; the one is 
(Mark 1:24; Luke 4:34; Matt. 8:29), "Art thou come to destroy us 
before the time?" This shows us that these imprisoned spirits had in 
mind destruction or torment as their final doom, but it by no means 
proves that their suppositions were correct, no more than for some 
of the so-called Orthodox to believe that nine-tenths of humanity 
will be everlastingly tormented would be a proof of it. The fact is 
that we find Satan, the master teacher who has taught men to thus 
blaspheme God's character through misrepresentation of his plans, 
was the master and chief over these cast-down spirits, and evidently 
had misrepresented Jehovah's plans to the imprisoned spirits as he 
has to men. He is the father of lies. 

The second text is (Matt. 25:41), "into everlasting fire, prepared for 
the devil and his angels." This cannot be used as an argument 
against a hope for a probation for the imprisoned spirits, for though 
by force of circumstances and restraint from any other service, they 
are now, Satan's angels or messengers or servants, yet they may not 
always be such, IF an opportunity were granted for them to return 
to God's service and be angels of God. The passage relates to the 
"lake of fire" or destruction into which at the close of the Millennial 
age all are to be cast, who are out of harmony with God. Satan will 
be of those cast into that everlasting destruction, and with him all 
who do unrighteousness or have pleasure therein —all of whom, 
spirits or men, are reckoned to be on his side, his angels or 
messengers— evil doers shall all be cut off from life. To cut off such, 
and such only, was God's plan from the beginning, for such only, 
destruction and cutting off from life forever was designed. 



R697 : page 3 

THE PROBATION OF ANGELS. 

The preceding article naturally suggests the inquiry, Will those 
"spirits in prison," "those angels which kept not their first estate," 
and who received such a powerful lesson from the ministry death 
and resurrection of Jesus, ever have any opportunity to profit by the 
lesson? will they ever have a chance to repent of their sin, to leave 
Satan's service, and return to loyalty to God? 



If at first we thought that the Scriptures were silent on the subject, 
we have found that to be a mistake, and when God speaks we may 
reasonably conclude that there is something profitable for us to 
learn. Hence let us give ear that we may learn whatever our Father 
deems expedient to communicate. 

Jude informs us that those angels (verse 6) which "committed 
fornication and went after strange flesh" "also" "in like manner" to 
the Sodomites (verse 7), God is keeping under restraint, their 
(penalty or punishment) "unto the judgment of the great day." The 
great day is the Millennial Day and mankind is also waiting for this 
judgment [krisis- trial]. Peter's testimony is in harmony 2 Pet. 2:4. 
And Paul settles the matter that these fallen and now imprisoned 
spiritual beings will have a trial as well as mankind, under the reign 
of Christ- the Church, the kingdom of God in exalted power. 
Speaking of the propriety of their deciding earthly difficulties, he 
says, "Do you not know that the saints shall judge the 
world?.. .Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" 1 Cor. 6:1-4. 
The Greek word here rendered judge, is krino of the same root as 
krisis rendered judgment in Jude 6 and signifies, to govern; to test; 
as to mete out to each individual blessings of stripes according to 
the merit of their course when brought fully into the light of truth, 
and under all the blessings of the reign of Christ. Hence it is thus 
seen that it will be a part of the work of the Christ to rule over and 
direct both human and angelic sinners, "to judge angels" and "to 
judge the world" of mankind-fallen men restrained unconscious in 
death, from which they have been redeemed, and fallen spirits 
restrained alive until this judgment or trial of the Great Millennial 
Day, when the saints under the headship of Jesus shall try their 
cause, giving everlasting life and favor to those who shall then 
prove themselves worthy of it, and everlasting destruction to those 
unworthy. 

Besides we find frequent references to a work Christ is to do in 
subjecting heavenly or spiritual as well as human powers, when the 
church which is his body has been selected and the work of judging 
and blessing commences. For instance we read, Eph. 1:10 "In the 
dispensation of the fullness of times, to re-establish [under God's 
dominion and law] all things in Christ [the disordered] things that 
are in heaven [spiritual] and on earth [human], in him."-Douay 
translation. Again, "In him it hath well pleased the Father that all 
fullness should dwell, and through him to reconcile all things unto 
himself, making peace by the blood of his cross, both as to the 
things on earth and the things in heaven. " (earthly and spiritual 
transgressors.) Col. l:20-Douay. 

In Eph. 3:8-10, it is shown that the length and breath of God's 
redemptive plan has been hidden by God until the Gospel Age, 
when the Apostles were commissioned to declare to men, the 
conditions upon which they might become sharers with Jesus in the 
execution of Gods' loving plans, and that the intent is, ultimately to 
have all the heavenly or spiritual beings know, through the 



instrumentality of the Church, the boundless wealth that is in God's 
great gift- His Son-and the different methods and steps his 
wisdom marked out for all his creatures. We quote the passage from 
the Diaglott translation:- 

"To me, the very lowest of the saints, was this favor given— To 
announce among the nations the glad tidings— the BOUNDLESS 
WEALTH of the anointed one: even to enlighten all as to what is 
the [method of] administration [or operation] of that secret [plan] 
which has been concealed from the ages, by that God who created 
all things; in order that now [henceforth] may be made known to 
the governments and the authorities in the heavenlies, through [the 
instrumentality of] the congregation [church] the much-diversified 
wisdom of God, according to a plan of the ages," "which he 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord." 

It would appear then, that God's bountiful plan and diversified 
wisdom, contains something of interest to the angels, and if of 
interest to any, of a special interest to those confined or restrained, 
and waiting a trial in the judgment of the great day. They see the 
saints and seek to look into things revealed by the spirit and Word 
to these, but in no other way can they learn of their future, or of 
what provision has been made for them in the boundless wealth and 
diversified wisdom of God, because it is to be "made known," 
"through the church." 

These condemned angels have been learning much since the first 
text and sermon, (The lesson of Jesus' obedience and exaltation 1 
Pet. 3:18-20 and 1 Tim. 3:16) for we read that we are made a 
spectacle to the world-both to angels and to men." (1 Cor. 4:9- 
Diaglott.) The spectacle and lesson is both to men and angels for 
the reason that both men and angels will shortly be judged by the 
church and blessed by it, if found obedient and worthy of life. 
When the testimony in due time is given, all things, both in heaven 
(the spiritual condition) and on earth (the human) shall bow to 
Jehovah's anointed and confess him their Lord and Ruler and those 
who refuse his righteous authority shall be cut off as unworthy of 
life. Isa. 45:23; Rom. 14:11; Matt. 25; Acts 3:33. 

R697 : page 4 

The angels that sinned in the days of Noah have had a bitter 
experience since; no doubt death would have been preferable in 
many respects. Cut off from association with good angels and 
placed in the companionship of each other and Satan without God 
and having no hope they must have had a terrible experience, with 
sin's demoralizing effects, while they have witnessed in man its 
ultimate penalty-death. Surely many of them will be prepared for a 
return to their former estate and its privileges and blessings, on 
whatever terms a just God may prescribe. 

We cannot forget too their respectful conduct toward Jesus and the 
Apostles, and the message they delivered; far more respectful 
indeed than that of the strictest sect of the Jewish church. While the 



latter scoffed and said, "Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph?" (John 
6:42) The former exclaimed "Thou art the Son of God." Mark 3:11. 
While the former said thou hast a devil and art mad, the latter said, 
"I know thee who thou art, the HOLY ONE of God." Mark 1:24. 

While they respected the true, they opposed the false saying to 
some who pretended to exercise power— "Jesus I know, and Paul I 
know, but who are ye? And the man in whom was the evil spirit 
was, leaped on them and overcame them." (Acts 19:15.) 

The Jews and Gentiles beat and stoned the messengers of God 
when they came among them with the glad tidings of salvation, but 
some of these fallen angels seemed desirous of spreading the glad 
tidings. One followed the Apostles, saying: "These men are the 
servants of the most high God which show unto us the way of 
salvation." Acts 16:17. 

THE BASIS OF THEIR HOPE. 

But now comes an important question, Scripture shows us that our 
hope centres in the fact that a ransom price for our sins was given 
by Jesus, but what is the basis of the hope for these fallen angels? 
On what ground can they have a trial and hope of future everlasting 
life? Did Jesus die for them? 

We answer that Jesus did not die for the angels— the ransom- 
sacrifice was human, a ransom for men. "Verily he took not on him 
the nature of angels," etc. (Heb. 2:16.) Furthermore they were not 
under condemnation of death, hence have never lost their life in any 
measure and would need no ransom from death, when they were 
not in, nor condemned to it. It was because DEATH had passed 
upon all men and they never could obtain life without, that Jesus' 
ransom was necessary in order that we might regain life. Those 
angels which kept not their first estate, were condemned, not to 
death, but to restraint and confinement, until a day of trial, when 
God will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he 
hath ordained. (Acts 17:31.) They are therefore undergoing their 
penalty as truly as man is suffering his, though they be very 
different in kind— "according to the much diversified wisdom of 
God." 

And yet they had a great interest in Jesus' work, for though they 
were not being redeemed or bought by the precious blood, as was 
man, yet it was this Jesus, the Redeemer of men, who on account of 
this work, would be accounted worthy of high exaltation to the 
divine nature, and given all power in heaven as well as in earth. In 
the exercise of which power in heaven (or among spiritual beings) 
they may hope for their day of trial to come, when they as well as 
men may be released from the dominion of Satan. 

Again, if we have the correct view of the matter, that these angels 
cast down, had been tempted and seduced by evil in men, which 
had become very great (Gen. 6:5) then we see how the 
reconciliation accomplished by the blood of the cross would apply 



to and cancel all guilt, both direct and indirect, which resulted from 
the one man's disobedience. So that now, in the words of the 
Apostle, "It pleased the Father... having made peace [propitiation- 
satisfaction] by the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things 
unto himself, by him, whether things [out of harmony] in earth, or 
things in heaven. " Col. 1 :20. 



R697 : page 4 

GOD'S COMPREHENSIVE LAW. 

God's wisdom, and love, and justice decide on what is best, and 
that decision is his will or law. But strictly speaking only so much 
of God's will as he expressed to his creatures is law to them. Hence 
while his laws never conflict, they may be more or less fully 
expressed on one occasion than on another. 

All of God's intelligent creatures are under instruction, being taught 
those laws which his infinite love, wisdom and justice have enacted 
for the well-being of all. Though created perfect, each in his plane 
of being, yet they all lack that scope of knowledge and wisdom 
which belongs in full measure only to the divine nature of which 
they are but images. They all lacked experience, hence in giving 
them instruction in the wisdom and propriety of his laws, it has 
pleased Jehovah to make an illustration which would manifest and 
practically exemplify his own character and prove to his creatures 
the wisdom and righteousness of his laws. 

It is evident that the spirit of his law is not to take advantage of 
some transgressive slip occasioned by lack of experience on the 
part of his creatures, but that he intends it to apply to the thoughts 
and intents of the hearts. That this is the real intent of God, we shall 
see illustrated by his dealings with those who have from lack of 
knowledge become sinners. 

His law in full, as we now see it in the light of His Word, is, "The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die"; that no being shall be permitted to 
live, who, when fully informed of God's righteous will, and enabled 
to obey it, shall not conform thereto; that all such shall be cut off 
from life. But this is as it may be seen NOW; once it was not so 
clearly expressed, nor so clearly seen. 

To exemplify this law fully, God caused man to be used as an 
illustration before the extreme penalty was placed upon the angels. 
So he placed upon him the full extreme penalty of his law— death, 
KNOWING that through inexperience he would violate that law 
and come under its penalty. But God purposed to make an 
illustration to all his creatures of the exceeding sinfulness of sin and 
the sure consequences, while at the same time his love and wisdom 
so marked out the plan, that man, the illustration, might not suffer 
loss, but be fully recovered from the penalty, and be himself 



blessed by being everlastingly guarded against sin by the lessons 
learned. 

Nor should we forget that God's dealing with man was perfectly 
just. He had a perfect right to demand perfect obedience from a 
perfect creature, and the fact that he has not required it at first of the 
angels, was a FAVOR toward them, permitting them to acquire by 
observation of mankind, a knowledge of sin and its dire results, 
before being placed liable to its extreme penalty— death; even as 
toward man he has displayed his FAVOR also, though in a different 
manner, viz., through a ransom, and Saviour, and restitution, and 
future trial for life, more favorable than the first, because of the 
knowledge of sin and its effects, meanwhile acquired by 
experience. Let us briefly 

VIEW THE EXHIBITION 

of God's character as displayed in his dealing toward mankind 
whom he made a spectacle to angels. (1 Cor. 4:9.) In so doing, let 
us guard against the common error which judges of God's actions 
exactly as of our own. Let us remember that justice, love, wisdom, 
and power, as commonly displayed by the fallen race, in dealing 
with each other, and with their children, is far from being perfect, 
far from being what it was at first, the image of those qualities in 
Jehovah. In consequence of the fall these qualities are constantly at 
war with each other, in our experience; sometimes love has a 
victory over justice, and sometimes justice has the victory over 
love. 

But with Jehovah there can be no conflict, and neither ever gains a 
victory or ascendancy over the other; both are perfect, and work 
only in perfect harmony. 

Before man was created, the justice, wisdom, love, and power of 
God held conference on the subject, and devised the plan which has 
since been developing. The plan was suggested by wisdom and 
concurred in by the other qualities, the arrangement and execution 
of it being left in Wisdom's hands. 

Wisdom designed to have the largest returns of experience and 
benefit to man, and the most valuable illustration of God's character 
to all his creatures, on every plane of being. Accordingly Wisdom 
said, Let the man come under the control of Justice, Love, and 
Power, separately, that the force and operation of each may be the 
more forcibly illustrated. Let Justice first have complete control, let 
the man be dealt with by the strict law, "Thou shalt not—" "In the 
day that thou dost... dying thou shalt die." And it was so. 

Man inexperienced and unused to controlling his liberty, violated it 
and experienced the full weight of Justice, as Wisdom had foreseen. 

The lesson under Justice has been long and severe, but the lesson 
must be thorough, so that it shall never need repeating. Men and 
angels must learn that Justice is relentless, irrevocable and 



unalterable. Then, too, before it could be realized that the remedy 
for man lay only in Jehovah and nowhere else, an opportunity was 
offered for the trial of other methods for his recovery. First, the 
angels were given rulership, (during the age before the flood), and 
made a miserable failure, for while man became more and more 
corrupt himself, his evil influence led to the fall of some of those 
who had attempted his assistance- "those angels which kept not 
their first estate." 

With the Deluge that order of affairs passed away. Then, under the 
law, given to one selected nation, another and a different 
opportunity was offered, to prove to man that even if God should 
cancel all enmity, or resentment, and receive the world into 
covenant relations, yet they would require a Restorer so that they 
could continue in harmony with God, even after being brought 
back. Hence sacrifices and offerings for sin were instituted, and 
God treated that nation AS THOUGH original sin and guilt had 
been removed, and then placed them under law to prove to them 
their inability (as degenerate creatures) to keep his law without a 
restitution to perfection-his likeness. 

Meanwhile Love stood ready to act at the moment Wisdom should 
give the word. It would have acted at once but for two reasons; 
First, it could not oppose or interfere with the action of Justice in 
condemning man and delivering him over for the execution of the 
prescribed penalty— death. Secondly, Love might have 
acknowledged Justice and approved its action by promptly 
providing a ransom [an equivalent price], but Wisdom objected and 
would not permit this course at that time, because it saw best to 
make the lesson complete and thorough. 

Hence for over four thousand years Love was not permitted to act, 
and might only speak in shadowy sacrifices and ceremonies, and 
more or less obscure promises. But finally when the right time had 
come, "in due time," "in the fullness of time," Wisdom gave the 
word and Love began to act in man's relief. The first act was to 
produce a perfect and sinless man to be a suitable "ransom for all," 
and it must be one not under the Adamic curse, who would lay 
down his life for the race, and whose sacrifice would meet all the 
requirements of justice, and therefore be acceptable as a ransom 
and propitiation for our sins. And Love's great exhibition was seen 
in the gift of the grandest, and greatest, and first of all God's 
creation, who became a man to redeem men, and "they called his 
name Jesus" when he became a man. 

Ah! says one who judges by his own habits and feelings, Now 
comes Love's victory over Justice. We shall see that God is more 
loving than severe. Not so, my brother; God is not more loving than 
severely just, he is perfect in both respects. It will be indeed a 
victory for Love, but not over Justice. It will be much grander than 
that. It will prove a victory for both Justice and Love; for it will be 
gained by Love's paying the price demanded by Justice-a 
RANSOM, "an equivalent price." 



Thus did the love of God magnify the justice and law of God, and 
"make it honorable," by acknowledging its claims in the payment of 
the very penalty demanded -man's death (Rom. 5:19). 

We need scarcely say, that the love of God so long veiled from 
sight, was manifested in the gift of his Son to be our Redeemer and 
Saviour. The record is: "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but 
that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation [satisfaction 
or appeasement] for our sins." "IN THIS WAS MANIFESTED 
THE LOVE OF GOD toward us, because that God sent his only 
begotten Son into the world, that we might LIVE through him." (1 
Jno. 4:9,10.) 

When Love had RANSOMED man, and was ready to reveal itself 
by restoring mankind to perfection and harmony with God, Wisdom 
forbade it and declared that a further development of its plan would 
ultimately enhance Love's glory, and perfect the work: that an 
interlude must occur [the Gospel age] in which should be selected 
some from among the redeemed; some sharers in Christ's sufferings 
and reproach, who should be counted worthy to share his glory, and 
be his associates in the execution of LOVE'S TRIUMPH in "the 
restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets." 

Long and faithfully has Love labored, yet all her labor will yet be 
lost, unless in due time Wisdom shall commission POWER to do its 
part in the great plan. 

Power thus far has done almost nothing directly in man's relief. 
Wisdom forbade it until its due time, hence we see it but feebly 
expressed save in the resurrection of our Lord and in the miracles, 
which but shadow forth its coming work. 

Now we are living in the day when Power begins to act, not in 
opposition to Justice, but in harmony with Wisdom, Justice, and 
Love, in crushing out sin and evil, and in legally removing the 
penalty of sin and the dominion of evil, cancelled through the 
ransom paid by Jesus. Oh, blessed day! The Lamb that was slain 
and redeemed us by his blood is now invested with POWER to 
restore and bless all whom he bought, and he is now about to take 
unto himself his great power and shall reign until he hath put all 
enemies in subjection (Rev. 20:6; and 1 Cor. 15:25). 

A thousand years earth's coming glory, 
'Tis the glad time so long foretold, 
'Tis the bright morn of Zion's glory 
Prophets foresaw in times of old. 

Thus God has chosen the plan which most fully and grandly 
exemplified his unalterable justice and exhibited the exceeding 
riches of his grace— his love; and in the restoration of man from 
destruction and death to life and perfection will God's power be 
illustrated far more forcibly than in man's creation. And as men and 
angels come to recognize the full fruition of God's plan in the ages 



to come will they not with one consent exclaim with our brother 
Paul, as he caught a glimpse of it: O the depths of the riches both of 
the WISDOM and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his 
judgments and his ways past finding out! For who hath known the 
mind [plan] of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor? 
....Because out of him, and through him, and for him are all things. 
To him be the GLORY for ever." (Rom. 1 1:34,36.) 



R704 : page 4 

"THERE is a gift that is almost a blow, and there is a kind word 
that is munificence; so much is there in the way of doing things." 



R704 : page 4 

"NEARNESS of life to the Savior will necessarily involve 
greatness of love to him. As nearness to the sun increases the 
temperature of the various planets, so near and intimate communion 
with Jesus raises the heat of the soul's affections towards him." 



R697 : page 5 

DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OF GOD. 

"The much-diversified wisdom of God" (Eph. 3:10. Diaglott) 
which selected one course with reference to men, chose another 
course with reference to the angels and did not first deliver them 
over to Justice under the extreme penalty of the law, but 
pronounced a lesser penalty until they should have learned of evil 
and its consequences from the example or "spectacle" furnished 
them in mankind. 

But the result of wisdom's course in either case is the same— The 
angels being perfect, and having had an example of the extreme 
penalty of the law will be able and doubtless glad to conform to 
God's law when again offered the opportunity. Man, who 
experienced the extreme penalty of the law, when restored will be 
able to appreciate forever good and evil, and to rightly choose that 
which is good. While both will then be liable to the extreme 
penalty— death— neither need come under it because of a perfect 
appreciation. They will then, as God does, love righteousness 
because it is good and hate unrighteousness because it is wrong. 

Though the experience of angels might at first appear less severe 
than man's, yet when it is remembered that man's dying experience 
was limited to an average of three-score years and ten, while the 
angels who sinned experienced over four thousand years of living 
restraint under Satan's rule, it will generally be conceded that their 
experience was not less severe than man's. 



In view of the great work to be accomplished, how necessary is the 
elevation of the Christ (head and body) to the DIVINE nature, since 
his mission is to govern, direct, and bring to perfection, "whosoever 
will," both of spiritual and human beings. And does not the 
selection of this class, made different both from angels and men— of 
the divine nature —illustrate yet further the much diversified 
wisdom of God, whereby he is able to work all things according to 
the counsel of his own will? 



R700 : page 5 

SHEEP AND GOATS. 

Our answer to some inquiries awakened by the article under this 
caption in the August number, we publish, hoping that they may be 
of use to others who may not have written. 

This parable cannot with any consistency be applied to anything 
which occurred at the first advent of our Lord. Its location is fixed 
by the introductory sentence— "When the Son of Man shall come in 
His GLORY." 

Its location is further fixed by the rule of judgment or trial 
prescribed, viz., works. The positions assigned on the right hand or 
left, are expressly stated to be because (or inasmuch as) certain 
works were done or not done. The test of the trial or judgment of 
the church during the Gospel age is "not works, but faith." By grace 
are ye saved through FAITH. "Not of works lest any man should 
boast." "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." Mark 
16:16. 

The reason for this may be readily seen: To test men by works in 
the Gospel age while under the dominion of the Prince of this 
world, and greatly crippled by the imperfections of our fallen 
nature, would be a very unfair standard. Hence, though now works 
according to our ability must naturally follow faith, our justification 
and reward are according to our faith, and not according to our 
works. 

In the coming age the circumstances will be very different. With 
Satan bound, evil and error restrained, the clear light of truth 
shining, driving away all obscurity, mist, darkness and error, and 
consequently driving away all room and opportunity for doubt, faith 
will become the possession of all mankind: all will know the Lord 
from the least to the greatest. Therefore we may see the 
reasonableness of the Scripture teaching that the test in the next age 
will not be faith, which none could then avoid, but works, which 
under those favorable circumstances should result from the 
knowledge and opportunities then afforded. 

We know of no statement of Scripture relative to the world's trial 
during the Millennial age, which mentions any other test of 



approval than that of works. Of course, this will imply and include 
a previous faith in the ransom. Works will be the test of judgment 
in that age as faith is the test in this. 

Works was the basis of the Law covenant, which with its mediator- 
Moses, was a shadow or type of the good things coming-the New 
Covenant and its mediator —Christ. And thus Moses wrote of 
Christ, saying: "A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto 
you of your brethren like unto me. Him shall ye hear in all things: 
and it shall come to pass that every soul [person] that will not hear 
[heed] that prophet shall be destroyed from among the people. 
(Acts 3:22,23.) This shows obedience (works) to be the basis of the 
antitypical covenant-the "New." 

The Apocalypse teaches the same lesson regarding the world's trial 
in the Millennial age, when the present thrones 

R701 : page 5 

are cast down and the rulership of earth is handed over to the saints, 
(Rev. 20:4;) when Satan is restrained (ver. 2); when the glorious 
New Jerusalem (heavenly kingdom) has come to rule the earth in 
harmony with the laws of heaven; and when the nations are being 
guided and directed by the light of truth shed abroad from it, (Rev. 
21:23,24.) When the books (of Scripture) are opened, and their 
teachings made clear and plain to all, and another book or record of 
those worthy of life-everlasting is open for recording the names of 
those who then shall be the Lord's "sheep," and worthy, as shown in 
the parable, to enjoy his favor and everlasting life;* when the 
GREAT WHITE THRONE, representative of purity, justice, 
fairness and impartiality of the TRIAL, when all the world-small 
and great shall be tried by Him that sitteth upon the throne, the 
basis of that judgment or trial is expressly stated in these words, 
"And they were judged every man according to their works." Rev. 
20:13. 

In perfect harmony then, is the teaching of Jesus in the parable 
under consideration. Love and its fruit, good works, will be the 
ground upon which the sheep of that age will be rewarded; and 
failure to develop and exercise these, under such favorable 
circumstances, is the peculiarity of the wayward "goat" class, 
condemned as unworthy of life— to be cut off— to die. God deems 
them unworthy of life, and our hearts and minds bow to his all-wise 
decision, "Every soul which will not hear that prophet shall be 
destroyed from among the people." Acts 3:23. 

Let it not be forgotten that the Millennial trial according to works, 
and ability of those being tried to render works of merit and 
approval, is based upon their redemption from the Adamic curse, by 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. Had it not been for that 
redemption there never would be a Millennial age of blessing and 
trial for the dead race. There could have been neither awakening or 
trial had we not been bought with His precious blood. 



Does not the reading of Matt. 25:41, indicate torture in literal fire as 
the merit of the "goat" class? No, not a word is mentioned about 
torture. The thought of torture has been added to the statement by 
some whose theories it fitted, without any authority, except that 
they infer torture as a result of contact with fire. But fire is not used 
as a symbol of torture, but of destruction. God under the Law 
shadows never permitted Israel to torture any creature, though he 
frequently commanded things and dead carcasses to be burned with 
fire as a symbol of utter DESTRUCTION. It is this significance that 
we attach to fire in this verse— destruction. To apply it literally 
would be out of harmony with the entire parable— the fire is not 
more literal fire than are the goats literal goats. Everlasting fire then 
would signify everlasting or non-ending destruction. 

"PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND HIS ANGELS. " 

Is it true that this fire or DESTRUCTION which will take place at 
the close of the Millennial age and in which the "goat" class will 
share— was prepared or designed, for the Devil and his angels? Yes, 
thus it is written, and so we believe. It is stated in so many words. 1 
John 3:8; Heb. 2:14. 

"His angels"— the word here translated angels signifies messengers, 
and the Diaglott so translates it. We do not understand it to refer to 
those fallen angels now associated with Satan— "Those angels 
which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation," etc., 
(Jude 6) but we apply the word on a more general principle. Satan 
will be bound at the close of the Gospel age, and all under his 
control will be released. But those who during the trial of the 
Millennial age will not become willing and obedient servants of the 
Lord, are reckoned His adversaries— the messengers and 
accomplices [angels] of the great adversary, Satan; and into 
destruction such are cast— the devil and his angels. It was prepared 
for them. Such, and such only, did God from all eternity design to 
blot from existence as unworthy the boon of life. 

Does the word everlasting in verse 46 indicate that the punishment 
will last forever? It certainly does. When some one told you that the 
Greek word aionian, here rendered everlasting, had not such a 
meaning, but always meant a limited period of time, they 
misinformed you, and merely applied a definition common to a sect 
called "Adventists," but nevertheless an error. It is true that the 
words aion and aionian sometimes are used to refer to a limited 
period of time— an age, epoch, or lifetime, but it is equally a fact 
that these words are used sometimes to represent an unlimited or 
"everlasting" time, and that it is so used in this verse there is no 
room for question or controversy. It is settled by the use of the same 
word to the righteous— they go into life EVERLASTING or 
"aionian"— the same Greek word being used. This fact is obscured 
in the common version by reason of the translators having used a 
different English word— eternal. The passage declares the same 
length of punishment (destruction, as shown above) to the goat 



class, as of reward to the righteous sheep, and if Adventists and 
Universalists claim that aionian here always means a limited period, 
they should, to be consistent, hope only for a life of limited duration 
for the righteous, since the same Greek word is used in reference to 
both. 

Is it true that the word "cursed" in verse 41 in the original Greek 
means merely unblessed or less blessed? 

By no means; the Greek word here translated cursed is kataraomai. 
It signifies the very opposite of blessing; it signifies a curse in the 
sense usually understood in the English. Webster defines cursed 
thus: Deserving a curse; execrable; hateful; detestable; abominable. 
Apply any of these synonyms in the place of cursed in the language 
of the text and see what kind of a blessing it would be. The same 
Greek word is used with reference to the cursed fig tree in Mark 
11:21, Also in Luke 6:28, Rom. 12:14 and James 3:9. And the same 
root word, katara, is used three times with reference to the original 
curse or condemnation resting upon all who failed to keep perfectly 
the requirements of the law of God in Gal. 3:10-13. If the curse 
lifted by Jesus' death was severe, then the curse imposed by him 
upon those called "goats" in the parable, is severe, and in no sense a 
blessing. As a matter of fact, the first curse which came upon all 
men through Adam's disobedience was death— cutting off from life- 
- and to purchase for man a right to live again, Jesus needed to be 
and was "made a curse for us"— cut off from life, treated as the 
sinner, as our substitute, that we might be restored to life and made 
the righteousness of God through him. (2 Cor. 5:21.) If, then, the 
Adamic death was a curse from which none could be released 
without a Redeemer, what must it imply to receive the curse again, 
and from the lips of the Redeemer? It implies, what other Scriptures 
state, that those who shall refuse to hear and heed that Prophet shall 
be cut off. The fact that he who redeemed and will bless by 
bringing all to a knowledge of the truth, with full opportunity for 
life everlasting, will be the one to say "Depart ye cursed" declares 
plainly that their trial will then be ended. He redeemed from the 
curse once, but "Christ dieth no more." (Rom. 6:9.) 



*Evidently the "other sheep" as also another "book of life" from 
that of the Gospel age. (John 10:16 and Rev. 20:12.) 



R697 : page 5 

SHALL NEVER DIE. 

"I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me though 
he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth 
in me shall never die." John 1 1:26. 



These were Jesus' words of consolation to Martha. They state 
briefly man's future hopes in, and because of the redemption that is 
in Christ Jesus. Let us analyze the statement, and, if possible, gain 
its full import. 

The first statement— "He that believeth in me, though he were dead, 
yet shall he live," teaches that only believers shall be resurrected— 
made to "LIVE." This may appear out of harmony with other 
statements of our Lord to the effect that ALL in their graves shall 
"come forth," until we recognize the full force of the words, 
RESURRECTION and LIVE. We have heretofore shown that the 
word resurrect signifies to lift or raise up again to perfection, and 
that since man's fall was from perfection, as represented in Adam, 
his resurrection would imply a bringing to perfection again. But 
many Scriptures indicate that while the gospel Church will be lifted 
to the perfection of the new nature in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye, the world will be resurrected, or brought to perfection of 
their human nature, gradually, the entire Millennial age being the 
times of resurrection, or restoration. 

Now, we shall find in the scripture under consideration, that by 
recognizing a similar fullness of meaning in the word "LIVE," we 
have the statement clear and easily understood, and in harmony 
with all other Scriptures. 

To LIVE means a great deal, in its full import. Adam and Eve lived, 
i.e., had life in perfect measure, before sin entered. When death 
entered and the dying commenced, it was a process of ceasing to 
live-so death, the opposite of life passed upon all men. Hence, 
looked at from God's standpoint, all are dead, and none alive. (2 
Cor. 5:14; Matt. 8:22.) So then though it is true that all in their 
graves shall "come forth," they will come forth with a small 
measure of life, such as men now have, still measurably in death. 
[The most hale of the race today, enjoy but a fragment of perfect 
life,] in which condition all shall come to a knowledge of the truth, 
and whosoever believeth in the Ransomer though dead, "yet shall 
he LIVE." Belief in the ransom being necessary to the full 
acquirement of the favor purchased-LIFE. 

In perfect accord with this view (and no other) is that peculiar 
statement of John 5:25: Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is 
coming when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and 
they that hear shall LIVE." [Sinaitic MS. omits "and now is" in this 
text.] According to the general conception this should read, they 
that live shall hear, but this would not have been in harmony with 
the plan,-not true; hence the peculiar and guarded expression used, 
only appreciable as we come to see more deeply into God's plans 
for that coming age. All are dead-under death's dominion —it has 
passed upon all. The Redeemer has come, the ransom has been 
paid, and in due time all the dead shall hear [be brought to a clear 
conception of it] and they that hear [receive, or grasp it] shall [in 
due time] LIVE, reach perfection of life-being. A few who were of 
the dead class, have heard more or less distinctly in this age of the 



ransom price given for our release. Those who have heard it, could 
also AFTERWARD HEAR, of a prize or high calling 

R697 : page 6 

being offered during the Gospel age to believing sacrificers, and 
thus have "access into THIS GRACE, wherein we stand and rejoice 
in hope of the GLORY of God." But the due time in which the great 
mass of the dead shall hear, will be when the "little flock" has 
attained the glory, and as Members of the great Prophet shall teach 
and bless the people, bringing them out of their graves or opening 
sin-blinded eyes and prejudice-stopped ears, as it is written. (Isa. 
35:5.) 

Let us now examine the second part of Jesus' statement: 
"Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." 

In the light of the previous statement, this one becomes very clear 
and simple. It is the Lord's assurance that any who reach the 
condition of LIFE, may retain it forever, if they shall forever 
continue believers. It is the promise of Everlasting Life. 



R701 : page 6 

CLOTHED AND UNCLOTHED. 

"For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, 
eternal in the heavens."— 2 Cor. 5:1. 

This is a blessed and comforting assurance to those consecrated 
saints who in fulfilling their covenant of self-sacrifice, realize daily 
that the "earthly house," or "earthen vessel" is dissolving. Such 
have a building of God [a new or spiritual body prepared for them] 
eternal in the heavens. But, this Scripture is only applicable to those 
who by sacrifice of the human nature have become "new 
creatures"— partakers of the divine nature. 

To this class, the human body has become, as it were, a house or 
temporary dwelling place for the new mind, the begotten new 
creature. Of the world this is not true; they are not new creatures, 
and the body is part of themselves and not a house. They have no 
new nature to maintain in the human conditions for a time, nor are 
they ever to be clothed with a heavenly, the spiritual body. 

The world is in due time to be delivered from its present bondage to 
sin and death, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, i.e., into 
freedom from corruption (death), but not to the spiritual nature and 
body. Their hope is restitution to human perfection, while that of 
the Church is the completion of our change of nature from human 
to spiritual. Our new nature, is burdened by the frailties and 
imperfections of the human and longs for full perfection as a new 
creature, remembering that the full fellowship of the Lord cannot be 
obtained before that change. Hence walking by faith we long for the 



house from heaven, a spiritual body adapted to the desires, etc., of 
the new mind. "In this tabernacle [or house] we groan, earnestly 
desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven." 

"For, we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not 
for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality 
might be swallowed up of life." The unclothed or death condition, 

R702 : page 6 

is not desirable though the majority of the Church had to remain in 
that condition for many years. Paul, when ready to be offered, must 
wait for the crown laid up for him, but not to be received until the 
day of Christ's appearing. (2 Tim. 4:8.) 

"Now he that hath wrought us for this self-same thing is God, who 
also hath given unto us the earnest of the spirit." We are begotten of 
God for the very purpose of being developed and born into the 
spiritual likeness, and the fact that we now realize that we have his 
spirit [leading us to sacrifice the earthly] is evidence that in due 
time we shall be born in the spiritual likeness— made like unto 
Christ's glorious body. 

Therefore we are always confident and willing rather to be absent 
from the body and to be present with the Lord. 

It is now, the privilege of the saints to be ushered into the presence 
of the Lord as soon as the earthly body is laid down, as we read, 
"Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforth." (Rev. 
14:13. See TOWER for April 1883.) 

Though this was the thing desired by all the saints during this age, it 
was not the privilege of any until this time of the Lord's presence. 
But it was the privilege of all to be always confident, knowing that 
after the earthly house should be dissolved— in God's due time, they 
should be clothed upon with the heavenly house, the spiritual body, 
swallowed up of life. Amen, so let it be. R. W. 



R702 : page 6 

THE GOSPEL THEME. 

"And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of 
heaven suffereth violence and the violent take it by force. " Matt. 
11:12. 

There is to-day more of what is commonly considered Gospel 
preaching than at any previous time in the world's history. From 
thousands of pulpits it is heard twice every Lord's day, and again at 
the mid-week meetings, while thousands of printing presses are 
preaching through weekly and monthly periodicals, and millions of 
tracts, pamphlets, and books. And added to all this, there are the 
extra efforts of what are termed lay-evangelists, Christian 
associations, salvation armies, etc. 



But as we listen to the many, many voices, we hear sounds 
strangely out of harmony with the commission of the great Head of 
the church, whose leading these all profess to follow. It would seem 
that if the commission was ever heard by this great army of 
preachers, it must have been forgotten. What was it? Hearken again 
to the Master's voice: "Go.. .and as ye go, preach, saying, The 
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." (Matt. 10:6,7.) And again "Let the 
dead bury their dead; but go thou and preach the kingdom of God." 
(Luke 9:60). And the Lord's disciples are taught also not only to 
preach-to publicly proclaim the coming of the kingdom of God, 
but to pray for it, saying: "Thy kingdom come-thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven." 

If that prayer is ever to be answered— and it certainly will be, since 
he who dictated it could not err, and would not teach us to ask for 
anything out of harmony with Jehovah's will— then there will come 
a time, when the kingdom of God will be actually SET UP in the 
earth, and when as a consequence of the setting up of that kingdom, 
His will shall be done ON EARTH, even as it is done in heaven. 
You who have so frequently declared your firm belief in answer to 
prayer, do you believe this? Shall not this united prayer of all the 
saints for nearly nineteen centuries past, dictated by the unerring 
wisdom of our Lord, be answered? Most assuredly it will. 

The coming of the kingdom of God, and the things pertaining to 
that kingdom —the death of Christ as the necessary preliminary 
work to its introduction, and the resurrection of Christ, the 
assurance and pledge of it, was the great theme of the Apostles' 
preaching, and the inspiring hope of the early church. 

When John the Baptist came preaching repentance, it was with the 
strong incentive, never before offered, "The kingdom of heaven is 
at hand." Jesus preached the same truth, saying, "Repent, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." And this was the spirit of the 
teaching of all the Apostles. Men generally desire to be in favor 
with the ruling power, and the coming kingdom of heaven meant a 
coming reign of righteousness, wherein the righteous would prosper 
and the wicked would be punished. If the kingdom was at hand, 
then how natural and proper to urge it as an incentive to repentance 
and righteousness. 

Ever since the fall repentance had been preached: but none before 
John were commissioned to preach the kingdom of God at hand, 
and other truths relative to it. This is the Gospel, the good news not 
made known in other ages. As Jesus said, "The law and the 
prophets were until John; since that time the kingdom of God is 
preached" [Sinaitic MS. omits with evident propriety the words 
"and every man presseth into it."] But the law and the prophets 
though shadowing forth and foretelling the coming kingdom, could 
never be clearly understood until the Gospel unraveled their 
mysteries. 



Was it in any sense a fact, that the kingdom of heaven was at hand 
in John's day? Nearly nineteen centuries have passed since, and still 
the powers of darkness reign and the kingdom of heaven is not yet 
SET UP. Still the wicked flourish and the righteous are oppressed. 
If we consider the expression as referring to the setting up of the 
kingdom in power and glory, it was true, and Jesus' words in John 
16:16 will help us to understand the statement. To his disciples, 
when about to leave them, he said, "A little while, and ye shall not 
see me: and again, a little while and ye shall see me;" and the little 
while has been the entire Gospel age. 

Ah yes, it is a little while from God's standpoint, with whom a 
thousand years is but as one day. (2 Pet. 3:8). From God's 
standpoint, and we are invited to take the same position of 
observation, it was but a "little while" to the second advent of 
Christ and the establishment of his kingdom. The kingdom was just 
at hand, and the king about to be anointed for his glorious reign. 
And if this was true in John's day, how emphatically true is it at the 
present time to which the prophecies point as the hour that just 
precedes the dawn of the glorious day of that reign! Jesus did not 
explain to the early Church just how long God's "little while" 
should be, as it would have seemed a very long time to them. 

But it would seem that in some sense, the kingdom of heaven had 
an existence in John's day; for Jesus said, "From the days of John 
the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence and 
the violent take it by force. " Since the kingdom when set up cannot 
suffer, but must reign triumphantly, we conclude that the text refers 
to those elements of the kingdom in existence, and being developed 
during this age. 

In John's day, Jesus, the Lord's anointed, was present, and he and 
the few disciples who then received him as their Lord, were then 
the only elements of the kingdom; but during the Gospel age others 
have become subject to him; and his reign of righteousness has 
been over them to mould and fashion them according to the divine 
will. So far as the imperfections of the flesh permit, God's will is 
done by these as it is done in heaven. It should be clearly manifest 
that none but those who are entirely consecrated to God, are of this 
kingdom, though many claim to be and think they are of it, who do 
not claim entire consecration. 

The subjects of Christ, the heavenly king, hearken to, and obey his 
voice. They do not turn every man to his own way and plan 
regardless of the Commander's instructions, though the command is 
to march through danger, privations, loss and suffering. But to 
those who recognize Jesus as king and become subject to him 
before his glory and power are manifested, there are exceeding 
great and precious promises, to be realized when his kingdom is set 
up. They shall be accounted worthy to reign with him. It was to 
give to this class the privilege of suffering and as a result, of 
reigning with Christ, that the kingdom began to be preached so long 
before it was to be actually SET UP or established in power. 



Of this class only, are our Lord's words first quoted true. These 
suffer violence at the hands of the present reigning power of this 
world-Satan, and the subjects of his kingdom, and the pages of 
history from the days of John the Baptist until now, present the dark 
record of the violence suffered by those who are of the kingdom of 
heaven. 

Violence persecuted and crucified our King, stoned Stephen his 
faithful martyr, beheaded Paul, crucified Peter, roasted others by 
fire, tossed them on piercing forks, and heaped upon them every 
indignity that fiendish wickedness could devise. And even in these 
days, when the "salt of the earth" (See July issue) has to some 
extent purified human society, and counteracted the terrible 
influence of Satan's reign, still the kingdom of heaven suffers 
violence. Their names are cast out as evil, they are despised and 
rejected; their business interests suffer, and they are counted as 
fools and fanatics. The violent take the kingdom by force— With 
overwhelming force of numbers and wealth they subdue the little 
handful of the saints, trample and crush their influence, and hinder 
the progress and spread of the heavenly kingdom. Thus by the 
dominion of evil, is made possible for the Church, a baptism into 
suffering, even unto death. 

R703 : page 6 

But is this all so, because the Heavenly King lacks the power, and 
is unable to bring victory to his faithful followers? This reminds us 
of the words of Jesus when about to perform the symbol of his 
death- "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us [himself and 
his church] to fulfill all righteousness "-the righteousness of God's 
law which required this sacrifice. 

God is able, and will bring victory to the tried and faithful few who 
have been loyal subjects of his kingdom in these stormy times. 
These we are told are to be kings, and priests, and joint-heirs of the 
throne with Jesus Christ, when in due time the kingdom of heaven 
is SET UP— placed in control. Though the violent prince of this 
world lays them all low in death, the power of the Almighty will 
bring them forth to certain victory. 

We would call special attention to the date Jesus mentions in the 
text. It dates "from the days of John the Baptist." 

Other children of God, preceding the day of John the Baptist, 
suffered in like manner as those who have suffered since. But 
notice, Jesus does not say, From the days of John the Baptist the 
children of God suffer violence, but the kingdom of heaven 
suffereth violence. Then those children of God who lived before 
that time were not of that kingdom to which Jesus referred-the 
kingdom of Christ. How could they be, when as yet there was no 
king anointed? 

The kingdom of heaven then began to have an existence when Jesus 
was anointed to be the King-at the time of his Baptism-"in the 



days of John the Baptist," after which time as John said, he began to 
decrease (in influence) and Christ to increase. Though ever since 
then, his kingdom has been in existence, yet this has been the time 
of its humiliation and affliction; its littleness and poverty have 
made it the subject of contempt and ridicule, while its unwavering 
opposition to the spirit of the world, has incurred their hatred and 
persecution. 

So it was also true in John's day that the kingdom of heaven was 
then at hand —about to come in the sense mentioned. But to-day it 
is true in a still more glorious sense; for the time for the setting up 
and exaltation of the kingdom is at hand. The prayer of these loyal 
subjects henceforth to be joint-heirs of the throne with Jesus, the 
king, is about to be answered. His kingdom is just about to come, in 
its glory and power, and the blessed outcome of the victory of that 
kingdom, will be, that God's will shall be done in earth as it is done 
in heaven. 

If then, we would be faithful to him who has called us to preach, let 
us see to it that we preach the Gospel (good news) of the kingdom, 
and that we be not diverted from it by any side issues. The 
kingdom, and things pertaining to the kingdom— its character, its 
permanence, its sure foundation, its blessed influence, and the 
cheering and inspiring fact that its setting up in glory and power is 
just at hand, should be the theme of every true servant of God. And 
if we have been faithful disciples of the Master we cannot be 
ignorant of these things, and if we know them how can we refrain 
from telling them. "Go ...and as ye go preach, saying, the 
KINGDOM OF HEAVEN is at hand." 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R703 : page 6 

A JEWISH-CHRISTIAN MOVEMENT IN RUSSIA. 

A most remarkable religious movement is in progress among the 
Jews in Southern Russia. It is nothing more nor less than the 
establishment of Jewish-Christian congregations among the Jews, 
which are to be in connection with none of the Christian religious 
communions as at present existing, but are to constitute a peculiar 
Christian association in close connection with Jewish customs and 
manners, and with the rejection of all Gentile-Christian dogmas. 
The soul of the movement is a Jewish 

R703 : page 7 

lawyer, Joseph Rabinowitz, a man of high reputation among his 
people. For many years the social and religious status of his people 
has been an object of deep concern to him, and in 1880 he 
published a program in which he advocated a complete 
reorganization of the Rabbinical system. He was further active in 



the work of a society for the promotion of agriculture among the 
Jews of Southern Russia; and during the days of persecution in 
1882 earnestly advocated the return of his people to Palestine. 
During that period the change in his religious convictions took 
place. It was not the result of Christian mission work, nor is he a 
convert in the ordinary sense of the word. The change was 
gradually effected, and only after long deliberation did the thought 
of organizing Christian congregations of the Jewish nationality 
assume maturity in his mind. After his return from Palestine his 
conviction was: "The key to the Holy Land lies in the hands of our 
brother Jesus." In the words "Jesus our Brother" lies the kernel of 
his religious views. His work has been successful, and now there 
are no less than two hundred families adhering to this new Jewish 
Christianity, and recently the Pesach festival was celebrated in 
accordance with the liturgy drawn up by Rabinowitz. 

Prof. Franz Delitzsch, of Leipzig, the leader of Jewish missions in 
Germany and editor of the Saat auf Hofnung, a quarterly devoted to 
this work, has just published a pamphlet of about seventy-five 
pages on this new religious development, the largest space in which 
is occupied by original documents, in both the Hebrew and the 
German translation, on this movement. These documents embrace 
thirteen theses: a confession of Faith of the National Jewish Church 
of the New Testaments; an Explanation of the Faith in the Messiah, 
Jesus of Nazareth, in the sense of this congregation; a Haggada for 
the Israelites believing on the Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth; and, 
finally, an Order of the Lord's Supper. As appendices are added a 
declaration of a teacher, Friedmann, to the Jewish believers in 
Christ, and a declaration adopted by a conference of the latter, held 
in March of the present year in Kischinew. The little pamphlet thus 
contains all the materials for a study of the new movement, as these 
are all original documents by its advocates. 

The theses, which are to be regarded as the basis of the new faith, 
start out with the deplorable state of the Jews in Russia, and 
maintain that the endeavors at improvement on the part of the Jews 
themselves have proved futile. "There is need of a deep and inner 
moral renewal, of a spiritual regeneration. We must cast aside our 
false gods, the love of money as such, and in the room thereof must 
establish in our hearts a home for the love of truth as such, and for 
the fear of evil as such." For this, however, a leader is necessary. 
Who is he to be? In Israel none can be found. "The man who 
possesses all the qualifications of a leader— love of Israel, 
sacrificing of life, pureness, deep knowledge of human nature, 
earnestness in the exposal of the sins and evils of his people-we 
have, after careful research in all the books of the history of our 
people, found only in one man, in Jesus of Nazareth." The wise 
Israelites in his day could not understand him; "but we, in the 
present year (5644) can say with a certainty that he, Jesus, he alone 
has sought the welfare of his brethren. Therefore we should sanctify 
the name of our brother Jesus." "We should receive the gospel 
books into our houses as a blessing, and unite them with all the 



Holy Scriptures which were handed down to us by our wise men." 
The last thesis reads: "We hope confidently that the words of our 
brother Jesus will bring us, as fruit, righteousness and salvation; 
and then the hearts of the people and the government will be turned 
to us in friendship, we shall have life and prosperity like other 
nations who live in safety under the shadow of European laws, 
framed in the spirit of our brother, who has given his life in order to 
make the world happy and remove evil from the earth! Amen." 

The rest of these documents are in the same vein, and all show that 
the movement is, as yet, guided by an undefined and crude idea. 
The Jewish character is stamped on its brow; but who will deny that 
great possibilities lie, in germ, in it? It will, doubtless, be wise to 
heed Delitzsch's admonition to withhold judgment for the present 
and await further developments. He closes his preface to his 
pamphlet with the words, "Spoil it not. There is a blessing in it."— 
N.Y. Independent. 

Bishop Titcomb, of the English church in Northern and Central 
Europe, in a letter to the London Times, mentions this same 
movement, and gives the following as one of the most noteworthy 
of a series of articles of faith which they have drawn up: 

"According to the decree of the inscrutable wisdom of God, our 
fathers were filled with hardness of heart, and the Lord punished 
them with the spirit of deep sleep, so that they opposed Jesus Christ 
and sinned against him until the present day. But by their unbelief 
they led other nations to greater zeal, and they thus contributed to 
the propitiation of mankind, who have believed in Jesus Christ, the 
son of David, our king, when they heard the good tidings through 
the peace-promising messengers (Isaiah 52:7), who had been 
disgracefully expelled from communion with Israel. In 
consequence, however, of this our sin against the Christ of God, the 
world has grown rich by its faith in Christ, and the nations in 
fullness have entered the kingdom of God. Now, too, the time of 
our fullness has also come, and we, the seed of Abraham, are to be 
blessed by our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; and the God of our 
forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, will take pity upon us and 
replant the branches which have been torn out, into our own Holy 
Root— Jesus. And thus all Israel shall share the eternal salvation, 
and Jerusalem, our Holy City, shall be rebuilt and the throne of 
David be reestablished forever and evermore." 



R704 : page 7 

OUR JUDGMENT. 

FROM THE DIVINE AND HUMAN STANDPOINTS. 

For the time past... may suffice us to have wrought the will of the 
Gentiles. ..wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them 
...speaking evil of you.. ..For this cause the gospel was preached 



also, to them that are dead, that they might be judged, according to 
men— in the flesh, but according to God in the Spirit.— 1 Pet. 4:3-6. 

Our explanation of the above Scripture is asked. We understand 
verse 5 to be a parenthesis, and hence in arriving at the direct chain 
of the Apostle's argument, it should be for the time ignored. To 
bring the important points of the argument closer together, we have 
arranged the quotation as above. 

The consecrated child of God has not only realized justification 
from sin through Jesus' imputed righteousness, but in his 
consecration he has given up —sacrificed— his justified human 
nature, and henceforth, according to God's instruction, he reckons 
himself no longer of the human nature, but a "new creature in 
Christ Jesus," a partaker "of the divine nature." And God so reckons 
him. 

Hence God judges of such, not according to the flesh, but according 
to their spirit or mind, and as new creatures, spiritual; while by men 
this class is misunderstood, for they think of you as of other men— 
in the flesh— and hence think strange that you are not controlled by 
the same desires and ambition as themselves. 

It was to produce this very distinction in you that the gospel was 
preached to you, who are dead to the world, that you might have 
Christ formed within you— his mind and principles, and that thus 
you might be so different from the world, that they, not 
appreciating the real cause of the change, but still regarding you as 
"of the fleshy nature," may think strange of you and misconstrue 
your motives, and hate you, and buffet you, and thus try you and 
make you meet for the inheritance of the saints in light. 
Nevertheless, remember that God recognizes you as a new creature, 
and will judge of all your course accordingly. You may know then, 
that your faith and patience he will appreciate, and that "your labor 
is not in vain in the Lord." 



R704 : page 7 

A SECOND CHANCE. 

A subscriber sends us the following extract from a paper, which 
attempts to demolish Peter's statement, that following our Lord's 
second advent there will be "times of RESTITUTION of all things, 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, 
(Acts 3:21). It says: 

"Now the trouble about all this is found in the fact that such 
teachers as John the Baptist and our Lord appear to have known 
nothing about this "second chance." John's text was "Repent, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." He spoke of the ax being laid at the 
root of the tree. He referred to One coming with a fan in his hand, 
gathering the wheat into his garner, but burning the chaff. Jesus 



took the same text, and indorsed the doctrines of John most 
positively. In his parable about Dives and Lazarus nothing appears 
looking to a "second chance": and, in the sentence pronounced in 
the Judgment scene, nothing favors the theory in question. One of 
two things is very certain: either Jesus and John knew nothing of 
probation after death, or if they did, they trifled with their hearers; 
for nobody who heard them preach, had any other impression than 
that now was the accepted time, and to-day the day of salvation." 

If a man should pick up an almanac and read throughout, its 
description of the weather to be expected from January to 
December, and should apply all its predictions of frost, hail, snow, 
rain, and thunderstorms to a single July day he would obtain but an 
imperfect idea of the kind of weather to be expected. Yet not more 
mixed than this seems the indiscriminate use of Scripture 
statements by the writer of the above and others. Truths concerning 
the next age are mixed with those of the past and present, and the 
result is great confusion, and a selection of such parts from all as 
will best suit preconceived ideas. We cannot suppose that a man 
who had the first idea of what the symbols— ax, tree, garner, chaff, 
wheat, fan, etc., mean would apply them as they are used above, or 
blend them in any way with the parable of Dives and the Judgment 
scene of Matt. 25. 

Let us pull straight the tangle before considering a "second chance." 

Both our Lord and John were speaking of the Jewish polity, when 
they compared it to a tree at whose root lay an ax. The end of 
special favor to that nation had about come, and if in the little while 
of Jesus' ministry they should fail to bring forth good fruit, they 
would be cut off from the root of promise, and believers from the 
Gentiles would be grafted in instead, (Rom. 11:17). It was the 
harvest time; for their age had reached its full. Jesus was present to 
select with his "fan" of truth, the wheat from among the chaff and 
"garner" it in the Gospel age, while a time of "fire" or tribulation 
came upon the chaff remainder of the nation, and as a nation, 
burned them up. 

Dives, a representative, in parable, of that people, so long peculiarly 
favored of God, faring sumptuously every day of God's special 
favors, has for some time been looking longingly for aid to the 
Gentile whom once he despised, but who now has been exalted to 
favor— Abraham's Bosom— and though once wild and ungoverned, 
has become the favored branch out of the Abrahamic olive root of 
promise. 

The Judgment scene referred to (Matt. 25), is the only point which 
bears at all upon the question of "second chance." It applies to the 
Millennial age, and is clearly described as being after the Lord has 
come the second time and established his kingdom (church) in 
power and great glory. Then the nations shall be judged or tried and 
rewarded, (Matt. 25:32.) When that scene has transpired, there will 
assuredly be no hope of further trial-no further chance. 



Let us now hastily glance at the statement made in the above— "John 
the Baptist and our Lord appear to have known nothing about this 
'second chance.'" 

Our Lord certainly knew that because of one man's transgression, 
sin and death had passed upon all men (Rom. 5:16,18), 
consequently man's FIRST CHANCE in Eden had resulted in total 
loss. He failed and lost all in the first chance, being tried 
representatively in Adam. All were condemned. That Jesus knew 
this, and came into the world to redeem all men in order that all 
men might have a SECOND CHANCE, is clear, from his statement 
that he came "to seek and to save that which was lost." 

As the expression, "which was lost," tells the tale of the first chance 
and its failure, so the words "seek and save" proclaim a second 
chance to all the lost. 

Who can reasonably dispute that the opportunity which comes 
through Jesus is a second chance? You and I had nothing whatever 
to do in the first chance of life offered to the race; we have to do 
only with the second. If then, you and I, fellow-believers, got our 
present or second chance of life through the ransom that Jesus gave 
for our sins, redeeming us from the first loss, shall we say that he 
was a ransom only for the small minority of mankind who have 
thus far heard of it and believed? or shall we conclude that "He is 
the propitiation [satisfaction or covering] for our sins; and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD"? (1 Jno. 
2:2.) 

Accepting this as the truth, is it not absolutely certain that the nine- 
tenths who have not yet heard, and hence not yet had the "second 
chance" Jesus' death was designed to provide, will surely have it in 
God's due time? Is not this fact clearly stated by the Apostle Paul 
when he says that Jesus "gave himself a RANSOM [equivalent 
price] for ALL, to be testified in due time"? 

The gospel age now closing is not the world's due time; it is the 
time appointed for the selection or election of a little flock out from 
the world, who, with Jesus, shall soon take (the "purchased 
possession") the dominion of earth out of the hands of Satan, the 
present "Prince," and give judgment or trial to the world-its second 
trial— the great blessing so long promised. The great Prophet shall, 
in that Millennial day, speak to the people, and "they that hear shall 
live," becoming his sheep and coming to his right hand of favor; all 
others, as willful goats, being cut off, (Acts 3:22,23.) And none 
claim more strenuously than we, that now is the acceptable time. 
That the Gospel Age is a special season, during which the Christ — 
the world's deliverer shall be selected, proved and fitted for their 
great work as the Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:29) to bless all the 
families of the earth. Now is the only time to secure this high 
calling. Now is the time of sacrifice, the only time when such 
sacrifices are acceptable to the Lord. 



R705 : page 7 



ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

If our charter is granted in a few days as we expect, voting 
certificates will at once be issued to all whose donations to the 
Society's funds shall aggregate Ten Dollars or more. Each ten dollar 
donation representing one voting share according to our charter. 

A few have evidently misunderstood the matter of obtaining a 
Charter and feared it was either an attempt to obtain protection or 
recognition, from a government of this world; or an evidence of 
lack of trust that God could and would carry forward his own work 
no matter who lived or died. 

These are mistaken ideas. While we trust fully to the Lord's care of 
His own cause, it is our duty to so arrange our affairs and His, that 
in case of one death it would not require miraculous interposition to 
prevent disputes, and law suits from swamping the Society and 
annoying our successors in its management. So far as the 
Government is concerned we ask only those rights which it accords 
to aliens as well as citizens. And a charter such as we are asking for 
is such a right; it brings us under no obligation whatever. 



page 7 

LANDS SELECTED. 

The following plots of the donated Florida land have been 
selected: Please refer to last month's Supplement and cross them 
out:-viz. Plots No. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 30, and 35. 



R705 : page 8 

HOW READEST THOU? 

The doctrine of atonement and reconciliation to God by the death 
of Christ implies that it was his death which constituted the 
reconciling act. It must be conceded that if the natural death of 
Jesus on the cross paid the penalty, then it was natural life only that 
man forfeited by disobedience. If both of these claims be true, then 
all men, according to Scripture, were, on the death of Christ, at 
some time entitled to a resurrection. Now, in the light of these facts, 
we should desire an explanation by substitutionists of 1 Cor. 15:17- 
18. There the Apostle is credited with saying: "If Christ be not 
raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also 
which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished." If the doctrine of 
substitution be true, these two verses cannot be. If, as is claimed, 
the death of Christ paid man's penalty, then, whether Christ be 
raised or not, man could not justly be in his sins. Moreover, if 



Christ's death entitled man to a resurrection, and this, 
substitutionists claim, then neither those in Christ nor out of him 
could have perished because of having previously fallen asleep. — 
Day Star. 

OUR REPLY. 

The force of this expression, "If Christ be not raised, your faith is 
vain; ye are yet in your sins: then they also which are fallen asleep 
in Christ are perished," lies in the fact that if Christ was not raised, 
he was dead, and could have no power to bless the families of earth, 
as he had purposed. The death of Christ as purchasing mankind, 
would still be a grand expression of his love, even though he had 
never arisen from the dead to dispense the blessings which his 
ransom-sacrifice gave the right to bestow; for "Greater love hath no 
man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." But it 
would have been waste and loss to purchase us had he not had in 
view a resurrection, which would enable him to bless those bought. 

But again, according to the types of the sin-offering, If the High 
Priest performed his sacrifice in a manner acceptable, so that its 
sweet perfume filled the Most Holy, then he should LIVE beyond 
the vail and could come forth to bless those for whose sin he had 
made sacrifice; and if he lived not, it was an evidence that his 
sacrifice for sins had not been properly done, and was not 
acceptable to Jehovah, and no blessing nor remission of sins could 
come from such a sacrifice. 

Thus seen, Paul's argument is this: Christian friends, you occupy an 
unreasonable, a ridiculous position when you say (verse 12) that a 
resurrection of the dead is an impossibility. If it is an impossibility, 
then is Christ not risen: and if so, why do you talk about being 
forgiven your sins and having hopes through him for the future? A 
dead Christ— one not raised from death— can never bless you; 
wherefore, if you accept the good news of redemption and blessing 
through Christ, be consistent and admit also a resurrection of Christ 
and the resurrection for all through him. 

Jesus' work for mankind is greater and grander than some seem able 
to grasp. He bought us with his own precious blood— substituting 
himself as a man for the race of men, tasting death for every man. 
But this purchase of mankind was only a means to an end— he 
bought the race that (in due time) he might have the legal right to 
RESTORE it to perfection. Hence, both the death of Christ was 
necessary for our purchase, and his resurrection was essential to the 
carrying out of the blessed plan for our restoration to harmony with 
Jehovah. 

Other statements of the same Apostle prove that he recognized fully 
the necessity both of the death to purchase and of the resurrection to 
confer the blessing upon those purchased. He says of Jesus, "Who 
was delivered [into death] for our offences, and was raised again for 
our justification"— i.e., in order that he might justify us. (Rom. 



4:25.) And again, "If while we were enemies we were reconciled to 
God by the DEATH of his Son, much more [easily believed, is the 
promise that] being reconciled we shall be saved [recovered fully, 
from the imperfections and penalties of sin] by his life. " (Rom. 
5:10.) 

It was impossible for the Apostle, as well as for us, to state every 
feature of the plan at once; hence, in treating of the resurrection in 
the passage above cited by our contemporary, he does not allude to 
the value of the death of Christ. But blind indeed must be the 
reader, if he has not seen that Paul and every other Apostle and 
prophet laid great stress upon the death of Christ as a ransom for 
all, the only BASIS of hope for blessings through him. 

Here let us remind our readers that those who deny that Jesus "gave 
himself a ransom for all" should give some reason for his death— an 
adequate reason for so great an event. To say that he died as we die, 
because of sin and imperfection, is to deny the testimony of 
Scripture, that he was holy, harmless and separate from sinners, and 
had no cause of death in him. To claim that he died merely as our 
example (to show us how to die?) is to furnish an inadequate 
reason, for there are many noble examples furnished in Scripture of 
those who laid down their lives for the truth. (Heb. 1 1:37,38). 

The only adequate reason for Jesus' death is repeated over and over 
again in Scripture, viz. : that we being condemned to death, he took 
our nature that he might "taste death for every man." "He died for 
our sins," "redeemed" us, "purchased" us, "bought us," giving 
himself "a ransom [equivalent price] for all." 



R706 : page 8 

LET TRUTH PREVAIL. 

Latrobe, Pa., Oct. 28th, 1884. 

DEAR BROTHER R.:— I send you by this mail a copy of a paper 
loaned me by an infidel neighbor. When done with it please return 
it to me. 

Read the article headed "Col. Ingersoll Catechized." Somehow I 
can not help feeling an interest in these honest, earnest, truth- 
seeking men far above what I can for the bigoted and superstitious 
upholders of orthodoxy. We believe much in common, and I can 
not help but respect such men as Putman, Ingersoll, and Chainey 
more than many of the preachers in Babylon. They show more 
candor, firmness and honesty. They are more noble. They manifest 
a better spirit, yes, such as Christians might well imitate. Notice 
Ingersoll's reply to the question, "Do you consider that churches are 
injurious to the community?" 

What a moderate yet truthful answer is given, all of which we can 
accept save one word— "miraculous." 



I don't know whether it would be prudent for you to publish the 
article referred to in Z.W.T., but I feel as though I would like every 
one of its readers to see it-knowing how they would appreciate the 
jewels of truth with which it abounds. 

Truly, these are trying times for the Christian blinded by the creeds. 
I cannot see how any of them who will think, investigate, and read, 
can escape infidelity. They can't answer it from their standpoint. 

How glad I am that my eyes were opened in time, else certainly 
such men as Ingersoll could have converted me to infidelity. The 
only safety for the intelligent church member is his bigotry and 
blindness. It keeps him orthodox, but as WE see orthodoxy, it is 
little better than infidelity. In fact both are the result of Spiritual 
blindness. I guess the blindest of the two and the most bigoted, is 
the stickler for orthodoxy. 

Since my return from our pleasant visit with you, I have betimes 
felt homesick. I long to behold him in glory. I long for the reign of 
him who will scatter darkness and ignorance, and bless all with 
truth. 

I have written in haste. "Mid scenes of confusion and creature 
complaints, How sweet to my soul is communion with saints." 

Yours etc., . 

We clip the paragraph referred to by our brother from the 
published interview between Mr. Ingersoll and the Editor of the San 
Franciscan. This is a fair sample of the spirit of the entire 
interview:- 

Question:-Do you consider that churches are injurious to the 
community? 

Ingersoll:-In the exact proportion that churches teach falsehood; in 
the exact proportion that they destroy liberty of the thought, free 
action of the human mind; in the exact proportion that they teach 
the doctrine of eternal pain, and convince people of its truth— they 
are injurious. In the proportion that they teach morality and justice 
and practice kindness and charity— in that proportion they are a 
benefit. Every church, therefore, is a mixed problem— part good and 
part bad. In one direction it leads towards and sheds light; in the 
other direction its influence is entirely bad. 

Now I would like to civilize the churches so that they would be able 
to do good deeds without building bad creeds. In other words, take 
out the superstitious and the miraculous, and leave the human and 
the moral." 

The following letter from another of this class, shows how the spirit 
of candor and reasonableness is appreciated. And we rejoice to 
know that others of doubtful hearts have been and are being led 
through careful study of the harmonious plan of God, as we now 
see it, to exclaim with us "My Lord and my God," and to trust in his 
precious promises. We wait with patience the promised hour when 



all the doubting Thomases will be given tangible evidence of the 
truth of God. 

Behold we bring good tidings of GREAT JOY which shall be to 
ALL PEOPLE. 



New York, Oct. 18, 1884. 

C. T. RUSSELL:— Dear Sir:— My wife is a subscriber to your 
"Watch Tower." I am a free thinker: But I want to thank you for the 
impartial way in which you have treated your opponent Col. 
Ingersoll, in the issue of this month. You have done what I have 
never before seen in a religious journal— before passing criticism 
on what Col. Ingersoll said in his lecture on "Orthodoxy," you have 
squarely, honestly and in a manly way printed what he said, and for 
this act of fairness, I for one wish to express my thanks. I am sir, 

Very truly yours, 



Truth is truth, from whatsoever source it may come; and he who 
loves and cherishes the fragments which he is able to discern 
amidst the rubbish of prevailing error, is ever worthy of our respect 
and esteem. Would that all "Free-thinkers" were free indeed. "The 
truth shall make you free"— "If the Son shall make free ye shall be 
free indeed." 



R706 : page 8 

THE RIDICULOUS SITUATION. 

The following preamble and resolutions have been adopted by the 
Chicago group of the International Association; 

Whereas, many thousands of people in Chicago are hungry because 
of a so-called over production of food products. 

Whereas, There are many thousands of people of Chicago in rags 
because of a so-called over production of clothing. 

Whereas, There are many thousands of people in Chicago who have 
no employment, because a few have no need of their services. 

Whereas, The gamblers in bread on the Board of Trade propose to 
raise the price of bread by feeding the surplus wheat to hogs, sheep 
and cattle; therefore, 

Resolved, By the International Working People's Association, that 
the hungry, naked, and unemployed, should organize and take some 
action by which they can remove the so-called "overproduction," 
which subjects them to the evils that make existence precarious and 
life miserable. 



The Chicago Alarm, in referring to the foregoing preamble, says: 



"The ridiculous situation that requires men to freeze because there 
is too much coal in the country, and starve because there is too 
much bread in the country, and go naked because there is too much 
clothing in the country, and lie out-doors because there are too 
many houses in the country, cannot always continue, especially 
when we know that the natural ingenuity of invention is constantly 
and rapidly increasing this over-supply, glutted markets, and forced 
idleness."— John Swinton's Paper. 



R705 : page 8 

"IT IS MY WAY." 

Many people, when reproved for an improper word or action, 
excuse or justify themselves by saying, "It is my way." Is this a 
proper ground for justification? Let us see what the Scriptures say 
about it? 

The Lord says, "Amend your ways." — Jer. 7:3. If our ways are not 
right they should be amended, and not justified. The weeping 
prophet says, "Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto 
the Lord."— Lam. 3:40. The Lord calls us to consider our ways. 
(Hag. 1:5,7.) By careful consideration our ways may not appear 
excusable. 

But the fact that certain ways are our own ways, should be no 
excuse for retaining them, but rather a reason for rejecting them. If 
we should honor God, we would not do our own way, (Isa. 58:13). 
"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my 
ways, saith the Lord."— Isa. 55:8. Of the wicked he says, 
"Destruction and misery are in their ways."— Rom. 3:16. In pleading 
with Israel he says, "Thou shalt remember thy ways and be 
ashamed."— Ezek. 16:61. The psalmist asks, "Wherewithal shall a 
young man cleanse his way?" and the answer is given, "By taking 
heed thereto according to thy word."— Ps. 1 19:9. His own 
experience is given in verse 104: "Through thy precepts I get 
understanding; therefore I hate every false way." The law of God is 
a detector of false ways, therefore we should test all our ways by it. 
If they are not in harmony with this rule let us not extenuate nor 
follow them, but "ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and 
walk therein."— Jer. 6:16.— Sel. 



R705 : page 8 

"The nearer a soul is to God, the less its perturbations, as the point 
nearest the center of a circle is subject to the least motion." 



"WHATSOEVER we bestow let it be given with a cheerful 
countenance; a man must not give with his hand and deny with his 
heart." 



ARE we growing in the knowledge of what Christ is to us? It is a 
happy life this; for it is not a mere self emptying, it is a process of 
Christ filling." 



page 8 

BIBLE STUDENT'S HELPS. 

YOUNG'S GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH CONCORDANCE. 

This work is at once a Greek and Hebrew Lexicon giving the 
meaning of the original terms in English, and also a Concordance 
giving each word of Scripture and the words which they translate. 
The value of the work is becoming more apparent daily, as theorists 
attempt to palm off a private interpretation under a guise of "a 
better definition of the original." 

In this superb volume every word is arranged under its own Hebrew 
and Greek original, exhibiting 311 ,000 references and 30,000 
various readings. Its size is large quarto, 1094 pages. 

A similar work, "Englishman's Greek and Hebrew Concordance" (3 
vols.) sold at $22, in cloth binding, only seven years ago, and 
usually reached only the hands of scholars; but the present work, by 
one of the ripest scholars of the age (Prof. Young, of Edinburgh, 
Scotland), has been printed in immense quantities, and its present 
price brings it within the reach of almost all self-sacrificing 
students. Indeed, it seems providential that it should be provided so 
cheaply at a time when it can be of so great service to truth-seekers. 
No Bible student can afford to be without a copy. It is of more 
value than two years' study of the Greek and Hebrew languages. 

The regular price was for a time depressed by competition, but now 
the English publishers have obtained full control and put the price 
at $5, which they claim is but half its value. 

Knowing beforehand of the advance, we have made such 
preparation as enables us to offer about 100 copies to our 
subscribers at $2.25 each. If sent my mail, the postage should be 
added, viz.: 54c, and 10c. additional if you wish it "registered." 
This is the latest revision.-"THE AUTHOR'S EDITION." 

We cannot send these to our European subscribers, because too 
heavy for the mail, and too expensive by express. 

There is an imperfect edition of this work on the market. Hence all 
should see that they get the "AUTHOR'S EDITION." 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

For the benefit of new readers we would state that this is a Greek 
Testament. Under each Greek word the corresponding English 
word. It is thus the most literal translation of the New Testament. 
Besides this, it has in another column alongside a very clear and 
emphatic translation, showing the emphasis of the Greek, which is 
generally lost to the English reader. 

The regular price for the work in cloth is four dollars— which, 
everything considered, is not too high; but by special arrangement 
we are enabled to offer it at $1.50 per copy to our subscribers. 

We cannot take postage stamps in pay, as we must pay cash. 



LEESER'S O.T. TRANSLATION. 

The Hebrews have prepared recently an English translation of the 
Old Testament Scriptures which we commend to those desirous of a 
critical translation for COMPARISON in studying. We have 
procured a small lot and can furnish them at $1.65 postpaid, which 
is less than the usual price. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

The place of meeting has been changed and is no longer at "Curry 
Institute Hall," but has removed to the "Grand Army Hall," No. 101 
Federal street, Allegheny City, just across the river. Readers and 
friends will be warmly welcomed at our new and more comfortable 
hall. Preaching every Lord's day afdternoon at 3.30 o'clock, and 
Bible Class at 2:30 o'clock of the same day. 



