Perseverance Rewarded
I AM serving as a special pioneer in our congregation at Coatepeque, Quezaltenango, Guatemala. On visiting for the first time a neighboring village, Flores Costa Cuca, I tried to present the sermon and offer the literature to a young man who was just leaving the post office. He seemed to be in a hurry. As he was mounting his horse he told me that if they were religious books he was not interested. But he did think it strange that I offered the books on such a reasonable contribution.
Two weeks passed and I returned to this small village, finding him working in a field a mile or so from town. We went up to his porch to talk. Although he was polite and kind, it seemed I could not make any headway in explaining the purpose of my visit. The only thing we agreed to was that I should call again the next time I visited this village.
From that day on I visited him regularly. More than once we studied right where he was working, laying cement and making walks. For chairs we used two big stones; our shade came from the trees. One of the things he appreciated was my holding the study to one hour. He always knew just how much time would be used. Our regular studies continued for two years.
My greatest difficulty regarding him was his marked indifference. It did not seem to mean anything to him whether there is a burning hell or a trinity of gods or not. Then one day a Protestant organization invited him to a special meeting and presented him with some literature condemning the Watch Tower Society and our work. Immediately he reacted! Now the questions came. Now there was detailed investigation on his part. Now he wanted to know the truth!
He not only studied but shared his findings. Some months later, during the visit of our circuit servant, my friend was baptized in symbol of his dedication to Jehovah God. Patiently he explained the whys and wherefores of the truth to his family, but his parents did not even believe that he was studying the real Bible! Quickly he brought home the Nacar-Colunga (Catholic) version and convinced them.
About a week later, things began to happen. His family suddenly discarded all their wooden images and pictures of saints. Even his helper, a very sincere Catholic, began to study.
My new brother in the faith began studying with others. Today there is a congregation service center in his home with five dedicated brothers attending. Three of them have been vacation pioneers, including the one with whom I studied, in spite of the fact that he is a polio cripple.
A short time ago our brother said to me, “By the undeserved kindness of Jehovah and because of the perseverance of his servants, now I know, not only that he exists, above all things, but I understand why I am here, alive, and what he requires of me. I have faith and, what is more, I can give a reason for my faith. I know the truth.”
Certainly Jehovah blesses our perseverance when we serve him in love.

