Special Campaign to Distribute New Brochure
1 Many people today are troubled by world conditions, but few understand why things are the way they are, what lies ahead, and what they must do in order to be preserved alive through the coming judgment. (Ezek. 9:4) To help them wake up to the significance of our times, a special campaign to distribute the new brochure Keep on the Watch! will be conducted from Monday, October 18, through Sunday, November 14.
2 The brochure may be offered when engaging in the house-to-house ministry, when making return visits, when witnessing informally, or when in a public setting. However, Keep on the Watch! should not be distributed indiscriminately. Rather, the brochures will be placed only with those who demonstrate interest in what the Bible says about the meaning of world events. Those who show minimal interest in the message might be offered a tract instead.
3 You might capture a person’s attention by saying:
▪ “Many people are concerned about the serious problems and shocking events that are common today. [Cite an example known locally.] Did you know that such things were foretold in the Bible? [Allow for response. Then read a scripture text appropriate for the example cited, such as Matthew 24:3, 7, 8; Luke 21:7, 10, 11; or 2 Timothy 3:1-5.] The Bible reveals the meaning of our times and what lies ahead for mankind. Would you like to know more? [Allow for response. Offer brochure if sincere interest is shown.] The brochure is available without charge. If you desire to make a modest donation to our worldwide work, we would be pleased to accept it.”
4 Or you might find this approach effective:
▪ “Many today are distressed by shocking events or by severe personal loss. Some wonder why God does not intervene to prevent such things. The Bible assures us that God will soon act to relieve mankind’s suffering. Notice what benefits God will bring to mankind. [Read Psalm 37:10, 11.] Would you like to know more?” Conclude as outlined above.
5 Try to obtain the name and address of each person who accepts a copy of the brochure, and arrange to return to cultivate the interest. Suggestions on how this can be done will appear in the November 2004 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. If a person shows keen interest on the initial call, you may be able to start a Bible study on the spot using either Keep on the Watch! or another publication, such as the Require brochure.
6 Copies of the new brochure will be available following the Service Meeting in which this article is discussed. It is suggested that publishers and pioneers initially take only what they will need for the first few days of the campaign. May Jehovah bless this special activity to his praise and to the benefit of honesthearted ones everywhere.​—Ps. 90:17.

