Strengthening Our Faith in God’s Word
MORE people have read the Bible than any other book. But how many have manifested faith in its message? The Bible itself explains that “faith is not a possession of all people.” (2 Thessalonians 3:2) Clearly, we are not born with faith. It must be developed. Even those who have a measure of faith should not take it for granted. Faith can deteriorate and die. Hence, effort is needed to remain “healthy in faith.”—Titus 2:2.
With good reason, then, the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses selected the theme “Faith in God’s Word” for their 1997/98 series of district conventions. Millions of Witnesses and others have thus been privileged to gather together to strengthen their faith in God’s Word.
God’s Word Is Truth—The Basis of Our Faith
This was the theme of the convention’s first day. It began with words of commendation to all in attendance. Presence at the convention was evidence of respect for the Bible. Yet, sobering questions were posed regarding the quality of our faith: ‘Are we able to defend our beliefs, using God’s Word as the authority? Do we appreciate the spiritual food, never taking the Bible, congregation meetings, and Bible-based publications for granted? Are we growing in love, accurate knowledge, and discernment?’ The speaker encouraged all to listen carefully, noting that “this ‘Faith in God’s Word’ District Convention has been prepared to help us scrutinize ourselves and examine the measure and quality of faith we individually possess.”
The keynote address was entitled “Walking by Faith, Not By Sight.” (2 Corinthians 5:7) “The faith of those who become Jehovah’s Witnesses is not credulity,” said the speaker. How true this is! Genuine faith is not blind. It is based on realities. Hebrews 11:1 says: “Faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for, the evident demonstration of realities though not beheld.” The speaker observed: “If we are truly going to walk by faith, we need faith that is well-founded.” Because we walk by faith, not by sight, we do not need details about how and when Jehovah will accomplish every aspect of his purpose. What we already know about him gives us absolute confidence in his power to fulfill his promises lovingly and righteously.
The talk “Christian Youths—A Vital Part of the Congregation” reminded young ones of how precious they are to Jehovah. They were encouraged to grow spiritually by pursuing such goals as reading the entire Bible and meeting the requirements for dedication and baptism. The pursuit of supplementary education is a personal matter to be decided with one’s parents, but if it is undertaken, the objective should always be to be equipped to serve God more effectively. Secular education can serve a beneficial purpose when we “make sure of the more important things” that are related to our faith.—Philippians 1:9, 10.
Next came a symposium of three talks on the theme “Whose Standards Do You Observe?” Faith in God’s Word motivates us to adhere to Bible standards. Christians obey Jehovah’s laws and principles. For instance, the Scriptures admonish us not to use obscene and abusive speech. (Ephesians 4:31, 32) The speaker asked: “When annoyed or irritated, do you scream abuse at your mate or your children?” Of course, that would be unchristian. God also has standards regarding our personal appearance. Christians should clothe themselves “in well-arranged dress, with modesty.” (1 Timothy 2:9, 10) The word “modesty” carries the thought of self-respect, a sense of honor, sobriety, and moderation. We are motivated by love for others and are guided by Bible principles and by a sense of what is appropriate.
The following two talks included verse-by-verse considerations of Hebrews 3:7-15 and 4:1-16. These Bible passages warn us against the danger of being “hardened by the deceptive power of sin.” (Hebrews 3:13) How can we succeed in our fight against sin? Jehovah helps us through his Word. Indeed, “the word of God is alive and exerts power and . . . is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.”—Hebrews 4:12.
The final talk on the convention’s first day was “A Book for All People.” It highlighted the authenticity, accuracy, and practical value of the Bible. How thrilling to hear the speaker announce the release of a new 32-page brochure entitled A Book for All People! This new publication was prepared particularly for people who, though educated, know little about the Bible. The talk concluded with the words: “People need to examine God’s Word for themselves. We are confident that if they make a firsthand examination, they will come to realize that this unique book, the Bible, is indeed a book for all people!”
Imitate the “Perfecter of Our Faith”
This theme of the convention’s second day drew attention to Jesus Christ, the “Perfecter of our faith.” We need to “follow his steps closely.” (Hebrews 12:2; 1 Peter 2:21) Many in Christendom are told: ‘Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will be saved!’ But is that all there is to faith? The Bible declares that “faith without works is dead.” (James 2:26) Besides believing in Jesus, therefore, we must do the works that he did, especially by preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom.
The morning program concentrated on the evangelizing work. Like Paul, we should be eager to declare the good news of salvation. (Romans 1:14-16) Jesus preached to people everywhere. Though our regular house-to-house ministry is producing results, more and more people are not at home when we call. (Acts 20:20) Many are in school, working, shopping, or traveling. Hence, we also need to preach in public places and wherever people can be found.
The talk “Become Rooted and Stabilized in the Truth” reminded us of the great number of new disciples that are being baptized—an average of over 1,000 each day! It is vital that these new ones become well rooted and stabilized in the faith. (Colossians 2:6, 7) The speaker explained that literal roots absorb water and nutrients while also providing an anchor or support for the plant. Likewise, through good study habits and wholesome association, new disciples can become stabilized in the truth.
This counsel was especially appropriate for baptism candidates. Yes, on the second day of the convention, droves of new disciples were baptized, following Jesus’ example. The talk “Faith in God’s Word Leads to Baptism” reminded the candidates that being totally immersed in water is a fitting symbol of their dying to their former self-seeking course of life. Their being raised up from the water represents their being made alive to do God’s will.
The talk “Put Up a Hard Fight for the Faith” was based on the Bible book of Jude. We were encouraged to protect our faith by resisting harmful influences, such as immorality, rebelliousness, and apostasy. Next, parents—especially fathers—received special attention in the talk “Make Provision for Your Household.” Providing for the family’s spiritual, physical, and emotional needs is a Scriptural obligation. (1 Timothy 5:8) This requires time, communication, and closeness. Jehovah God is certainly pleased with all the hard work Christian parents do to raise their children in the truth.
The following symposium, “To the House of Jehovah Let Us Go,” built appreciation for Christian meetings. They provide rest from the anxieties of this world. At meetings we have opportunity for an interchange of encouragement, and we can demonstrate our love for our fellow believers. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) Meetings also help us to sharpen our skills as teachers, and they deepen our understanding of God’s purpose. (Proverbs 27:17) May we never isolate ourselves from the congregation, and let us remember Jesus’ words: “Where there are two or three gathered together in my name, there I am in their midst.”—Matthew 18:20.
The last talk of the day was “The Quality of Your Faith—Tested Now.” Faith that is untested has no proven worth, and its quality remains unknown. It is like a check that has not yet been cashed. Is it really worth the amount that appears on it? Similarly, our faith must be tested to prove that it has substance and real quality. (1 Peter 1:6, 7) The speaker said: “At times, the news media as well as the authorities are duped by clergymen and apostates into pinning false labels on us, misrepresenting our Christian beliefs and way of life. . . . Will we allow those who are blinded by Satan to intimidate and dishearten us and make us feel ashamed of the good news? Will we permit lies about the truth to affect our regular meeting attendance and our preaching activity? Or will we stand fast and be courageous and more determined than ever to continue declaring the truth about Jehovah and his Kingdom?”
Live by Reason of Faith
The theme of the convention’s third day was based on Paul’s words: “That by law no one is declared righteous with God is evident, because ‘the righteous one will live by reason of faith.’” (Galatians 3:11) The symposium, “Joel’s Prophetic Words for Our Day,” was one of the morning’s highlights. The book of Joel points to our time and says with a sense of urgency: “Alas for the day; because the day of Jehovah is near, and like a despoiling from the Almighty One it will come!” (Joel 1:15) In a manner similar to that of relentless locusts, anointed Christians have let nothing stand in the way of Kingdom proclamation in this time of the end.
The book of Joel also gives hope, saying: “Everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will get away safe.” (Joel 2:32) This means more than just using Jehovah’s name. Heartfelt repentance is needed, and this includes turning our backs on wrongdoing. (Joel 2:12, 13) There is no time for delay because Jehovah will soon execute judgment upon the nations, even as he did upon Moab, Ammon, and the mountainous region of Seir in the days of King Jehoshaphat of Judah.—2 Chronicles 20:1-30; Joel 3:2, 12.
All were encouraged by the talk “Show Faith by Waiting on Jehovah.” Now deep into the time of the end, we can look back on the fulfillment of many of Jehovah’s promises, and we are keenly interested in things that will yet come to pass. Jehovah’s people must continue to have patience, remembering that everything God has promised will occur.—Titus 2:13; 2 Peter 3:9, 10.
The morning program concluded with the drama “Keep Your Eye Simple.” This realistic dramatization encouraged us to examine our attitude regarding material pursuits. No matter where we live, if we want our life to be free of anxiety, we must follow Jesus’ counsel to keep our eye simple, clearly focused on the Kingdom of God.—Matthew 6:22.
The public talk had the intriguing title “Faith and Your Future.” It offered proof of the inability of human leaders to solve the problems of the world. (Jeremiah 10:23) Man’s history keeps repeating itself—on a larger and more damaging scale. How do Jehovah’s Witnesses feel about the future? We believe that faithful mankind has a bright future under God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 5:5) God will fulfill his promises for the benefit of all who have faith in his Word, which urges: “Search for Jehovah, you people, while he may be found. Call to him while he proves to be near.”—Isaiah 55:6.
Jesus raised a vital question with our day in view. He asked: “When the Son of man arrives, will he really find the faith on the earth?” (Luke 18:8) The final talk reviewed the convention program and showed how it provided resounding evidence that faith in God’s Word exists, even though we live in a faithless and secularized world.
Still, we can individually ask ourselves, ‘Am I among those with unwavering faith in God and his Word?’ The “Faith in God’s Word” District Convention should help us to answer yes to that question. And how thankful we are to Jehovah for strengthening our faith in him and in his inspired Word, the Bible!
[Pictures on page 24]
Many volunteers worked cheerfully to accommodate thousands of delegates
[Pictures on page 25]
Large stadiums like this were used around the world
[Picture on page 25]
L. A. Swingle of the Governing Body releasing the new brochure
[Picture on page 26]
Many were baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah
[Pictures on page 27]
Conventioners joyfully sang Kingdom songs. Inset: the drama “Keep Your Eye Simple”

