VOL. XVII. APRIL 1, 1896. No. 7. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 62 

Views from the Tower 63 

The Reward of the Righteous 65 

Love Not the World 66 

"My Soul, be on thy Guard" 67 

After the Order of Melchisedec 68 

Laying On of Hands 69 

Bible Study: Parable of the Great 

Supper 70 

Bible Study: The Prodigal Received 71 

Encouraging Letters 72 

page 62 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE Passover Memorial celebration at Allegheny was a very enjoyable 
and impressive event. It was good to be there, we believe was 
the verdict of all present;— about one hundred and fifty. The dear 
ones scattered abroad were remembered. We trust that they all had 
the Master's blessing as we enjoyed it. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? 



THIS pamphlet of 80 pages, a special issue of the OLD THEOLOGY 
QUARTERLY, examines every text of Scripture in which the word 
"hell" is found, and related passages. Extra copies furnished to subscribers 
at ten cents each, or seventy-five cents per dozen, or six dollars 
per hundred,— postpaid. 



R1955 : page 62 

NO SPECIAL FAVOR ASKED. 



THE friends of the cause who responded to our suggestion for prayers 
for tract work, and in petitioning the Postmaster General and the 
members of Congress, will be pleased to learn that one of the objectionable 
rulings of the P.O. Dep't. has been suspended for sixty days from 
March 19, meantime expecting some new laws from Congress. This 
lets the Old Theology Tracts go out at "pound rates" for the period 
mentioned. All who need tracts, especially friends at a distance, should 
order before the expiration of the period named. State particularly 
what quantities you can use judiciously. The DAWNS are still under 
embargo. Continue your prayers with ours for such privileges as the 
Lord may be pleased to grant. 

Two of our readers seemed to misunderstand the phraseology of the 
cards which we suggested should be sent to Congressmen. They got 
the impression that we were asking legislation specially favorable to religious 
literature, and feared that this would be asking the state to support 
the church. They were mistaken. The Act of Congress of July 
16, '94, extends special privileges to Benevolent Societies, Literary Societies 
and Lodges, of one thousand members or more. The framers of 
the law no doubt thought that the word literary would include religious 
literature, which should out-rank all other literature. But since the P.O. 
Dep't. does not so interpret the law, our request of Congress is that 
they specify religious literature, and thus put it on the same footing with 
lodge literature. This is not asking a special favor for religion, but 
simple equality and justice. We assume that the American people are 
not willing to put religion at a disadvantage. Such of the friends as 
have had favorable responses from Congressmen might, if they please, 
reply to them, and call special attention to the lack of explicitness in the 
Act of July 16, '94, and request that it be amended to specify religious 
literature. There is still time for more petitions from those who have 
not yet sent them in. 



R1953 : page 63 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



A FEVERISH ambition, pride and sensitiveness 
seems to be growing amongst nations as well as 
amongst individuals. Every one seems more than ever 
ready for a conflict on any and every pretext. During the 
short space of this year 1896, several immense wars have 
narrowly been averted,— between Russia and Japan, between 
Turkey and the combined powers of Europe, between 
Great Britain and the United States, between Great Britain 
and Germany and between the United States and Spain 
backed possibly by France; besides a number of smaller affairs. 



While pride and self-confidence have had to do with all 
these dangers of wars, fear of the terrible implements of 
modern warfare has doubtless had much to do with the 
avoidance of actual combat. But the pent up ambition 
and military feeling of Europe is finding a field for exercise 
in Africa, and British, Italian and French troops are finding 
plenty to do; while Spain has her hands overfull with 
Cuba; the Turks are conquering to death the Armenian 
Christians who refuse to become Mohammedans, and 
Russia is getting ready to seize Corea. 

How unlike is all this to what might have been hoped 
for as the result of eighteen centuries of Christian instruction. 
Humanly speaking it seems as though we were getting 
farther and farther away from the promised era of 
"peace on earth, good will toward men." How strange 
their own attitudes must seem to so-called Christian 
kingdoms! 

Thank God, our hopes of peace do not rest upon the 
expectation that the natural man, either individually or 
nationally, will grow just and merciful and loving and generous 
and peaceable. We find no ground for such hopes. 
On the contrary, it is still as true as eighteen centuries ago 
that the natural man appreciates not the things of the spirit 
of God, but is at enmity to them because they curb his desires 
and condemn his attitude and ambitions. It is still 
true that the carnal heart is boastful, proud, envious, vain-glorious, 
and that the carnally minded are despisers of them 
that are good (meek, loving, peaceable, etc.), and full of 
hatred and strife. 

No, thank God! our good hope of good things near at 
hand rests on a more reasonable basis— on the promised establishment 
of a strong, as well as a just and merciful, government 
—of God's Kingdom in the hands of the King of 
glory,— the Prince of the kings of the earth. To the 
rightly instructed these various signs, unfavorable to peace, 
are really harbingers of peace, since they corroborate the 

R1954:page63 

declarations of God's Word, that the reign of the Prince 
of Peace will be introduced by an unprecedented time of 
trouble and national and social disruption. 

In view of the general prevalence of the proud, boastful, 
self seeking and combative spirit (2 Tim. 3:1-5), 
let us who are seeking to walk close to the Lord, remember 
and continually practise the Apostle's injunction, 
"So far as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men." 



As we read recently of the gathering of a rough element 
outside a Presbyterian church in Chicago, probably drawn 
by curiosity to witness the drill of the Boy's Brigade, 
how they misused the janitor who attempted to quiet and 
disperse them, and how then the boy-soldiers came out 
and with fixed bayonets charged upon and dispersed the 



crowd, sustaining some slight bruises from sticks and stones, 
we were reminded of our Lord's words,— "They that take 
the sword shall perish with the sword."— Matt. 26:52. 

Neither the boys nor their religious instructors probably 
foresee the results of their present course. The 
blending of carnal with spiritual warfare is impossible, and 
such a course is sure to cultivate, more and more, the carnal 

R1954 : page 64 

mind. In the troublous times coming, the poor as well as 
the vicious will be only too ready to conclude that religion 
and civil government are banded together for their oppression. 
True Christians should keep themselves and their 
children free from all such evil entanglements. 

The Governors of some of the States are requiring 
all companies of the Boy's Brigade to take the oath of 
allegiance to the state, the same as the Militia; because, 
according to law, others are not allowed to drill with 
firearms. 



Mr. T. V. Powderly, formerly the chief executive of 
a powerful social order known as the Knights of Labor reports 
a tour among some churches thus: 

At the Episcopalian church "the minister was a 
good speaker. He spoke of church repairs and parsonage 
repairs. He spoke 45 minutes and never spoke of Christ 
nor his work. In our cathedral [Powderly is a Roman 
Catholic] the priest told the people to be good, but nothing 
of Christ— not a word. I went to the Presbyterian church 
and to every church in the city— all the same story: all for 
man, not one word about God; not one word to help the 
poor man." 

The need of to-day is the same as eighteen centuries 
ago. Our Master gave it as a sign of his Messiahship that 
"the poor have the gospel preached to them." We are told 
that "the common people heard him gladly." Now, as 
then, the chief priests and scribes and Pharisees have mistaught 
the poor, that after a life of trouble here ninety-nine 
of every hundred will find it worse hereafter, until the 
common people distrust and despise such bad tidings of 
great misery, falsely called gospel— good tidings. 

We advise co-laborers to search for the Lord's jewels 
among the humble. Remember the Apostle's words: Ye 
know your calling, brethren, how that not many great or 
wise or rich are called, but [chiefly] the poor, rich in faith. 
-James 2:5; 1 Cor. 1:26-29. 



The new X-ray is proving still more wonderful, in the 
new art of shadowgraph. Mr. Edison's latest announcement 
is that by placing a human being before a mineral 
coated screen he can pass the rays of light through the 



body so as to show the bones mirrored on the screen. By 
removing the subject further from the screen the bones become 
invisible, and the various organs are mirrored. 

Truly, as our Master foretold, we seem to be approaching 
a time when "every secret thing shall be made manifest." 
(Mark. 4:22; Eccl. 12:14; Matt. 10:26; 1 Cor. 4:5.) 
As a railway passenger remarked, recently, "A 
man needs to be very good these days or his sin, however 
secret, will find him out and expose him." 

Could we always remember that by powers yet more 
subtle than X-rays,— 

"God our inmost thoughts doth read," 
it would help us all to walk carefully, so that the "words 
of our mouths and the meditations of our hearts" might 
be acceptable to our Lord. 

Quite probably the restored man of the Millennial 
period will have considerable of the power of mind reading, 
and intuitive discernment, over the imperfect; as our 
Lord could read the thoughts of the Pharisees. And quite 
probably this will occasion a portion at least of the "shame 
and lasting contempt" of the awakened wicked. (Dan. 12:2.) 
Their mean, grovelling dispositions, debased by 
selfish indulgences, will shame them in their progress back 
to manhood, while it will serve as a lesson to others not so 
degraded. 



Mr. Rockefeller, one of the principal stockholders of 
the Standard Oil Company, recently received his quarterly 
dividend check for four million dollars. 

What a responsibility, what a care, what a burden, 
what a stewardship, what an accounting to the Lord is implied 
in this wealth! 

The Apostle says, "Charge them that are rich among 
you [they are not likely to be of you, for not many great 
or rich hath God called to joint-heirship with Christ], 
that they trust not in uncertain riches." Let us not be 
envious of those who have wealth, but sympathetic. The 
possession of wealth brings with it temptations to make it 
a treasure, a god. In many ways the position of the comparatively 
poor is far more favorable to grace. It is easier 
for them to cultivate meekness, patience, humility, brotherly 
kindness and all the graces of the spirit. Our Lord summed 
up the matter when he said, "How hardly [with what difficulty] 
shall they that have riches enter into the Kingdom 
of God!" Yet there were none rich in that day in comparison 
with the very rich of to-day. 

Our Lord's words are applicable to all in proportion 
as they have the "good things" of this world. Let each 
be faithful in his stewardship; for he that is unfaithful in a 
little charge would be unfaithful to a greater trust. The 
demand of the Law upon the Jew was— one tenth of all his 
increase. The test of discipleship to Christ is the consecration 
of all that we possess, principal and increase, 
money, influence, time and talent, to be used as his 



stewardship,— 

"To be used in joyful service, 
For the glory of our King." 
In contrast with the wealth of some, note the fact that 
upon the lists of the WATCH TOWER are over three thousand 
too poor in this world's goods to pay for it, to whom it is 
provided out of the Tract Fund. Nevertheless, to some of 
these "poor" God has granted the "riches of his grace;" 
and has made them "rich in faith" and heirs of his coming 
Kingdom. To such of them as shall prove faithful to 
the end of their course he sends word through his Apostle, 
"All things are yours, for ye are Christ's and Christ is 
God's." Yes, thank God! many of these have received 
from the Lord a wealth of exceeding great and precious 
promises, the understanding and appreciation of which are 
beyond all price. 

R1954:page65 

Dismissing the question of whether or not a man can 
possess such enormous wealth honestly (for this dividend 
is only the interest, not the principal, and represents only 
one of Mr. Rockefeller's large investments) and supposing 
that every cent of it came justly: supposing also that Mr. 
R. is very charitable and generous, and uses his stewardship 
wisely, the question remains, Is there not something 
radically wrong with our present social and business laws 
and customs, when they leave it possible for one man to 
amass so great wealth while many find it impossible to 
earn a living? 

True, the laws are alike for all, and in one sense all 
have the same chance; but all are not equally endowed 
with perceptive and reasoning powers and judgment and acquisitive 
propensities; hence "the strong [mentally, physically 
and spiritually] ought [as a matter of equity] to bear the 
infirmities of the weak." (Rom. 15:1.) And the laws should 
compensate, somewhat, for mental and physical inequalities 
of the race. But such laws will never be enacted. Why? 
Because the well-to-do are strong-minded, forceful men, and 
the same intellectual activity and power which enables 
them to acquire more than average proportions of this 
world's goods make them the natural leaders, lawmakers 
and rulers of the less forceful; and it would be like "making 
water run up hill" to reverse this natural condition. 

But would not Love solve the problem? Yes; Love 
could solve the problem; but Love is not natural to the fallen 
race: Selfishness is the rule and law of life with all the 
fallen sons of Adam— except the few who have become new 
creatures in Christ, with whom Love is become the law of 
their hearts, and, so far as they are able, the controlling 
power in their mortal bodies also. (These, however, are 
a "little flock," and not a factor in the problem.) There 
is, therefore, no hope of a radical reform in this direction, 
unless we can convert the hearts of at least a majority of 
those who are able to profit by the present "free for all" 
race for wealth; and the Scriptures assure us that they are 



the class most difficult to touch with the Truth and its spirit. 

Is there then no hope? Yes, thank God! "Be patient 
brethren, the coming of the Lord [in the full glory of his 
Kingdom] draweth nigh." (Jas. 5:8.) He shall help the 

R1955 : page 65 

poor and the needy; and in his day equity and the righteous 
shall flourish. (Psa. 72:11-14.) He will exalt the 
humble and abase the proud, and cause the general 
levelling of society; and all the families of the earth shall 
be blest. The short, terrible struggle incident to the fall 
of the "powers that be" and the general spoliation of the 
present social structure (Mark 3:27) will be indeed a dark 
night, between now and the glorious Millennium of divine 
favor, in which the rich will "howl" for the loss of their 
treasures (Jas. 5:1); but doubtless many of them will 
then begin to search for the true riches, which moth and 
rust do not corrupt and which thieves cannot steal. Let 
us therefore have great sympathy for those who mistakenly 
are trusting in uncertain riches and are overlooking the 
riches of divine grace. 



R1956 : page 66 

THE REWARD OF THE RIGHTEOUS. 



"And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the 
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars 
forever and ever."— Dan. 12:3. 

IN CONSIDERING who are the wise here referred to 
we are forcibly reminded of Paul's significant inquiry 
—"Where is the wise? where is the scribe [who boasts of 
his wisdom]? where is the disputer of this world? hath 
not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after 
that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not 
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching [i.e., 
the preaching of this foolishness] to save them that believe." 
(1 Cor. 1:20,21.) And these believers are the 
truly wise ones to whom the Prophet makes reference. 

Those who so thoroughly believe the testimony of God 
as to yield themselves fully to his will are wise indeed. 
They have prudently chosen that good part which shall not 
be taken from them. In this present evil world, it is true 
that, like their Lord, they have tribulation; but if they 
endure it as good soldiers, faithful unto death, their eternal 
reward is sure. The reward promised is beyond this vale 
of tears, and the valley of the shadow of death. Then 
these that suffered here, meekly bearing the reproach of 
Christ; who took up their cross daily, and followed him; 
who nobly adhered to the principles of truth and righteousness, 



and faithfully conformed their lives thereto; who 
delighted themselves in the Lord, and daily meditated in 
his law; who devoted themselves faithfully to the doing of 
his will, sacrificing their own,— these shall by and by shine 
forth as the sun, as the brightness of the firmament, in the 
Kingdom of their Father. 

O, weary ones, look up; sad hearts, be glad; for even 
now your deliverance is nigh, even at the doors! Soon the 
sorrows of this earthly pilgrimage will be ended, and your 
glory will appear. 

It is a very noticeable fact, that the nearer we approach 
to the consummation of our glorious hopes, the 
opposition of the powers of darkness grows more and 
more severe as well as more subtle. And those who 
walk by faith alone must indeed have a very strong 
faith to be able to wage a successful warfare to the end, and 
win the victor's crown of glory. To this end, dearly beloved, 
let us keep these precious promises of God ever in 
mind. "Wherefore comfort one another with these words." 

While this glory that excelleth is to be manifested by 
and by in the overcoming gospel Church, there is a lesser, 

R1955 : page 66 

but nevertheless a great, glory to be manifested in all the 
lovers and doers of righteousness in all the ages past. 
Faithful Noah, a preacher and doer of righteousness; faithful 
Abraham, with whom the Lord's will was always paramount; 
faithful Enoch and Elijah and Moses and Aaron 
and Joshua and Caleb, and a host of others, of whom the 
world was not worthy, shall by and by gleam forth in the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom of God, as the stars forever 
and ever. 

When righteousness is finally established in the earth, 
and men have learned to appreciate the pure, the beautiful 
and the good, when generous love shall have displaced all 
selfishness, then indeed will the good deeds and blessed influences 
of those who, in the midst of sin and wickedness, 
sought to turn many to righteousness, come into remembrance 
and receive from all men their just reward of appreciation 
and praise. They shall shine as the stars forever 
and ever. 

How refreshing the prospect of the glorious consummation 
of the divine plan! Let us rejoice and be glad, and 
daily strive to prove ourselves worthy of the glory promised 
to them that love God, to the called according to his purpose. 



R1955 : page 66 

LOVE NOT THE WORLD. 



"Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any 



man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him."— 1 John 2:15. 

ONE can scarcely read this advice of the Apostle 

John without having another scripture suggested 

to his mind, which, at first sight, may seem contradictory; 

viz, "God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten 

Son, that whosoever believeth on him might not 

perish, but have everlasting life." The two, however, are 

not antagonistic, but are in full harmony when rightly understood. 

If God so loved the world, even while they 

were yet sinners (Rom. 5:8), as to sacrifice the dearest 

treasure of his heart in order to redeem and save them, 

then such love and such benevolence toward the world on 

our part cannot be out of harmony with his will. Indeed, 

such is the direct teaching of the Word. "Do good to all 

men as you have opportunity;" "Love your enemies, do 

good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully 

use you and persecute you, that ye may be the 

children of your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh 

his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth 

rain on the just and on the unjust.. ..Be ye therefore 

perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." 

-Matt. 5:44-48. 

To love the world as God loves it, is not the sentiment 
against which the Apostle warns the Church, as the 
context clearly shows. That is a grand and ennobling 
love— a love which stands on the high plane of purity, and 
without having the least fellowship with the impure, nevertheless 
pities the fallen, and is active in efforts to rescue 
them from their degradation. This divine love, so worthy 
of our imitation, is that which benevolently ignores personal 
antagonisms and animosities, and, overleaping all 
selfish considerations and vengeful feelings, considers only 
the possibilities and the ways and means for peace and reformation 
and salvation. 

But the love of the world to which John refers, as 
the context shows, is the love of fellowship, which implies 
the partaking of its spirit— its aims, ambitions and hopes, 
and its methods of pursuing them. If any man love the 
world in this sense, surely the love of the Father is not in 
him; "For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, 
and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the 
Father, but is of the world [i.e., according to the spirit 
of this present evil world]. And the world passeth away, 
and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God 
abideth forever." 

R1956 : page 66 

As children of God we have been called to a position 
of great favor and advantage. Our Heavenly Father has 
revealed to us his plans and purposes and has condescended 
to take us into his fellowship and active cooperation; and 
so grand and extensive is our outlook of the future that we 
are able to view the present life in a very different light from 
that in which the world views it. The world walks on in 



darkness without the light of life, and consequently to them 
the things of this present life, which we have learned to count 
but as dross, are to them of great value, and they strive 
and run and contend for the delusive prizes that bring with 
them only labor and sorrow and quickly pass away. 

The Apostle has very briefly summed up the world's 
treasures as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and 
the pride of life. The lust of the flesh includes all the 
fleshly appetites and passions, the merely animal instincts. 
To these thousands sacrifice all the higher interests. To 
fare sumptuously in eating and drinking and frolic and 
pleasure is their delight. The lust of the eyes demands 
luxury in dress and home appointments, and the gathering 
for self-gratification of all that is admired and 
desired. And the pride of life glories in the shame of 
that selfishness which has ignored the wants and woes of 
the needy and suffering, and complacently said to self, 
"Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take 
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry." And it goes further: 
it despises the poor and needy and oppresses them. 

Such is the spirit of this world. It is the very opposite 
of the spirit of God and of Christ; and those who 
are led of the spirit of God should keep as far from it as 
possible. Their conduct, their dress, their home-life and 
home appointments must all speak a different language. 
We are to mind not high things, but to condescend to men 
of low estate; to show no preference to the man that wears 

R1956 : page 67 

the fine clothing or the gold ring, but, like our Master, to 
regard with highest esteem and Christian love those who 
do the will of our Heavenly Father.— Rom. 12:16; 
James 2:1-5. 

"God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth 
in God, and God in him. Herein is love with us made 
perfect [completed] that we may have boldness in the day 
of judgment; because as he [God] is, so are we in this 
world." As God is love, and is so manifested to all his 
creatures, so ought we to be love, and thus to shine as lights 
in the world. And if in this world we become living embodiments 
and representatives of love, we may be confident 
that at the end of our course we will stand approved 
before Him who seeks above all things to see in us this 
likeness to himself.— 1 John 4:16-18. 

To fellowship the world is to walk in harmony with 
its ideas and to conform to its ways. In this sense we may 
not love it, but must be apart from it and in opposition to 
it. The way thus pointed out to us is, in some respects at 
least, a difficult way, and a lonely way; but it is the only 
way of peace and lasting happiness. This world with the 
lust thereof is rapidly passing away: it is hollow and unsatisfying 
and eventually leads to disaster and ruin; but 
those whose delight is in the Lord's way have blessed communion 
and fellowship with him. Their joys come from 
a source which the world cannot comprehend. They live 



on a higher plane, breathe a purer atmosphere and enjoy a 
holier, sweeter friendship than the world could ever offer. 

But if any man in Christ descend from these high 
privileges to partake of the poor substitutes which the world 
has to offer, he is thereby proving his lack of appreciation, 
and hence his unworthiness of the heavenly things: the 
love of the Father is not in him; and he may well fear the 
verdict of the day of decision. 



R1956 : page 67 

"MY SOUL, BE ON THY GUARD. 



WHILE, as the Apostle predicted, "perilous times" 
are upon us, in which some in the Church will 
"stumble" and some "fall," and when "the love of 
many shall wax cold," let us not forget that it is "he that 
endureth [faithfully] to the end [of his trial], the same 
shall be saved." Remember the Apostle's advice, to take 
trials and oppositions and misrepresentations cheerfully, 
joyously, patiently, knowing that, so endured, they will 
"work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory." But, as the Apostle adds, to secure such blessed 
results from trials, persecutions and oppositions, we must 
remember to "look not at the things that are seen [earthly 
things and prospects], but at things that are unseen [the 
heavenly and eternal things]." We are to endure "as 
seeing him who is invisible." Greater is he that is with us 
than all that be against us. (Heb. 11:27; 1 John 4:4-8.) 
"Who is he that will harm you [really], if ye be followers 
of that which is good?" (Read 1 Pet. 3:13-16; Rom. 8:31-39.) 
The opposition of evil can work only good 
to "the elect," those who are called according to God's 
purpose. To all who are of the true Zion the promise is, 
"No weapon that is formed against you shall prosper." 

When that noble servant of God, John Wesley, was 
zealous in opposing Satan, and preaching a full consecration 
to God, he provoked Satan's enmity, and the latter 
found mouthpieces amongst ambitious and jealous "false 
brethren" who spread abroad vile rumors from time to 
time, not only assailing his teachings, but even his moral 
character. His plan was to make no defence. He argued 
that if he should engage in personal disputes it would be 
just what Satan would want— a hindrance to his work. 
Finally, however, when a most malicious rumor, reflecting 
on his moral character, was started by some prominent persons, 
and the entire work seemed likely to be greatly injured 
by it, his brother Charles and some others came to 
him, and said, John, you must answer this charge or your 
reputation is gone. 

John replied in substance thus,— No; I will keep right 
along with my work. When I consecrated myself to the 



Lord, I gave him my reputation as well as all else that I 
possess. The Lord is at the helm! Our Lord Jesus, by 
his faithfulness, "made himself of no reputation," and 
was crucified as a blasphemer and between outlaws, yet he 
opened not his mouth! No, I will make no defense. A 
certain class, evil at heart, would believe the evil reports 
regardless of my denials; and those thus alienated will no 
doubt, as in the early Church, go "out from us because they 
were not of us." "The Lord knoweth them that are 
his," and will keep his own; and none shall pluck them 
out of his hand. Besides, the Lord may see that some are 
thinking of me, rather than of him and his message which 
I seek to declare. 

The results we all know. The message of holiness 
with faith swept over the world, and its influence is not 
yet lost. And John Wesley is still loved for his work's 
sake in every civilized part of the world; but his traducers 
are forgotten. There is a lesson in this for all, as an illustration 
of the Lord's words— "In quietness and in confidence 
shall be your strength." 

Wherefore, dearly beloved, think it not strange concerning 
the fiery trial which shall try you, as though some 
strange thing happened unto you: but rejoice, inasmuch 
as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his 
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding 
joy.-l Pet. 4:12,13. 

Remembering that the Passover season is always one 
of Satanic activity and of special trial to God's people, 
we are praying for the dear flock, and for ourselves, as did 
our Master for Peter,— that faith fail not, and that whatever 
trials may come may only draw the sheep nearer to 
each other and to the great Chief Shepherd. But we should 
distinguish between the weak ones, and the wilfully wicked, 
like Judas. The former should be prayed for and helped, 
the latter should be left entirely to the Lord's judgment. 



R1956 : page 68 

AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC. 



"Jehovah hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest 
forever after the order of Melchisedek."— Psa. 1 10:4. 

A PRIEST, in the only true sense, is a mediator between 
God and fallen creatures, the object of such 
mediation being to restore and establish harmony on a 
legal basis. 

The office of the priest or mediator between God and 
man is to restore to perfection and consequent harmony 
with God a race of human beings condemned to death, and 
already dead or dying. Hence this priest must of necessity 
be "mighty to save." (Psa. 89:19.) He must have 



both the right and the power to recall the dead to life, and 
ability to instruct and discipline, and thus to lead every 
willing subject back to the perfect estate from which Adam 
and the race in him fell. To secure this right he must first 
satisfy the demands of Justice, which required the extinction 
of the human race; and these demands of Justice 
could only be met by a corresponding sacrifice— a human 
life for a human life. The life of Adam and all in him 
could be redeemed only by another perfect human being. 
And so it was— "Since by man came death, by man came 
also the resurrection from the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) 
By the sacrifice of a perfect human existence is secured the 
right of the priest to restore. 

But beyond the right or privilege of restoring, the 
priest must have the power, and power would of necessity 
presuppose his own everlasting existence. He must have 
power to create, since to restore to being that which had 
completely lost existence is to re-create it, and is a greater 
work even than the first creation; he must also have perfect 
knowledge, both of God's requirements and of human 
necessities, as well as perfect ability to guide a race so 
destitute back to the glorious heights of perfection and 
blessed harmony and communion with God. 

What an office! Who would presume to assume such 
a title? It belongs really and only to Jehovah's Anointed. 
Even Jesus, "the Anointed One, did not glorify himself 
to become a high priest," but he has "been declared by 
God a high priest according to the order of Melchisedec." 
(Heb. 5:4,5,10— Diaglott.) Jehovah honored him by 
inviting him to that position, and giving him all power to 
fill it. In harmony with God's plan, not only has Jesus, 
his Anointed one, been chosen as the chief, or high priest, 
but the "little flock," who follow him in sacrifice now, are 
called to be joint-heirs with him in the same honor. "If 
we suffer with him we shall also be glorified together." 
Jesus alone is the great High Priest; but the Gospel Church, 
redeemed by his death and associated with him now in 
sacrifice, and to be associated with him in divine power 
hereafter, is counted in with him, and, together with him, will 
constitute the great Prophet, Priest and King promised, to 
liberate and bless the groaning creation— the Seed of promise. 
-Gen. 22:18; 28:14; Gal. 3:29; Acts 3:20-23; 
Psa. 110:4. 

From these considerations it should be plain to all that 
our High Priest is truly a King, in whose hands absolute 
power is vested. And in looking back to the types God 
has given us, we find Melchisedec, to whom we are cited 
as an illustration of this priesthood both by the Psalmist 
and by the Apostle Paul. (Psa. 110:4; Heb. 5:5,10.) 
They show that Melchisedec, who was a priest upon his 
throne, represented the Christ in glory and power, while 
in the Aaronic Priesthood the special features of the redemptive 
sacrifice were shadowed forth— its perfection, its completeness, 
its acceptableness, as also the share which the 
Church has with Christ in that sacrifice. 

Christ was not constituted a priest of the Aaronic 



order: that priesthood was only the type or figure. The 
Aaronic priesthood sprang from the tribe of Levi, while 
"our Lord [according to the flesh] sprang from the tribe 
of Judah, of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning 
priesthood;" and the members of his body, the Church, are 
chosen chiefly from among the Gentiles. As a man, Jesus was 
not a priest, neither as men are the saints members of the 
royal priesthood; but as "new creatures" they hold and 
execute their office. Jesus as a "new creature," "partaker 
of the divine nature" (to which he was begotten at the 
time of his baptism), was the priest, and as a priest he offered 
up his perfect human nature an acceptable sacrifice to God. 
He consecrated or offered himself in sacrifice on becoming 
the priest, and he received a special anointing for the office 
which was necessary to enable him to accomplish the sacrifice 
as well as to apply its benefits to men. His human 
nature, when sacrificed, could do nothing more; it must 
remain a sacrifice forever; but the new nature, fully developed 
in the resurrection, has "all power in heaven and 
in earth. "--Matt. 28:18. 

The priestly office of the new nature is not of the 
Aaronic order: it does not trace its lineage to any human 
source. This fact is strikingly typified in the priesthood 
of Melchisedec, whose lineage and death are not recorded. 
He was a priest without having inherited the office from 
his father or his mother— thus typifying Christ's priesthood, 
which came not of the lineage of the flesh, as did the 
Aaronic priesthood, which Israel thought to be the real. 
Neither was Melchisedec's death recorded, nor a successor 
named (Heb. 7:3, Diaglott), that thus might be typified 
the continuity of Christ's priesthood. In this type the 
work of sacrifice is not shown, as Melchisedec represents 
the Christ glorified and reigning after the work of sacrifice 
has been completed, and the divine nature fully perfected. 

In Heb. 7:4-10 Melchisedec is declared to be greater 
than Abraham, thus showing that the divine Christ will be 
greater, and therefore able to bless every "friend of God" 
on the human plane. 

"Wherefore he [Christ] is able to save them to the 

R1956 : page 69 

uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth 
to make intercession for them. For such a High Priest became 
us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from 
sinners, and made higher than the heavens [lifted higher 
than the highest— to the divine nature]." (Heb. 7:25-27.) 
And this blessed assurance of such a priest, so mighty to 
save, is confirmed unto us by the oath of Jehovah. (Heb. 7:21; 
Psa. 110:4.) What strong consolation, then, may 
those have, who have fled to Jehovah's Anointed for refuge: 
"Jehovah has sworn, and will not repent. Thou art a 
priest forever after the order of [or typified by] Melchisedec." 
What believer, justified by faith, who has offered 
himself as a living sacrifice, may not read his title clear to 
joint-heirship with the Head in that glorious anointed 



body? He is authorized and is able to save completely 

all that come unto God by him now, as well as all who shall 

hear and come in the Millennium. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly 
calling, consider the Apostle and High-Priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus;. ..for we have become associates 
of the Anointed, if indeed we hold fast the beginning of 
our confidence, firm to the end."— Heb. 3:1,14, Diaglott. 

We conclude then, that while the Aaronic priesthood 
furnishes typical illustrations of the sacrifices and sufferings 
of Christ and the blessings to follow, it did not completely 
illustrate the glorious, everlasting and unchangeable character 
of his priesthood during the Millennial age; and for 
this cause Melchisedec was presented as a type, that thus 
might be shown his glorious office of priest and king— a 
priest upon his throne. Here, too, the body of Christ is 
no longer shown as separate individuals, but as one, complete. 
In the work of sacrifice we have seen the head or 
chief priest and the under priests more or less separately 
sacrificing, as represented in Aaron and the under priests; 
but all will unitedly share in the future glory represented 
in Melchisedec alone. 



R1956 : page 69 

LAYING ON OF HANDS. 



West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-From the TOWER for Nov. 
15, '95, 1 was gratified to find that your mind and investigation 
upon the subject of "Order in the Church" coincides 
so exactly with our own. Before seeing anything from 
you at all on the subject, the Church here realized the necessity 
of more order, and was forced to examine the whole 
subject with the result you state. 

There is one item, however, that you seem to have 
overlooked or thought not necessary to discuss, upon which 
I greatly desire to have your opinion; that is, in regard to 
the custom of "laying on hands." 

I agree with you heartily in its being the best to follow 
the "pattern" as closely as possible, and in doing so I cannot 
avoid the conclusion that the recognition of God's 
gifts is expressed by the solemn formula of laying on hands 
of the presbytery. Now, if my conclusions are erroneous, 

R1957 : page 69 

please help me out. If in your understanding they are 
wrong, please explain the following texts: Acts 6:6; 1 Tim. 4:14; 
5:22. Are the terms "bishop" and "elder" 
synonymous? 
I am aware that in this ordinance the early Church 



conferred no special power, that it set up over them no 
ruler or lord; but did not this formula make the "elder" 
or "bishop" a representative or servant of those who 
lay on hands? We hope that your opinion, which we 
greatly respect, may help us out on this question. 

We have appointed three "elders"— one who takes 
oversight of the work at this place and two who work in 
the adjacent localities, I being one of the latter. I say appointed, 
but no hands have been laid on us; but the question 
is now being discussed by the brethren, and comes up 
for final settlement shortly. 

With fraternal love for you and yours, I remain, 
C. A. McCLUNG. 

[REPLY:— According to the Scripture use of the term 
the word "presbytery" signifies a "company of elders," 
the word coming from the Greek word which signifies "old 
man." The word "bishop" signifies "overseer," and is 
used with reference to elders in Acts 20:28, and is evidently 
another name for the elders mentioned in Phil. 1:1. 
The reference of 1 Tim. 5:22 may possibly be to ordination 
by laying on of hands; but this is uncertain. 

With regard to the laying on of hands of the presbytery 
(that is, the eldership) upon Timothy: the eldership 
in this case probably referred to the Apostles who were still 
living. Timothy was chosen by Paul as his successor to 
carry on the work which he began, and he evidently desired 
that the Apostles in general should recognize Timothy. 
Besides it was the custom in those days for the Apostles to 
lay hands upon all who believed, and thus to communicate 
to them a gift of the spirit. Paul reminds Timothy that he 
had received such a gift. In evidence that only the Apostles 
could confer these gifts we recall the fact that 
Simon Magus offered the Apostles money in exchange 
for the power that they possessed, so that upon whomsoever 
he might lay hands he would receive a gift of 
the spirit. We remember also the case mentioned in Acts 19:6, 
also Acts 8:12-19, in which it is shown that although 
Philip (the evangelist) had preached Christ to the Samaritans, 
and they had believed and been baptized, yet Philip 
did not lay hands upon them nor communicate the holy 
spirit, but sent word to Peter and John who were apostles, 
and who went down and prayed with them and communicated 
the gifts of the spirit. 

All of this seems to indicate clearly that only the apostles 
had the power to communicate these gifts of the spirit, 
although the apostles might very properly be called, and 
did call themselves, elders or presbyters. But since they 
are no longer living there are none who can convey the gifts 
of the spirit by the laying on of hands. 

R1957 : page 70 

But notice that in the early Church the laying on of 
hands was used also to indicate consent; as, for instance, in 
the case of the Church at Antioch when it chose Paul and 
Barnabas to be its missionaries and representatives in 



Gospel work. This congregation fasted and prayed and 

laid their hands upon Paul and Barnabas, and thus sent 

them away. The laying on of hands in this case did not 

imply the communication of any gift, but merely denoted 

representation, as in the case of the priests of old, when 

the offerer laid his hands upon the animal before it was slain, 

it represented that the animal or person upon whom the 

hands were laid was thenceforth recognized as the representative 

of the person who laid hands upon it or him. Thus 

the congregation at Antioch sent forth two from their midst 

as their representatives in the work. No doubt they also 

furnished them money for their travel, and after they had 

performed their journey Paul and Barnabas returned to the 

Church at Antioch and gave them a report of the work 

done as their representatives as well as the Lord's representatives. 

--See Acts 14:26,27; Also 15:3. 

Applying these things to the present time we would say: 
In Europe and America the custom of laying on hands to 
indicate representation is no longer followed, just as kissing 
among men is no longer a custom, although both customs 
are still in vogue in the far East. We suggest, therefore, 
that in our judgment the choosing and fasting and prayer 
are still the proper acts in connection with the congregational 
recognition of the elders— whether local or traveling; 
but that the laying on of hands, which could communicate 
no gift of the spirit, and which in the custom of our country 
no longer indicates representation, is no longer the proper 
thing. Indeed, we consider it the improper thing in view 
of the customs and practices in general, because it would 
be liable to be misunderstood, and to give the impression 
that the users hold the theory in common with many that 
an apostolic succession has been continued with power to 
authorize and commission and to imbue the subjects with 
supernatural abilities; for instance, as do the Roman Catholics, 
Greek Catholics, Episcopalians, Mormons and to a 
lesser extent nearly all other denominations.] 



R1957 : page 70 

PARABLE OF THE GREAT SUPPER. 

-APRIL 12. -Luke 14:15-24.- 

Golden Text— "Come, for all things are now ready."— Luke 14:17. 

THE feast of this parable is not the feast of Isa. 25:6. 

That is to be a feast for all people and points forward 

to the Millennial age and its blessings, when the Kingdom 

of God will be established for the blessing of all the families 

of the earth:— "And in this mountain [Kingdom] shall 

the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, 

a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, 

of wines on the lees well refined." That will be a feast of 

joy and gladness such as earth has never known, the blessed 



tidings of which were proclaimed by angel messengers at 
the birth of Christ, through whom the invitation and privilege 
of admittance was to be extended to all mankind. 
"Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which 
shall be unto all people." 

But the feast of this parable is one to which only a 
select number are invited. It is a feast which was announced 
as ready at the beginning of the Gospel age. John the 
Baptist first announced it to the Jewish nation, saying, 
"Repent ye; for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand." 
(Matt. 3:2.) And after him came Jesus of Nazareth, saying, 
"The time is fulfilled [—"all things are now ready"] 
and the Kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye and believe 
the gospel [the good news of the great feast now ready]." 
(Mark 1:15.) It is noticeable also that while this feast was 
announced as ready in the beginning of the Gospel age, 
and that while the bountiful board has been spread for a 
select company all through this age, the feast for "all 
people" is foretold as a thing future— after the great time 
of trouble (Isa. 25:1-4), when great Babylon will have 
been destroyed. 

Both of these feasts consist of the good things pertaining 
to the Kingdom of God; but the difference is that the 
feast of this Gospel age pertains to the spiritual phase of 
the Kingdom, while that of the age to come will pertain to 
the earthly Kingdom. The feast now spread is for the elect 
Gospel Church, while that of the Millennium is for "all 
people"— all the willing and obedient. 

If it be asked, Of what good things does this feast 
consist? the reply is suggested by the Psalmist (Psa. 34:8), 
"O taste and see that the Lord is good." And Peter adds, 
"As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word 
so that ye may grow thereby: if so be ye have tasted that 
the Lord is gracious." (1 Pet. 2:3.) Those who have a 
mere curiosity interest to know what good things are found 
upon the table of the Lord can never know. Only those 
who come with sincere hearts to taste and see for themselves 
can ever know. Theirs is the "hidden manna." They 
have "meat to eat" that others "know not of;" for "the 
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him." Unto them 
"it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of 
heaven"— the mystery which was kept secret since the 
world began. -Rev. 2:17; John 4:32; Psa. 25:14; 
Matt. 13:11,35. 

It is their blessed privilege to know and realize their 
relationship to Christ as his prospective bride and joint-heir, 
and, as his betrothed, to hold sweet communion with him 
here. And they may feast continually upon the glorious 
hope of living and reigning with him, of seeing him as he 
is, and being made like him, and of inheriting with him 
the spiritual phase of the Kingdom of God, being partakers 
with him also of the divine, immortal nature. Words can 
never make manifest to uncircumcised hearts the blessedness 
of the privileges of the saints at "the table of the Lord," 
even amidst the trials and difficulties of the present life and 
its warfare with the powers of darkness. "Thou preparest 



a table before me in the presence of mine enemies; thou 
anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over;" for 
the glorious fellowship with Christ hereafter has its joyful 
beginning even here, in the fellowship of his sufferings and 
his cross. 

R1957 : page 71 

Only those are invited to this table of the Lord— this 
feast of spiritual blessings, of communion and fellowship 
with God, of a knowledge of the deep things of God, the 
exceeding great and precious promises, and of joy in cooperating 
with him in his plan of salvation— who desire to 

R1958 : page 71 

forsake all other tables; for "Ye cannot be partakers of 
the Lord's table and of the table of devils." (1 Cor. 10:21). 
Only deeply appreciative ones are desired at this feast— 
those who will gladly forsake all to enjoy the favor. Our 
Lord Jesus expressed this fact forcibly when he said: "If 
any man come to me and hate not [love not less] his father, 
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and 
sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. 
And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, 
cannot be my disciple.. ..Whosoever he be of you that 
forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple." 
-Luke 14:26,27,33. 

Those who do cheerfully and of their own free will 
comply with these conditions are privileged to come to the 
table of the Lord and to partake of his bounties. But the 
realization of these conditions is the explanation of the indifference 
and even opposition of many who hear the call. 
They are not willing to sacrifice the business prospects of 
the present life, the social ties, etc. They consider the 
cost, and prefer to be excused. Such will never taste of the 
supper. 

The parable shows three classes called: (1) Those originally 
invited; i.e., those of Israel who, having respect 
to their covenant, were striving to keep the Law, and thus to 
attain to all that God had promised (the "elder brother" class 
of the parable of the prodigal son). To this class belonged the 
Kingdom favors by divine covenant, if they had appreciated 
and accepted them; but the strait gate and narrow way repelled 
them and they excused themselves, and were excused. 
(2) The class of the streets and lanes of the city represents the 
publican and sinner class of Israel— the prodigal-son class, 
of which some came, and, accepting the terms, left all to 
follow the Lord. But that remnant was not sufficient— not 
the full number which God had foreknown and predestinated 
should be the elect number to constitute the 
Kingdom class of joint-heirs with Christ. Hence (3) the 
Lord sent forth the message to the Gentiles— outside the city, 
outside of Israel— in the highways and hedges urging* a 
sufficient number of them to come to complete the elect 
number. 



Truly so precious an invitation is worthy of our strivings 
and self-denials to attain it; and the truly appreciative will 
lay aside every weight and the sin that doth so easily beset, 
and run with patience the race for this great prize. But, 
thank God, we are no longer deluded into the belief that 
those who, blinded by Satan, reject this great invitation will 
be everlastingly tormented therefor.— Compare 2 Cor. 4:4 
withlsa. 29:18; 35:5; and Rev. 20:1-3. 

We are plainly told that the great majority who hear the 
call will reject, and that only a "little flock," a mere remnant, 
of both Jews and Gentiles will be the privileged sharers of 
this "supper." And "blessed" indeed will he be "who 
shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God"— who shall be 
counted worthy to share with Christ in the honors and 
glory of the spiritual Kingdom established. "To him 
that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne." 
"Fear not, little flock [of overcoming ones], it is your 
Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom." 



*"Compel" in verse 23 is better rendered constrain or urge as in 
the Diaglott. The Lord never compels the acceptance of his favors, 
but he does constrain by his love and grace and promises those who 
love righteousness and truth.— 2 Cor. 5:11,14,15. 



R1958 : page 71 

THE PRODIGAL RECEIVED. 
-APRIL 19.-Luke 15:11-32.- 



Golden Text— "Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence 
of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth."— Luke 15:10. 

THIS parable, as also the two preceding ones concerning 
the joy in finding the lost sheep and the 
precious bit of silver, was spoken by way of reproof to the 
murmuring of the Pharisees and scribes against our Lord's 
gracious attitude toward the publicans and sinners who in 
great multitudes assembled to hear him. Their complaint was, 
"This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them."— Vs. 2. 
The parable recognizes two classes in the Jewish nation, 
—one represented by the "elder son," who had carefully 
and wisely preserved their portion of the inheritance granted 
them, and the other a prodigal class who had wasted their 
portion in riotous living. The former class were the Pharisees, 
and all who had respect unto their inheritance in the 
Law Covenant, which was the portion granted to all Israel 
by the Heavenly Father; while the latter class were such as 
recklessly plunged into open sin, regardless of all their interests 
in the inheritance granted to them. But, as a matter 
of fact, while the one had preserved and the other had 
wasted his inheritance, neither class had rightly valued or 



comprehended all that was implied in their share of the inheritance 
of Israel, and while the one had grievously sinned, 
neither was the other without sin; and the sin of both 
hindered the operation of the Law Covenant for their blessing. 
And so that which was ordained to life was found to 
be unto death.— Rom. 7:10. 

Seeing the helpless condition of all, which neither of 
these classes realized, God, in his abounding mercy, sent to 
them the Messenger of a New Covenant, which would indeed 
be unto life to all who should comply with its righteous 
conditions. (Gal. 3:21,22; Acts 3:26.) Now while the 
"elder son" class was really in the most favorable position 
to receive the blessings of the new covenant in Christ, being 
schooled in the law and the prophets, all of which testified 
of Christ in type and prophecy, as a matter of fact, as 
Jesus said (Matt. 21:31,32), the publications and harlots 
were going into the Kingdom blessings and privileges before 
them. And why? Simply because this "elder son" class had 
cultivated a spirit of pride and boastfulness, feeling that 
they had done a very meritorious thing in simply retaining 
their respect for the law and refraining from riotous living, 
whereas in this they had done nothing more than their duty, 
and that they had done very imperfectly. They had actually 
become so vain and puffed up in their self-righteous conceit 
that they were thereby blinded to their need of any new 
covenant of life, and they became foolishly confident of receiving 
eternal life as a recompense for their imperfect, 
outward keeping of the law. 

The publicans and sinners, on the other hand, seeing 
nothing whatever in themselves to boast of, saw no hope for 
themselves in the provisions of God's perfect law, which 

R1958 : page 72 

they had openly and grossly violated; and being despised by 
and cast out from the more law-abiding "elder brother" 
class, they were ready to appreciate the condescending love 
and kindness of the Lord, the great Teacher and Prophet 
in Israel, and to profit by his instructions. The hearts of 
many of this "prodigal" class were won by the meek and 
loving zeal of the Lord for their recovery from the bondage 
of sin and their reestablishment in the favor of God. 

Had the hearts of the scribes and Pharisees been right, 
had they really been actuated by the spirit of the divine 
law, even though they could not fulfil its letter, they would 
have rejoiced in the return of the prodigal publicans and 
sinners from the paths of sin to the paths of righteousness. 
But, actuated by a spirit of proud self -righteousness, they 
scorned the returning prodigal and arrayed themselves in 
opposition to the Lord, the Heavenly Father's representative, 
who graciously welcomed them and taught them and 
companied with them and blessed them. This loving, helpful 
spirit is the spirit which the Lord would have all his 
people exercise toward even the most degraded of men who 
manifest any disposition to forsake sin and return to the 
right ways of the Lord. In our Father's name, he would 



have us meet them, even while they are yet a long way off, 
and encourage their return with assurances of a hearty welcome 
and a blessed feast. He would have us bring hither 
the best robe,— the robe of Christ's imputed righteousness, 
that, thus clothed, they may receive the unending divine 
favor of which the ring was a symbol, and the seal of the 
Father's love of which the kiss was a token. 

This is the spirit manifested also among all the holy 
angels:— "There is joy in the presence of the angels of 
God over one sinner that repenteth." 



R1958 : page 72 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



We are sure that many aching hearts will respond to 
the sentiments of the following letter. To such must come 
with the sweeter encouragement those words spoken to one 
of old— "She hath done what she could;" and that other 
assurance— "Ye are complete in him." 

Dear friends, we "labor fervently for you in prayers, 
that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of 
God," even unto death. 

Texas. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-As I have written you before, 
my father and wife have been very sick this winter; hence 
I have been close at home. I have only two appointments 
each month. 

I think of Moses in Kadesh. When the people were 
complaining on account of no water, the Lord commanded 
Moses to take the rod and gather the assembly together. 
Moses surely gathered from this that he was to use the rod. 
When I was commanded to "go preach," I started, supposing 

R1959 : page 72 

that to preach was all, or the main business, that 
God (who was able) would remove all hindrances and that 
I would go into what I did (and do) delight. This was 
fifteen years ago. 

Alas! I have found that there are many oppositions, 
and that God did not promise to remove them but to assist 
me in overcoming them. 

Now I think of David's prayer (Psalm 19: 13) — 
"Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins." We 
may presume; but I now see it is best to "wait upon the 
Lord," and "be instant in and out of season." Oh, yes! 
"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he 
is tried [not before] he shall receive the crown of life which 
the Lord hath promised to them [who succeed in their undertaking 
and are never overcome by temptation? Ah, no! 
if that were the case, and such only were to be blessed, 



many, and I for one, would be left, but it is to them] that 
love him." Yes! Praise his holy name! I know I love 
him, and am filled with prayer and praise, and my desire is 
well expressed by the Psalmist— "Let the words of my 
mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy 
sight, O Lord, my strength and my redeemer." 

Here is my great desire, and may I, yes, I will! approximate 
as nearly as possible to a life of harmony with, 
and perfect obedience to, him who said, "I do always the 
things that please him." 

So now, whether I may stand before the people to declare 
the glad tidings (in which I so much delight) or stand 
around the bed to witness the sufferings of those I love so 
dearly (which is so heart rending), I want to be submissive 
and "endure as seeing him who is invisible." 



The following letter from an aged Brother is refreshing 
and encouraging. He is spending his declining days in 
going about binding up the broken hearted and applying so 
far as permitted the eye salve of present truth to the blind 
eyes. May God bless him, and all like him who are giving 
their all in sacrifice. "How beautiful upon the mountains 
are the feet of Him," etc. 

Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER:— With me life's work still progresses; 
though feebly and slowly, as in age I approach an open 
grave— the spirit is willing but I find the flesh is weak. I 
have been laboring here at home with the intent of creating 
an interest in the truths of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
with some success; but nothing to what I had fondly desired. 

Religious teachers are making every effort, and using 
all conceivable means, to keep the minds and hearts of their 
membership and hearers intensely occupied with church 
work and measures, thereby preventing their consideration 
of any thing new (to them) in religious thought. 

I am content that the harvest should come in God's 
own good time. No doubt we shall be surprised some day 
to learn the untold value of the truths we are now spreading 
to the world at large during the great day of trouble 
upon which we are entering. I purpose now, the Lord 
willing, to spend some time from home this coming winter 
with the chart. Enclosed please find order for tracts. 

Yours in the bonds of truth and love divine, 
S. S. CONE. 



page 72 

Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed find my "Good 
Hopes" contribution for this year. I send it all now, hoping 
it will be a help in the Harvest work. 

Thank God for the help received from the TOWER! 
Several years ago it showed me how selfish I was; and by 



the grace of God I have been trying to overcome it. And 
now the last TOWER (Feb. 15) shows me that I have not 
been guarding my thoughts and words as I should. The 
Lord is my helper. Yours in love and service, 



page 73 
