Kingdom News No. 33
Life—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?
Our earth is packed with so many amazing and different types of living things. Where did they all come from? Where did we humans come from? Did we evolve from apelike animals, or were we created? And does it really matter?
Why It Matters What We Believe
Today, millions of people believe in evolution. Other millions believe in creation. Still others are uncertain about what to believe. Then, too, some feel that it does not make any difference whether we evolved or were created.
However, it can make a big difference. Why? Because if life just evolved by itself, then we can expect only more of the same struggle with war, suffering, sickness, and death, which have filled human history.
On the other hand, if there really is a Creator who made separate and distinct kinds of living things, there must be a purpose in his putting them on earth. And certainly, then, there is a purpose in putting humans here. If this is so, our future will be determined, not by evolution, but by the Creator’s purpose in making us. Therefore, it is only reasonable that we should want to know more about this vital subject.
And do not think that science has settled the matter. As evolutionary scientist W. R. Thompson said in his introduction to a special edition of Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species:
“There is a great divergence of opinion among biologists, not only about the causes of evolution but even about the actual process. This divergence exists because the evidence is unsatisfactory . . . It is therefore right and proper to draw the attention of the non-scientific public to the disagreements about evolution.”
To help you determine for yourself what the facts are, and just what it means to your future, the book Life—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? has been prepared. Already, millions of people have found it of great value. As one reader said: “It’s a masterpiece!” See the following page for more details.
See Why Millions Find It of Great Value
The book Life—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? is being read by millions of people in many lands and languages. Many have expressed appreciation for its thoroughly documented discussion of how life came to be, where humans came from, and what this means for our future. Note some of the book’s 20 intriguing chapters:
● Disagreements About Evolution—Why?
● Could Life Originate by Chance?
● Letting the Fossil Record Speak
● “Ape-Men”—What Were They?
● The Amazing Design of Living Things
● Why Do Many Accept Evolution?
● Why Would God Permit Suffering?
● Can You Trust the Bible?
OBTAIN YOUR COPY of this 256-page, large-size, beautifully illustrated book by filling out the coupon and sending $2.50 (U.S.) to the following address:
Please send, postpaid, the book Life—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? I enclose $2.50 (U.S.). (Contribution subject to change.)
[Picture on page 2]
Where did this AMAZING VARIETY OF LIFE come from?
[Picture Credit Line on page 3]
Photo credits: U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, ground squirrel and hummingbird by Dean Biggins, butterfly by William Hartgroves.

