Do You Discuss Religion?
“Please, let’s change the subject. There are two things I never discuss—religion and politics!”
“I leave religion to the wife and kids.”
“I do not want to discuss religion now. I just got home from church.”
DO THESE comments sound familiar? Some prefer not to discuss religion because they view it as a matter between them and God. Jesus himself said: “When you pray, go into your private room and, after shutting your door, pray to your Father who is in secret; then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.”—Matthew 6:6.
On the other hand, Jesus and his disciples did not feel that every aspect of religion should be private. They freely and openly talked about a variety of spiritual topics, and this resulted in their teachings being spread throughout the world. (Acts 1:8; Colossians 1:23) Of course, not everybody was inclined to talk with them, and some who did remained skeptical.
Today, too, attitudes toward discussing religion vary from person to person and from culture to culture. In many Western lands, for example, people tend to be quite concerned with secular matters—education, employment, sports, computers, TV, and so forth. In other cultures, people are more willing to talk about their beliefs. Yet, regardless of people’s background, things happen in their lives that move some who previously were not interested in religion to reassess their spiritual need.
Intolerance Discourages Many
Those who refuse to discuss religion may have seen or been involved in a discussion that boiled over into a heated argument. “Difference of religion breeds more quarrels than difference of politics,” said a renowned orator. Also, Richard M. Johnson, an early American vice president, observed: “Religious zeal enlists the strongest prejudices of the human mind; and, when misdirected, excites the worst passions of our nature under the delusive pretext of doing God service.”
Does it strike you as odd that something as potentially elevating and ennobling as the teachings of the Bible should be misused to promote intolerance, bigotry, and hatred? Actually, it is not those teachings of the Bible that make religion unpalatable to many. Rather, it is a corruption of them. Consider, for example, Christianity.
By word and example, Christianity’s Founder, Jesus Christ, encouraged love of God and love of neighbor, not intolerance and fanaticism. The tools employed by Christ and his followers in their ministry were reason and persuasion. (Matthew 22:41-46; Acts 17:2; 19:8) And they prayed for their enemies and persecutors.—Matthew 5:44; Acts 7:59, 60.
True religion enlightens mind and heart, and it draws people together. For sincere truth seekers, therefore, dignified religious discussion can be very fruitful, as we shall see.
[Box on page 3]
What Prominent Persons Have Said
  “If Jesus is the way to God, it is imperative for followers of Jesus to share this with other people.”—Ben Johnson, professor of evangelism at Columbia Theological Seminary.
  “Jesus taught his disciples to take the gospel to the people. The Great Commission demands that we go into all the world. The Lord commanded his followers to go into the highways and byways.”—Kenneth S. Hemphill, director of the Southern Baptist Center for Church Growth.
  “Unless we are witnesses, we cannot be authentic Christians. . . . Every Christian is called to be a missionary and witness.”—Pope John Paul II.
  “Too many preachers . . . are more interested in building big congregations and church construction projects and their next pastoral assignment than they are in preaching the uncompromising and uncomfortable message contained in the Gospel.”—Cal Thomas, author and columnist.
  “We’ve got to knock on doors . . . Like the (Jehovah’s) Witnesses and some of the others, we’ve got to get out there and proclaim the Gospel of Jesus Christ.”—Thomas V. Daily, Catholic bishop.

