From Our Readers
End of Poverty  Thank you so much for the June 8, 1998, Awake! series “The End of Poverty Nears.” It really put things in perspective and made me aware of my own complaining attitude. I am unemployed and have little spare money. I thought I was in poverty. Hardly! This article shows that there are others worse off than I am. I should be grateful for what I already have—food, clothing, good health and, most important, Jehovah. I so much look forward to the end of poverty. My resolve is to keep seeking Jehovah’s Kingdom and to stop complaining.
C. W., New Zealand
Celibacy  For some years I have been a reader of your magazines. I have to protest your one-sided reporting about the doctrines of the Catholic Church in the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Is Celibacy a Requirement for Christian Ministers?” (June 8, 1998) There is no “enforced celibacy” in the Catholic Church! There is only a voluntarily chosen celibacy that is a prerequisite for a certain profession. Whoever claims that he was forced into celibacy is lying.
R. G., Germany
We believe that there is an important distinction between the phrase enforced celibacy and the notion that people are forced into celibacy. If, for example, a corporation establishes a dress code and hires only those who agree to adhere to it but fires those who violate it, then it could be said that the corporation has an “enforced” dress code. In a similar sense, it is fair to say that there is “enforced celibacy” in the Catholic priesthood. Our article, however, mainly points out the lack of a Scriptural basis for making celibacy a prerequisite for Christian ministers. (1 Timothy 3:2) Rather than criticizing those who choose singleness as a life course, the article noted that this “has proved to be a rewarding and spiritually satisfying way of life for some.”—ED.
My Choice Between Two Fathers  I learned the truth of God’s Word from a school friend when I was 14 years old. My parents, especially my father, opposed my study. Fortunately, he never followed through on his threats to expel me from the house. I persevered and was baptized five years ago. Like the brother in the article (June 8, 1998), I hope that one day my parents will share my hope of living in Jehovah’s righteous new world.
W. S. L., Brazil
Tears came to my eyes when I read the article. My father has been a determined opponent of my beliefs. Even though we can talk reasonably with each other at times, whenever the subject of the Bible or Jehovah’s Witnesses comes up, I fear his angry outbursts. He has attacked me physically several times. But the article gave me warm encouragement to stand firm, even in the face of such strain.
I. H., Germany
The article moved me deeply. Since I grew up in a religiously divided family, I can understand the emotional suffering of the young man who was forced to make such a difficult choice.
A. M., Italy
Fibromyalgia  Thank you so much for the article “Understanding and Living With Fibromyalgia.” (June 8, 1998) I have been suffering from fibromyalgia for six years. The article is thorough and accurate. Also, the scriptures in the box encouraged me greatly.
N. M., United States
The article generated a considerable response. We hope to publish more comments in a future issue.—ED.

