The Hope Offered by True Religion
BY NATURE we like to talk about things that concern or excite us. This is one reason why Jehovah’s Witnesses delight in sharing the Bible’s wonderful message with others. That message, which features the Kingdom of God, contains the answers to questions about the things that really concern people today, such as the future, security, health, and happiness.—Luke 4:43.
But first, what is God’s Kingdom?
A Thrilling Hope
God’s Kingdom is a government of God ruled by his Son, the “Prince of Peace.” The Bible says regarding him: “There has been a child born to us, there has been a son given to us; and the princely rule will come to be upon his shoulder. And his name will be called . . . Prince of Peace. To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end.”—Isaiah 9:6, 7.
Looking far into the future, yes, to our own period of history with its rulers, another Bible prophecy foretold: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”—Daniel 2:44.
This Kingdom of God, ruled by Christ, the Prince of Peace, will fulfill the prayer Jesus taught his followers to pray, namely: “Our Father in the heavens . . . , let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:9, 10) What will it mean for the earth and for us when God’s Kingdom comes? Consider the promises made by Jehovah God himself, as recorded in the Bible. Some of them are illustrated on these pages.
A Message From God
The wonderful promises found in God’s Word should not be kept hidden, and this brings us back to the matter of discussing religion. Jesus foretold that prior to the end of the present system of things, his followers would take the initiative to preach about God’s Kingdom: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.”—Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20; Acts 1:8.
It is this message regarding God’s Kingdom that Jehovah’s Witnesses are proclaiming worldwide. This magazine’s companion, The Watchtower, is published in 130 languages, and on the cover of each of the more than 22 million copies printed per issue are the words “Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom.”
As a wise person, you want to make informed decisions about your life. (Proverbs 18:13) We, therefore, invite you personally to learn more about the glorious Kingdom of God and what it can mean for you. To that end, do not exclude yourself from discussing the Bible. No discussion could be more informative, interesting, and important.—John 17:3.
[Box/Pictures on page 8, 9]
Promises of a Paradise Earth
Total peace will prevail on earth. “In his days the righteous one will sprout, and the abundance of peace until the moon is no more.”—Psalm 72:7, 8.
Even the dead will be brought back to life. “There is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.”—Acts 24:15.
Perfect health will be enjoyed forever. “[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
People will build and occupy their own homes. “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.”—Isaiah 65:21.
Food will be abundant. “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”—Psalm 72:16.

