





How to Make Your Study of the Bible More Effective and Enjoyable









JOSHUA faces a daunting challenge. He has to lead the nation of Israel into the Promised Land in the face of formidable obstacles. Jehovah assures him of success, though, and encourages him: ‘Be courageous and strong. Observe my Law. Read it day and night, in order to observe carefully all that is written in it. Then you will be successful and you will act wisely.’​—Josh. 1:7, 8.
In these “critical times hard to deal with,” we too face formidable challenges. (2 Tim. 3:1) Like Joshua, we can succeed by following the advice Jehovah gave him. We can read the Bible regularly and carefully apply its principles to the tests we face.
However, many of us would admit that we are not the best students and that studying is not easy for us. Yet, since studying the Bible is so important, review the box “Try These Suggestions” for some good tips that can make your study more effective and enjoyable.
“Guide me in the pathway of your commandments,” sang the psalmist, “for in it I take delight.” (Ps. 119:35) You can derive great pleasure from considering God’s Word. Rewarding gems are awaiting discovery as you dig for spiritual treasures.
Although you do not have to lead a nation as Joshua did, you have your own challenges to face. So, like Joshua, study and observe what has been written for your benefit. When you do, you too will be successful and act wisely.



TRY THESE SUGGESTIONS





Pray before you study. The Bible contains the thoughts of the almighty God that he had recorded for your benefit. So when you read the Bible, seek his help to understand it, retain it, and apply it in your life.​—Ezra 7:10.






Ask yourself questions as you read the Bible or Bible-based literature: ‘What does this passage tell me about Jehovah? How does it contribute to the overall message of his Word? How can I use these thoughts to help others?’






Meditate on what you study. Stop reading and think: ‘How does this material make me feel? Why does it make me feel that way? How does it relate to my past experiences, to my current situation, or to possible future events? How can I apply these Bible principles and this counsel in my life?’ (Job 23:5; Ps. 49:3) See if you can explain why Jehovah urges his people to avoid certain practices or what the consequences of a different course of action would likely be.​—Deut. 32:28, 29.






Use your imagination when reading descriptive passages. Can you, for example, picture the scene as Joseph’s brothers sell him to the Ishmaelites? (Gen. 37:18-28) What do you see, hear, and smell? Put yourself in the place of the characters. What are they thinking and feeling? Such thoughts will make your study more vivid and meaningful.






Use the study tools that have been provided to enrich your research. Get familiar with the tools available in your language, both online and in print. Do not hesitate to ask others to help you learn how to use them effectively. The Watch Tower Publications Index or the Research Guide for Jehovah’s Witnesses, for example, will help you to locate what has been written on many topics and to find explanations of many Bible verses. Use the appendixes of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures if available in a language you know. These provide useful information on geography, chronology, weights and measures, and so on.






Summarize key points in the material to help you remember what you have just studied. Better still, share it with others. Is there something you can use in your ministry? In these ways, you not only fix the main points in your mind but also use what you have studied to benefit others.




