Where Can You Find Answers?
ONE goal of religion is to teach the purpose of life. Many people, however, have found that their spiritual needs have been unfulfilled by the teachings of their religion. Denise, who was raised as a Catholic, recalls: “The Baltimore Catechism includes the question, ‘Why did God make us?’ with the answer, ‘God made us to show forth His goodness and to share with us His everlasting happiness in heaven.’
“That didn’t provide a clear reason for why I am here,” Denise continued. “If I’m only waiting to go to heaven, what am I supposed to be doing in the meantime?” Denise’s experience is not unusual. One survey found that two thirds of those interviewed believe that most churches and synagogues are not effective in helping people find a meaning in life.
As a result, many turn elsewhere to find answers—to science or various forms of philosophy identified by such labels as humanism, nihilism, and existentialism. Why do people keep seeking, although few seem to realize satisfaction?
Inherently Spiritual
Dr. Kevin S. Seybold calls it “the seemingly universal tendency of humans to worship something.” In recent years a number of scientists have reached the conclusion that humans are, in fact, inherently inclined to look for a deeper meaning in life. Some actually believe that genetic and other physiological evidence points to a natural need for humans to connect with a higher power.
While the concept of spirituality is debated in academic circles, most people do not need a scientific consensus to believe that humans have a spiritual need. It is our spirituality that triggers in our mind what some call ultimate questions: Why are we here? What should we do with our lives? Are we accountable to an all-powerful Creator?
If you make time for careful observation of the natural world, you will find some of the answers to these questions. For instance, consider the mind-boggling complexities found in nature, from unicellular organisms to galactic clusters millions of light years away. Do they not tell us that there is an intelligent Designer, or Creator? The Bible says: “For [God’s] invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.”—Romans 1:20.
Satisfy Your Spiritual Need
Regarding the way God made humans, the Bible says: “He has even put eternity into their minds.” (Ecclesiastes 3:11, Byington) Our inborn desire is to live, not to die. Our inherent quest is to know the meaning of life, to want answers to questions.
Seeking answers is, in effect, part of being human. After noting man’s scientific and technological achievements, an editor of The Wall Street Journal wrote: “We are still left with questions of who we are and why we are and where we are going.” Wisely, we will look for answers from the best source. Pointing to that Source, the Bible says: “[God] has made us, and not we ourselves.”—Psalm 100:3.
Is it not reasonable that we look to the One responsible for such miracles of creation to satisfy our spiritual need? Jesus Christ recommended that we do just that. He recognized that only the Source of life—our Creator—can satisfy our spiritual need.—Psalm 36:5, 9; Matthew 5:3, 6.
Surely, having a reliable answer to the question Why are we here? is vital to having our spiritual need satisfied. Please consider the refreshing viewpoint of our Creator on this matter.

