Announcements
AUGUST DISTRICT ASSEMBLIES
Can you imagine a city of several thousand persons not requiring a complete law-enforcing organization, with its courts, judges, detectives, policemen and all the other essential crime-prevention measures, besides strong jails with barred windows? And without all of these the people would still feel secure? No strong locks, no bolted doors! Impossible, you say? Normally, Yes. But none of such would be necessary in and around the assembly grounds of the convention cities of Jehovah’s witnesses. When you walk through the stadium or auditorium entrances you will be within the type of “city” that is ruled not by guns, or billy clubs, but rather by kindness, love and genuine hospitality. Would you like to meet with such a gathering? Remaining assemblies are listed below.
August assemblies. July 29-August 1: Billings, Mont. Charleston, S. C.; El Paso, Tex.; Milwaukee, Wis., Oakland, Calif.; Oklahoma City, Okla.; Pueblo, Colo.; Salt Lake City, Utah; Sioux City, Iowa; Tampa, Fla. August 5-8: Portland, Oreg.; New Westminster, British Columbia, Can. August 12-15: Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Can. August 19-22: Halifax, Nova Scotia.
FLEEING TO THE MOUNTAINS FOR SAFETY
In his prophecy concerning the end of this world Jesus said: “When you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation, as spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place, (let the reader use discernment,) then let those in Judea begin fleeing to the mountains.” (Luke 21:20, 21; Matt. 24:15, 16, NW) These things are now taking place. It is time for all persons of good will toward Jehovah God to take refuge in the Kingdom. Realizing knowledge is necessary to do this, all of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions will present three Bible study aid books and three booklets, on a contribution of $1.50, during August, to help many more of the other sheep yet to flee to the mountains of safety.
ARE YOU CONVINCED?
Are you convinced that the things you have been reading in the Watchtower publications are Scriptural and therefore true? That they have comforted and aided you? Then you are invited to introduce to those you are able to contact the following tracts:
The Sign of Christ’s Presence (T9)
Man’s Only Hope for Peace (T10)
Which Is the Right Religion? (T11)
Do You Believe in Evolution or the Bible? (T12)
You may obtain 200 tracts for 25c, or 1,000 for 75c. Please specify the particular tracts you want.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 15: Religion in Politics Means War with God, ¶1-21.
Week of August 22: Religion in Politics Means War with God, ¶22-29, and This Generation’s Disgusting Alliance.

