Announcements
HOW TO SHINE AS THE “LIGHT OF THE WORLD”
To his true followers Jesus said: “You are the light of the world. . . . let your light shine before mankind.” (Matt. 5:14, 16, NW) Only those who know about the Kingdom can tell the good news of its establishment and shine as the “light of the world.” Do you know, understand and appreciate “this good news of the kingdom”? Then you may have part in shining as the light of the world by actively telling the message to others. Do so by introducing the Watchtower magazine to others and obtaining their subscription for a year at only $1. Three booklets on absorbing Kingdom themes will be given to each subscriber.
IS YOUR HOPE WELL FOUNDED?
Life is the hope of all professing Christians. Yet fear of death haunts the world. Why? Because the world does not have a hope based on God’s Word. The Bible has much to say about salvation. But it also speaks at length about the end of the world. What is your hope? What is its basis? Thousands of persons have already gained assurance for the future through a new Bible study aid called “You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World.” To anchor your hope in the Word of God obtain your copy of this book for a contribution of 50c.
KEEPING THE LORD’S EVENING MEAL
“This do in remembrance of me,” said Jesus, as he instituted the commemorative evening meal of bread and wine, replacing the annual observance of passover. Accordingly, annually, on the anniversary of his death, his followers assemble as congregations to keep the Lord’s evening meal faithfully. This year the date Nisan 14 falls on March 26, after 6 p.m. All of Jehovah’s witnesses, remnant and other sheep, will assemble in their meeting places to hear a discourse delivered on this theme, after which the bread and wine will be passed separately, after Jehovah’s blessing has been asked upon each. In conclusion all will be invited to share in special activity arranged for spreading the Kingdom message throughout the area. Jehovah’s witnesses will make special effort to contact all good-will persons and invite them to attend the Lord’s evening meal. If you are not associated with a congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses, contact the nearest Kingdom Hall or write this office for additional information.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 29: Full-Time Service—a Glorious Treasure. Page 169.
May 6: Is This Treasure for You? Page 176.

