Soon No More Sickness or Death!
NO ONE enjoys being sick, nor do humans want to die. A professor of medical sociology asserts: “The search for longer life seems to be almost universal throughout history and in most societies. It is related to the basic drive for self-preservation . . . Ponce de Leon is only the most famous of a long line of men who spent their life seeking a longer life. Most of medical science is dedicated to preserving longer life through combating disease and death.”
Death so offends our inner nature that when it overcomes friends and family members, we almost naturally try to cushion its impact. The book Funeral Customs the World Over observes: “There is no group, however primitive at the one extreme or civilized at the other, which left freely to itself and within its means does not dispose of the bodies of its members with ceremony. . . . It satisfies deep universal urges. To carry it out seems ‘right,’ and not to carry it out, particularly for those who are closely connected by family, feeling, shared living, common experience or other ties, seems ‘wrong,’ an unnatural omission, a matter to be apologized for or ashamed of. . . . [Man] is a being that buries his dead with ceremony.”
The Origin of Sickness and Death
The idea that sickness and death will one day be eliminated thus has powerful appeal, but is there a basis for such a belief? Indeed there is, and it is both reasonable, reliable, and infallible. It is the inspired Word of our Creator​—the Holy Bible.
That book clearly explains the origin of human misery. It tells us that the first human, Adam, was created by God and placed in a paradise garden home located somewhere in the Middle East. Adam was created perfect; sickness and death were unknown to him. He was soon joined by an equally perfect wife, and together they enjoyed the prospect of eternal life on earth.​—Genesis 2:15-17, 21-24.
This idyllic state did not last long. Why? Because Adam selfishly chose a way of life independent of God. Hard labor, pain, sickness, and eventually death resulted. (Genesis 3:17-19) His offspring inherited the unhappy sort of life that Adam had chosen. Romans 5:12 explains: “Through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and thus death spread to all men because they had all sinned.” Romans 8:22 adds: “We know that all creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together until now.”
On Earth or in Heaven?
Nevertheless, the Bible assures us that God will soon restore obedient mankind to the happy condition that Adam and Eve lost. Says Revelation 21:3, 4: “God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” An ancient prophet similarly foresaw the time when “no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”​—Isaiah 33:24.
Can you imagine a world without hospitals, mortuaries, and graves? Can you imagine living on and on, free from even the threat of suffering and death? Yes, God’s promise touches emotions deep within all of us. Yet, how can we be sure that this wonderful prospect is for our planet Earth​—not for heaven? Note the context of the aforementioned Scripture texts. The first verses of Revelation chapter 21 verses 1-3 speak of “a new heaven and a new earth.” The clear statement is made that God will be with mankind and that they will be his people. The promise in the book of Isaiah that no one will be sick is followed by a reference to “the people that are dwelling in the land,” who have been “pardoned for their error.”
So these encouraging promises refer to life on earth! And they harmonize with Jesus’ prayer to his Father: “Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”​—Matthew 6:10.
Why Soon?
Jehovah’s Witnesses have helped millions to come to the realization that these promises will be fulfilled in the near future. On what basis, though, do they feel so sure of this? On the basis of overwhelming evidence that we are living in “the last days” of the present system, or arrangement, of things on earth. (2 Timothy 3:1-5) Jesus’ disciples asked for a sign as to when the conclusion of the system of things would be. In response Jesus foretold in detail the escalating world events that have taken place since the outbreak of World War I in 1914.a Then he added: “When you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors. Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.” So some of the generation living in 1914 will live to see the end of the present world system.​—Matthew 24:33, 34.
At that time Jehovah God will commission his Son, Christ Jesus, to go forth and destroy all causes of suffering and misery from the surface of this beautiful planet Earth. The Bible speaks of the elimination of wickedness as “the war of the great day of God the Almighty” at Armageddon.​—Revelation 16:14, 16.
A vast number of God-fearing humans will survive this awesome development and live to see the peaceful reign of Christ Jesus begin. (Revelation 7:9, 14; 20:4) Though his rule will be from heaven, its beneficial results will be enjoyed by all those living on earth​—both the survivors of the war of Armageddon and the millions upon millions who will subsequently be raised from the dead. The promise will then become a reality: “He [Christ] must rule as king until God has put all enemies under his feet. As the last enemy, death is to be brought to nothing.”​—1 Corinthians 15:25, 26.
We can thus confidently exclaim: “Soon no more sickness or death!” This is no pipe dream, nor is it wishful thinking. It is the sure promise of Jehovah God, “who cannot lie.” Will you put your trust in this hope? It can benefit you everlastingly!​—Titus 1:2.
[Footnotes]
For further evidence that mankind is living in the last days, see chapter 18 of the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture on page 7]
Sickness and death will soon be replaced by vibrant health and eternal life

