Witnessing in France​—A Land of Variety
FRANCE is a country of great variety. Majestic mountains, rolling hills, storm-swept rocky cliffs, warm sandy beaches, open grain fields, small hedged farms, extensive vineyards, pasturelands, coniferous and deciduous forests, hamlets, villages, towns, large modern cities​—France is all of this, and more.
Although much of the countryside has retained its charm, the French social scene has undergone rapid changes in recent years. “French society is not going through a period of crisis,” says the 1989 edition of Francoscopie, “but through a real upheaval. Social structures, values, cultural standards, and attitudes are undergoing deep changes at an accelerated pace.”
These drastic changes have also affected the religious realm. Though Catholicism is still the religion of the vast majority, it is now more a tradition than a religion with any real influence on the life of most members. The people’s increasing indifference toward spiritual values has halted the growth of the churches.
In sharp contrast, the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses in France has moved forward rapidly in the past few years. From Alsace in the northeast to Brittany on the Atlantic, from the lofty Alps to the low-lying Loire Valley, even on the Mediterranean isle of Corsica, Witnesses face different circumstances and meet people with different backgrounds. Let us take a pictorial tour and see what it is like to preach the Kingdom good news in France, the land of variety.​—Matthew 24:14.
ALSACE
Bordering Germany, Alsace is a province well-known for its vineyards and charming flower-filled villages. Strasbourg, its capital, has been a Protestant stronghold since the Reformation, and the Alsatians generally have a healthy respect for the Bible. Jehovah’s Witnesses have been preaching the Kingdom good news in this region since early in this century. Today, the work is well established, as exemplified by the experience of one youngster named Sylvie, who took advantage of the opportunity to preach in school.
In a discussion with several classmates, Sylvie brought up the purpose of life and the prospects for the future. One boy became sufficiently interested to let Sylvie and another Witness call on him at home. “Though this Catholic youth had been an altar boy, he had many questions that had never been answered,” said Sylvie. “We used the Bible to answer some of them, and he accepted a regular Bible study.” The young man was baptized one year later and after qualifying entered the full-time ministry as a regular pioneer. Sylvie too has since taken up that privilege of service.
BRITTANY
Jutting out into the Atlantic, Brittany is a province of strong Catholic tradition. However, through the persistent efforts of the Witnesses, an increasing number of people in this area are accepting the Kingdom message. Here is an example of what is happening in this northwestern region of France.
“A young couple moved into the apartment above ours,” reports a local Witness. “Some time later, I met the young woman on the staircase, with her son in her arms. Upon learning that his name was Jonathan, I asked if she knew the origin of that name. ‘I think it comes from the Bible, but that is all I know,’ she replied. She listened to the explanation I offered, and she mentioned that both she and her husband were intrigued by the Bible. Though we had further conversations, nothing concrete developed then.
“A little later, the couple asked me for advice on certain problems. I used the Bible to answer, and they were impressed by the information it had to offer. I invited them once more to study the Bible. The following day the young woman accepted. A few weeks later, her husband joined the study. Both are now baptized Witnesses.”
THE ALPS
The Alps are famous for spectacular scenery. People go there to marvel at the majestic peaks, particularly Mont Blanc, the highest summit in Western Europe. In this region also, the number of Kingdom publishers who glorify the Creator is increasing. People of all ages and from all walks of life are joining their ranks, as the following account shows.
Four youths in that area had quite a record. They stole cars and other goods, often got drunk, used and peddled drugs, and were involved in prostitution and spiritism. They were unemployed and in frequent trouble with the police, and all of them had been in prison. However, all four had heard about the truth in their childhood because their families had studied with Jehovah’s Witnesses from time to time.
After some years of wild living, one of the youths had a change of heart and decided to serve Jehovah. This caused a chain reaction. One day the police were carrying out a routine check, and they asked one of the youngsters to open his bag. Expecting to find drugs or stolen goods, they were surprised to find only a Bible and some booklets. The young man used the Bible to explain what brought about the changes in his life. Finding that hard to believe, one of the policemen asked: “You mean you don’t smoke, drink, or take drugs anymore?” The policemen finally accepted the explanation and let him go without further ado. Today these four young men are baptized, all are serving in the congregation as ministerial servants, and three of them are regular pioneers.
LOIRE VALLEY
The Loire Valley is called the garden of France. It stretches from Orléans, 70 miles [110 km] south of Paris, to the mouth of the Loire River on the Atlantic Coast. This region is known for its many castles, the former residences and hunting lodges of royalty. There are congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses in all the major towns in this area.
During school recess one day, little Emma, an outgoing and affectionate girl of six, went back to her classroom to greet her teacher. Shocked to see her teacher smoking, she burst into tears and ran away. The teacher went after her and asked why she was crying, yet Emma would not say anything. When the teacher insisted, Emma sobbed and replied: “It’s because you’re smoking. You are going to get sick and die!”
The next day the teacher called Emma’s mother to say how touched she was by the daughter’s reaction. So the mother explained the Witnesses’ stand regarding tobacco. The teacher then confided that her family had already asked her to give up smoking, but it had not worked. This time, however, she was so moved by Emma’s genuine response that she stopped smoking in just two days.
CORSICA
The isle of Corsica, though called “the scented isle,” is also known for the strong spirit of its inhabitants, often resulting in bloody vendettas. For years the Witnesses were viewed as a religion “from the Continent.” However, the power of Bible truth is changing the hearts of many there.
One newly baptized Witness related that once he returned from vacation to discover that all the portable equipment from his farm had been stolen. “By trusting in Jehovah,” he confided, “I was able to react differently from the way I would have reacted in the past.” While speaking to his neighbors, he calmly mentioned his loss.
“Later, some neighbors had problems. I left my work to go and help them out. A few days later, I received a phone call from one of them asking me to come over as soon as possible. Thinking he was in trouble again, I went over right away. He invited me to sit down and asked: ‘Do you know why I asked you to come? It’s about your equipment. I was the one who stole it. But when I saw your kind and friendly attitude, I said to myself, “I can’t do that to him!” And after you helped us out, I couldn’t sleep at night anymore.’” True Christianity in practice led to a good outcome.
At the end of the second world war, when the Kingdom witnessing work opened up again in France, there were only 1,700 Witnesses in the whole country. The task of reaching the entire population with the Kingdom message seemed an impossibility. However, over the years, Jehovah has blessed his people in France with the needed equipment​—printing plants, Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls, and so on—​and the willing spirit to accomplish the task. Today, with over 117,000 active preachers, the message that Jehovah’s Kingdom by Christ is the only hope for humanity is being preached throughout this land of variety.
[Map/​Pictures on page 23]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
FRANCE
BRITTANY
LOIRE VALLEY
THE ALPS
ALSACE
ATLANTIC OCEAN
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
ENGLISH CHANNEL
CORSICA

