Youths​—Will You Pass the Test of Christian Loyalty?
“YOU don’t think of immoral conduct as disloyalty. You’re simply having fun. True, you know that if your parents or the elders were to find out, it would cause heartbreak and a lot of problems. But when you are having fun, you just block all those thoughts out.”
The young man just quoted had carried on a secret practice of fornication. He led a double life, deceiving his parents and the Christian congregation. Little did he realize at the time that he was failing a test of Christian loyalty.
Thousands of Christian youths have failed similar tests of loyalty. And little wonder! Why, Satan the Devil is ‘waging war’ with God’s people, doing all he can to break their integrity. (Revelation 12:17) Especially has he made youths a target of his “crafty acts.” (Ephesians 6:11, Kingdom Interlinear) It thus takes real effort and determination to remain loyal.
Just what is loyalty? In the Hebrew Scriptures, the original language word for “loyalty” indicates a loving attachment to a person with a purpose in view. (Psalm 18:25) It does not describe some weak bond that can easily be broken but an attachment that remains intact until its purpose in connection with that person is fulfilled. In the Greek Scriptures, the original language word for “loyalty” carries the thought of holiness, righteousness, or reverence.
Loyalty thus involves a right relationship with God. Ephesians 4:24 tells us to “put on the new personality which was created . . . in true righteousness and loyalty.” Do you want to be loyal to Jehovah? Then you must cultivate a loyal attachment to him, an unbreakable bond, a determination to please him in all your ways. You must adhere to Jehovah’s righteous standards​—no matter how tempting it might be to do otherwise!
The Pressures to Be Disloyal
Commendably, most young people among Jehovah’s Witnesses are striving to remain loyal, and they enjoy a clean conscience as a result. The apostle Paul nevertheless prophesied that during “the last days,” disloyalty would characterize people in general. (2 Timothy 3:1, 2) Tragically, some Christian youths have allowed this disloyal world to ‘squeeze them into its own mold.’ (Romans 12:2, Phillips) How has Satan accomplished this?
Peer pressure is one potent tool of Satan. Most people want to be well-thought-of by others, and Satan knows how to play on this natural desire. Wanting to be viewed as normal, some Christian youths have engaged in unwholesome conversation, immoral conduct, smoking, drunkenness​—even drug abuse—​all in the interests of being accepted by their peers.
Satan wants us to ‘conduct ourselves in harmony with the desires of our flesh, doing the things willed by the flesh.’ (Ephesians 2:3) He well knows how powerful the pull of sexual desire can be during “the bloom of youth.” (1 Corinthians 7:36) And he wants you to give in to those desires. Some Christian youths unwittingly play into his hands by viewing pornographic literature, movies, and videos or by practicing masturbation. These things, in turn, often lead to serious acts of disloyalty. Has Satan’s world ‘squeezed you into its mold’ in some of these areas?
Leading a Double Life
While committing a gross wrong such as fornication is in itself a very serious matter, some youths compound their difficulties. They are like the “men of untruth,” spoken of at Psalm 26:4, “who hide what they are.” Such youths lead a double life, acting one way while in the company of their parents or other mature Christians and another way when in the company of their peers.
Leading a double life, however, is self-defeating and dangerous. Wrong acts unchecked almost always lead to other wrong acts. And while one’s conscience may be bothered at first, the longer one persists in wrongdoing, the less one’s conscience reacts to wrongdoing. One may literally ‘cease feeling pain’ over doing wrong.​—Ephesians 4:19, Kingdom Interlinear.
At this point it becomes extremely difficult to confess one’s wrongdoing and get help. This is particularly so if other Christian youths are involved in the wrong. A misguided sense of loyalty often prevails. The youth quoted at the outset explained: “You realize what you’re doing, and you know that it’s wrong. In order for the other individuals involved not to get in trouble, you agree not to tell anyone.”
While a person may ‘hide what he is’ from his parents or the congregation, he cannot hide from Jehovah. “There is not a creation that is not manifest to his sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have an accounting.” (Hebrews 4:13) The Bible assures us: “He that is covering over his transgressions will not succeed.” (Proverbs 28:13) In time the wrong will be exposed. One simply cannot outsmart Jehovah. Proverbs 3:7 says: “Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.” Remember, too, that “the eyes of Jehovah are in every place, keeping watch upon the bad ones and the good ones.”​—Proverbs 15:3.
The aforementioned youth, along with several others involved in the secret wrongdoing, was thus found out, and he and his companions had to be expelled from the Christian congregation. They later recovered spiritually and were reinstated. Still, what a hard way to learn the meaning of loyalty!
‘Setting Matters Straight’ With God
What if one has already proved disloyal in some way, perhaps by committing a wrong act? It is easy to fool oneself and deny the need to correct matters. One youth who secretly engaged in fornication said: “I increased my field ministry, thinking that this would somehow cover up the wrong.” The wayward nation of Israel similarly tried to appease Jehovah with sacrifices. But Jehovah rejected such hypocritical devotion. He urged them: “Wash yourselves; make yourselves clean; remove the badness of your dealings from in front of my eyes; cease to do bad.” Jehovah would accept their sacrifices only after they ‘set matters straight with him.’ The same holds true today for any who may be involved in wrongdoing.​—Isaiah 1:11, 15-18.
One cannot set matters straight with Jehovah simply by confiding in a peer. For one thing, peers do not always offer the best help, since oftentimes they are equally limited in experience in life. More important, they cannot forgive your sin. Only God can do that. So “pour out your heart” to him in confession. (Psalm 62:8) Though you may be deeply ashamed of your conduct, be assured that Jehovah ‘forgives in a large way.’​—Isaiah 55:7.
You will need additional help. “Let your parents know, let the elders know right away​—right in the beginning,” exhorts one young Christian who benefited from such help. Yes, your parents are probably in a good position to help you. “Give your heart” to them, letting them know the full extent of your problems. (Proverbs 23:26) They can arrange for you to receive further assistance from the congregation elders when that is necessary.​—James 5:14, 15.
Manifesting True Loyalty​—How?
Of course, it would be best never to fall into disloyal conduct in the first place. Psalm 18:25 tells us: “With someone loyal you [Jehovah] will act in loyalty; with the faultless, able-bodied man you will deal faultlessly.” Jehovah richly blesses those who loyally maintain high standards of conduct.
There are other ways, though, in which your loyalty may be put to the test. For example, suppose a friend of yours has embarked upon a wayward course. Will you let misguided loyalty to that friend overshadow your loyalty to Jehovah? The loving thing to do would be to approach that friend and urge him to report the matter to his parents or to the elders. Tell your friend that if he does not do so within a reasonable period of time, you will have to do so yourself. Proverbs 27:5 says: “Better is a revealed reproof than a concealed love.” By assisting your friend in this way, you manifest not only the genuineness of your friendship but also the depth of your loyalty to Jehovah.
Whatever the test, the strength to display loyalty stems from having a strong personal relationship with Jehovah. Meaningful prayer and diligent personal study are essential if we are to enjoy such a relationship. Interestingly, all the erring youths mentioned earlier admitted that their prayers and personal study habits had become routine​—and in time nonexistent. Jehovah ceased being real to them, and unclean conduct soon followed. Are you, by prayer and personal study, strengthening your relationship with Jehovah so as to remain loyal?
True, at times you may wonder if you are missing out on having a good time. “Sometimes it seems as if worldly people are having fun,” said one young woman. “But when you get caught up in a situation, you can see that it is not fun at all.” She spoke from experience, having engaged in sexual immorality, resulting in pregnancy and abortion. “Being in the truth is a protection,” she now says​—a lesson she learned the hard way. Psalm 119:165 reminds us that “abundant peace belongs to those loving [God’s] law.”
Therefore, do your utmost to remain loyal. Work at building an enduring relationship with Jehovah. Hate what is bad and cling to what is good. (Romans 12:9) Psalm 97:10 tells us: “O you lovers of Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the souls of his loyal ones; out of the hand of the wicked ones he delivers them.” Yes, as a Christian youth, you will benefit from Jehovah’s protection and enjoy eternal life if you pass the test of Christian loyalty.

