From Our Readers
A God of War?  Thanks for the fine article in the November 8, 1993, Awake! “The Bible’s Viewpoint . . . Is Jehovah a War God?” That is a question many have posed over the years. We used to discuss it on occasion as a family. Your article, along with other research I have done, has helped answer my questions.
S. T., United States
Breast-​Feeding  We enjoyed reading the article “The Case for Mother’s Milk.” (September 22, 1993) My wife is currently breast-​feeding our child. No mention was made in the article, though, of the fact that breast-​feeding drains the mother physically. Perhaps not every woman can breast-​feed at night. In our case, for example, if my wife gets too little sleep, it is very difficult for her.
T. K., Germany
Thank you for your observations. Previous articles have touched upon some of the difficulties new mothers might experience in this regard. See, for example, “Awake!” of June 8, 1983, and March 22, 1986.​—ED.
Too Far?  I would like to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Far is ‘Too Far’?” (October 22, 1993) I’ve been a baptized Christian for almost a year now, and I have often wondered about Jehovah’s viewpoint on this. I appreciate very much your addressing this subject. Even though it will not be easy, I am determined to live up to Jehovah’s standards.
C. S., United States
For months I have been looking for such an article. I have been dating for nine months, and when the article arrived, I immediately phoned my boyfriend. Thank you very much for instructing us on these sensitive and delicate matters.
A. P. G. S., Brazil
I thank you from the bottom of my heart for the article. It came out just when I needed it. I am 16 years old, and there is a boy I like. I was thinking of making advances toward him. Of course, I knew fornication was wrong, but I had a feeling that kissing and hugging was not really going too far. But with this article, I can see that until I reach an age when I can get married, such things are going too far!
M. H., Japan
I am not young, but I am still single, and I have asked that same question. I have been dating someone, and as a full-​time evangelizer, I should know the answer. But when you get emotionally involved, your judgment can get blurry. The article was very timely and has helped me tremendously in talking about this subject with the Christian man I’m dating. We have read it over together and want to keep things honorable before all.
M. R., United States
I had been praying to have an explanation of this subject. When I saw the title of the article, my heart ‘stopped.’ I devoured the article, and now I know exactly how I should behave.
S. G., Italy
Nonblood Medical Management  I want to thank you very much for the article “Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Medical Profession Cooperate.” (November 22, 1993) As I read it, tears of appreciation welled up in my eyes. The article described some of the hard work that many of us do not know about because we have never had this problem. But for those of us who may one day face a test of our faith over the blood issue, it is a great comfort knowing that our brothers are working diligently in our behalf.
B. B., United States

