Chapter 12
Respect for Authority Essential for Peaceful Living
 1-3. (a) What has contributed to widespread rejection of authority in our day? (b) In what various ways is this attitude expressed? (c) Where are the effects felt?
A SPIRIT of independence permeates today’s world. A general distrust of authority has developed, particularly among those born since World War II. Why? For one thing, their parents had observed oppression on an unprecedented scale, as well as high-​handed and corrupt tactics by those in power. They developed a dim view of authority. Consequently, many of them, on becoming parents, did not instill in their children a respect for authority. Nor have official injustices seen by the children helped matters. As a result, disrespect for authority has become common.
2 That disrespect is shown in various ways. Sometimes it is by adopting a type of dress or grooming that indicates rejection of accepted standards. It may involve public defiance of the police, or even violence and bloodshed. But it is not limited to these. Even among those who do not express themselves in these more open ways, many ignore or sidestep laws if they disagree with such laws or find them inconvenient.
3 This situation has deeply affected the atmosphere in homes, in schools, at places of employment, and in contacts with government officials. More and more, people do not want anyone telling them what to do. They reach out for what they believe to be greater freedom. Faced with this situation, what will you do?
 4. By what we do in this matter, we show our attitude on what issue?
4 Your course will show where you stand on the issue of Jehovah’s universal sovereignty. Do you really respect Jehovah as the Source of true peace and security? Will you seek out and apply in your life what his Word directs? Or will you go along with those who independently make their own decisions as to what is good and what is bad?​—Genesis 3:1-5; Revelation 12:9.
 5. (a) What often results from following the lead of humans who promise “freedom”? (b) How free is the person who does God’s will?
5 An accurate knowledge of the Bible can protect you against being misled by those who, while ‘promising freedom, are themselves existing as slaves of corruption.’ Following the lead of such persons would merely put you in the same enslaved condition. (2 Peter 2:18, 19) True freedom can only be had by learning and doing the will of God. His divine commandment is “the perfect law that belongs to freedom.” (James 1:25) This can be said because Jehovah does not needlessly restrict us, hedging us in with rules that serve no useful purpose. But his law does provide the kind of guidance that brings freedom, peace, and security based on a right relationship with God and with our fellowman.
 6, 7. (a) Who is in the best position to do something about the misuse of authority? (b) How did Jesus show what happens to persons who take the law into their own hands?
6 Better than anyone else, God knows the extent of man’s corruption and misuse of authority. And he has given his word that regardless of how highly situated those causing oppression may be, he will call them to account. (Romans 14:12) In God’s appointed time, “the wicked . . . will be cut off from the very earth; and as for the treacherous, they will be torn away from it.” (Proverbs 2:22) But no lasting good for ourselves will result if we grow impatient and take the law into our own hands.​—Romans 12:17-19.
7 On the night of his betrayal and arrest, Jesus emphasized this to his apostles. Because of conditions in the land, including the presence of wild beasts, people often carried weapons. So on that occasion there were two swords among Jesus’ apostles. (Luke 22:38) What happened? Well, they saw a flagrant distortion of justice when Jesus was being arrested without cause. So the apostle Peter impulsively drew his sword and struck off the ear of one of the men. But Jesus restored the severed ear and admonished Peter: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take the sword will perish by the sword.” (Matthew 26:52) Many persons, even in our day, could have been saved from untimely death by following this advice.​—Proverbs 24:21, 22.
Proper View of Secular Authority
 8. (a) As stated at Romans 13:1, 2, how are Christians to view secular rulers? (b) What is meant by the statement that they are “placed in their relative positions by God”?
8 When writing to Christians in Rome, the apostle Paul was inspired by God to discuss how they were to conduct themselves in relation to secular authorities. He wrote: “Let every soul be in subjection to the superior authorities, for there is no authority except by God; the existing authorities stand placed in their relative positions by God. Therefore he who opposes the authority has taken a stand against the arrangement of God; those who have taken a stand against it will receive judgment to themselves.” (Romans 13:1, 2) Does this mean that God has put these secular rulers in power? The Bible definitely answers no! (Luke 4:5, 6; Revelation 13:1, 2) But they do exist by his permission. And the ‘relative position’ that they have occupied in the course of history was determined by God. What has that position been?
 9. Even though officials engage in wrong practices, why can we show them respect?
9 The scripture just quoted says that it is a “superior” one. Thus government officials are not to be treated with disrespect. The laws put into force by them are not to be disregarded. This does not mean that you necessarily admire the individuals, nor that you approve of any corruption in which they might engage. But respect is properly shown because of the office they occupy.​—Titus 3:1, 2.
10. How is the payment of taxes to be viewed, and why?
10 In large measure, secular laws work for good. They help to maintain order and assure a measure of protection for people and their property. (Romans 13:3, 4) Also, governments usually provide roads, sanitation service, fire protection, education, and other services that benefit the people. Are they to be paid for these services? Should we pay taxes? This question often prompts strong feelings because of high taxes and frequent misuse of public funds. In Jesus’ time, too, the question had political overtones. But Jesus did not take the position that the existing situation warranted any refusal to pay. Referring to the money that had been minted by the Roman Caesar, he said: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” (Matthew 22:17-21; Romans 13:6, 7) No, Jesus did not endorse the idea of each one becoming a law to himself.
11, 12. (a) How do the Scriptures show that there is another authority to be considered? (b) What would you do if secular rulers issued orders that conflicted with God’s requirements, and why?
11 However, Jesus showed that “Caesar,” the secular state, was not the only authority to be considered. “The superior authorities” are not superior to God or even equal to him. On the contrary, they are very inferior to him. So their authority is limited, not absolute. Because of this, Christians have often been confronted with a critical decision. It is a decision that you too must face. When men in power demand for themselves what belongs to God, what will you do? If they forbid what God commands, whom will you obey?
12 The apostles of Jesus respectfully but firmly stated their position to the members of the high court in Jerusalem: “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard. . . . We must obey God as ruler rather than men.” (Acts 4:19, 20; 5:29) Governments have at times imposed restrictions in emergencies, and that is understandable. But sometimes governmental restrictions may be designed to interfere with our worship of God and make it impossible to fulfill God-given obligations. What then? God’s inspired Word answers: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.”
13, 14. (a) How careful should we be not to disobey secular laws just for personal reasons? (b) From the Scriptures, point out reasons for this.
13 Though honoring this obligation to God may conflict with what “Caesar” requires, this is far different from independently breaking laws that we do not agree with. It is true that, from a personal standpoint, certain laws may seem unnecessary or unduly restrictive. But that does not justify ignoring laws that are not in conflict with God’s laws. What if all people obeyed only the laws they considered to be of benefit to themselves? It could only lead to anarchy.
14 At times a person may feel that he can ignore authority and do what he pleases because he is not likely to get caught and punished. But there is grave danger in this. While disregard for law may at first involve minor matters, a person’s going unpunished may embolden him to greater lawlessness. As Ecclesiastes 8:11 states: “Because sentence against a bad work has not been executed speedily, that is why the heart of the sons of men has become fully set in them to do bad.” But is the real reason for obeying the law merely fear of punishment for disobeying? For a Christian, there must be a far stronger inducement. The apostle Paul called it a “compelling reason”​—the desire for a clean conscience. (Romans 13:5) A person whose conscience has been trained by Scriptural principles knows that pursuing a lawless course would be taking a stand “against the arrangement of God.” Regardless of whether other humans know what we are doing, God knows, and our prospects for future life depend on him.​—1 Peter 2:12-17.
15. (a) What should guide a person in his attitude toward a schoolteacher or an employer? (b) In this way we avoid being influenced by whose spirit?
15 The same is true of a young person’s attitude toward his schoolteacher and of an adult’s attitude toward his secular employer. The fact that many people around us do wrong things should not be the determining factor. Whether the teacher or the employer knows what we do should not make any difference. The question is, What is right? What is pleasing to God? Again, if what we are asked to do does not conflict with God’s law or righteous principles, we cooperate. Schoolteachers are generally representatives of the secular government, hence agents of “the superior authorities,” and so deserve respect. And as to secular employers, the Bible principle at Titus 2:9, 10 may be applied, even though Paul was there writing of a different relationship, that of slaves to their owners. Paul said: “Please them well, . . . exhibiting good fidelity to the full, so that [you] may adorn the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things.” (Titus 2:9, 10) Thus, we avoid the influence of Satan, whose spirit “operates in the sons of disobedience,” and we build peaceful relations with our fellowmen.​—Ephesians 2:2, 3.
Authority Within the Home
16. What requirement for harmonious family life is stated at 1 Corinthians 11:3?
16 The family circle is another area in which respect for authority can make for peaceful relations. Too often such a wholesome respect is lacking, resulting in the breakdown of family relations and often the breakup of the household. What can be done to improve the situation? The principle of headship, as set out at 1 Corinthians 11:3, holds the answer: “The head of every man is the Christ; in turn the head of a woman is the man; in turn the head of the Christ is God.”
17. (a) As to headship, what is the man’s position? (b) What fine example as to husbandly headship did Christ set?
17 Notice that this statement of Jehovah’s arrangement does not point first to man’s headship. Rather, it draws attention to the fact that there is someone to whom the man should be looking for direction, someone whose example he should be following. That someone is Jesus Christ. He is the head of man. And in his dealings with his congregation, which is likened to a bride, Christ demonstrated the way to make a success of husbandly headship. His fine example stirred a willing response in his followers. When he took the lead, instead of being a boss, harsh and demanding toward his followers, Jesus was “mild-​tempered and lowly in heart,” so that they found refreshment for their souls. (Matthew 11:28-30) Did he belittle them for their shortcomings? On the contrary, he lovingly counseled them and even laid down his life to cleanse them of sins. (Ephesians 5:25-30) What a blessing to any household to have a man who sincerely endeavors to follow that example!
18. (a) In what ways can a wife show that she respects the authority of her husband? (b) How are children to show respect for their parents, and why?
18 When there is such headship in the home, it is not difficult for a woman to look up to her husband. And obedience comes more readily from the children. But there also is much that the wife and children can contribute to family happiness. By her diligence in caring for the household and by her spirit of cooperation, a wife shows that she has “deep respect for her husband.” Is that true in your household? (Ephesians 5:33; Proverbs 31:10-15, 27, 28) As for the children, willing obedience to both father and mother shows that they honor their parents, as God requires. (Ephesians 6:1-3) Would there not be far more peace and a much greater feeling of personal security in such a household than in one where respect for authority is lacking?
19. If you are the only one in the family who tries to be guided by God’s Word, what should you do?
19 You can help to make your home such a place. Whether other members of the family choose to uphold Jehovah’s ways or not, you can do so. The others may respond to your fine example. (1 Corinthians 7:16; Titus 2:6-8) Even if they do not, what you do will stand as a testimony to the rightness of God’s ways, and that is something of no little value.​—1 Peter 3:16, 17.
20, 21. (a) How does the Bible show that the authority of a husband and of parents is not absolute? (b) So, with what decision may a Christian wife or believing children be faced, and what should motivate them?
20 Keep in mind that the entire framework of family authority originates with God. Thus men are to be in subjection to Christ, wives to their husbands “as it is becoming in the Lord,” and children to their parents “for this is well-​pleasing in the Lord.” (Colossians 3:18, 20; 1 Corinthians 11:3) So God cannot be left out of account, can he? This means that the authority of a husband over his wife, and of parents over their children, is a relative one. That is, the Christian mate and children are subject to God and Christ first, obeying their counsel. To some unbelieving mates or parents that idea might at first be displeasing. But really it works for their good, because it will help to make the believing mate and children more dependable and respectful.
21 However, what if a husband was to demand that his wife do something that would not be “becoming in the Lord”? What she does will show whether she really ‘fears the true God’ or not. (Ecclesiastes 12:13) The same is true when children are old enough to understand and obey God’s Word. If their parents do not share their desire to serve Jehovah, the children must decide whether they will be loyal to God or share the lot of parents who are not. (Matthew 10:37-39) But aside from their first obligation to God, children should be submissive in “everything,” even if it means doing things that are not to their liking. (Colossians 3:20) This course of conduct may even attract their parents to Jehovah’s provisions for salvation. It is truly “well-​pleasing in the Lord” when one’s motivation is loyalty to Jehovah and his righteous ways, instead of disobedience born of an independent spirit.
In the Christian Congregation
22, 23. (a) How do Christian overseers serve the members of the congregation? (b) So, what attitude does Hebrews 13:17 say that we should have toward them?
22 The same loyalty to Jehovah should be reflected in our attitude toward his Christian congregation and those caring for it. Jehovah has provided overseers to shepherd “the flock.” They receive no salary but give of themselves because of genuine concern for their Christian brothers and sisters. (1 Peter 5:2; 1 Thessalonians 2:7-9) They help the congregation to carry out the work of preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom. Also, with concern for each member of the congregation, they assist these to learn how to apply Bible principles in their lives. Too, if any member of the congregation takes a false step without being fully aware of it, effort is made to readjust him. (Galatians 6:1) If a member disregards Scriptural counsel and persists in serious wrongdoing, the overseers see that he is expelled. Thus the congregation is protected from his corrupting influence.​—1 Corinthians 5:12, 13.
23 In appreciation for this loving provision of Jehovah to assure peace among his people, we should heed the admonition found at Hebrews 13:17: “Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over your souls as those who will render an account; that they may do this with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging to you.”
24, 25. (a) How should what the elders teach influence the way we view them? (b) When and where should we apply what we are taught from the Bible? Why?
24 The Bible emphasizes that a principal reason these overseers or elders deserve respect is that they are teaching “the word of God.” (Hebrews 13:7; 1 Timothy 5:17) And concerning the power of that “word,” Hebrews 4:12, 13 states: “The word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-​edged sword and pierces even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of joints and their marrow, and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart. And there is not a creation that is not manifest to his sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have an accounting.”
25 Thus the truths in Jehovah’s Word expose the difference between what a person may appear to be and what he really is. If he has genuine faith in God and a genuine desire to please his Creator, his motivation will properly reflect “the glory of God” even when out of the sight of the congregation elders. (Romans 3:23) He would not engage in some unscriptural conduct simply because it is not among the serious wrongs for which a person could be expelled from the congregation. Hence, if anyone is inclined to take lightly any of the counsel found in God’s Word, he ought to examine carefully what his attitude toward God really is. Is he becoming like that person concerning whom Psalm 14:1 says: “The senseless one has said”​—no, not publicly—​but “in his heart: ‘There is no Jehovah’”?
26, 27. (a) Why is it important to take seriously “every utterance” of Jehovah? (b) How are our lives affected when we thus show respect for authority?
26 When tempted by the Devil, Jesus declared: “Man must live . . . on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4) Do you believe that “every utterance” of Jehovah is important, that none are to be ignored? Obeying some of Jehovah’s requirements, while treating others as unimportant, simply is not enough. Either we uphold the rightfulness of Jehovah’s sovereignty or we take the Devil’s side of the issue by setting our own standard of what is good and what is bad. Happy are those who show that they truly love Jehovah’s law.​—Psalm 119:165.
27 Such persons are not ensnared by the divisive spirit of the world. Nor do they indulge in the shameful conduct of those who throw off moral restraint. Deep respect for Jehovah and his righteous ways gives stability to their lives. Such respect for Jehovah and his ways enables them to have proper respect for earthly authorities, which is essential for peaceful living.
[Picture on page 134]
The apostles of Jesus told the high court: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men”

