Special Tract Campaign​—October 20–November 16!
1 Beginning on Monday, October 20, and continuing for four full weeks, we will engage in a special distribution of a new tract entitled Would You Like to Know the Truth? It is hoped that this earth-wide special campaign will generate increased interest in the only source of truth.​—John 17:17.
2 The tract gives concise Bible answers to six important questions: “Does God really care about us?” “Will war and suffering ever end?” “What happens to us when we die?” “Is there any hope for the dead?” “How can I pray and be heard by God?” and “How can I find happiness in life?” The churches of Christendom have never supplied satisfying answers to these questions. Even many who do not profess to be Christian have wondered about such matters, but they may not be aware that clear answers are found in the Bible. Therefore, this message should have wide appeal.
3 Cover Your Territory: Endeavor to cover as much of your house-to-house territory as possible. If you have a large territory, the elders may encourage you to leave a copy of the tract at not-at-homes on the first call. Remember to give a copy to neighbors, relatives, acquaintances at work or school, and others you speak with on a regular basis. Perhaps you can arrange your affairs to auxiliary pioneer in October or November. Do you have a child or a Bible student who is making good spiritual progress and who may qualify to join us in this campaign as an unbaptized publisher? If so, inform the elders.
4 What to Say: In order to reach more people with the message, it is best to keep your presentation brief. Simply ask householders one of the six questions on the cover and direct them to the answer in the tract. This will allow for all publishers to adapt their presentation to the needs of the territory. If someone indicates interest, make a note of it and call back. On weekends, the current magazines may be offered along with the tract. After the campaign ends on November 16, we will offer the Bible Teach book. Any remaining tracts will be used in the same way as other available tracts.
5 Start a Bible Study: This tract has been specifically designed to help us start Bible studies. When making a return visit on someone who showed interest, you might ask which Bible truth brought him comfort or relief? Call attention to the back page where our Bible study arrangement is mentioned, and hand him a copy of the Bible Teach book. If possible, briefly consider a paragraph or two from the chapter that has more information on the subject that he selected.
6 Jehovah is looking for those who will worship him “with spirit and truth.” (John 4:23) May all of us share in this special campaign to help others come to know the truth!

