Teach Others to Love Jehovah
 1. What draws some to Jehovah?
1 Do you recall the first time you heard of Jehovah? What was it that drew you to him? Many honesthearted people will tell you that they were drawn close to our Creator on gaining knowledge of his matchless qualities, especially his compassion and love.​—1 John 4:8.
2, 3. How can we use the Bible Teach book to help Bible students to grow in their love for Jehovah?
2 “This Is Our God”: The Bible Teach book underscores Jehovah’s love and the need to have a personal relationship with him. How can we use this publication to teach others to grow in their love for God? When focusing on a new point, we could ask heart-searching questions, such as: “What does this truth reveal about Jehovah?” or “In what way does this point give evidence that Jehovah is the best Father anyone could want?” Teaching in this way can help the student begin a lifelong relationship with Jehovah.
3 When we help Bible students appreciate what a privilege it is to be taking in knowledge of the only true and living God, they will come to acknowledge, as in the words of Isaiah, “this is our God.” (Isa. 25:9) When explaining God’s Word, we need to emphasize how mankind will be blessed by the fulfillment of Jehovah’s purposes through his royal government under Christ Jesus.​—Isa. 9:6, 7.
4, 5. What does love of Jehovah mean?
4 Evidence of Love for Jehovah: We know that loving Jehovah with one’s whole heart, soul, and mind involves more than simply having strong feelings toward God. We must come to adopt and adhere to his way of thinking. (Ps. 97:10) Love for God is made manifest by strictly obeying his commandments and continuing to engage in “holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion,” even in the face of trials and opposition.​—2 Pet. 3:11; 2 John 6.
5 Doing God’s will out of love for him is a pleasure. (Ps. 40:8) The Bible student must come to appreciate that all of God’s commandments are designed for the everlasting good of His servants. (Deut. 10:12, 13) By living in harmony with Jehovah’s guidance, a person demonstrates deep appreciation for all His wonderful works. Help the student to understand that walking in Jehovah’s righteous ways will spare a person much pain and heartache.
 6. What blessings may one receive for loving Jehovah?
6 Blessings for Those Who Love God: Jehovah cares deeply for humble ones who love him, and he reveals to them “the deep things of God.” (1 Cor. 2:9, 10) With such knowledge of Jehovah’s purposes, they have a clear view of the future and a sure hope. (Jer. 29:11) Those who love Jehovah become recipients of his extraordinary kindness. (Ex. 20:6) They cherish the hope of everlasting life because of God’s great love for them.​—John 3:16.
 7. How do you feel about teaching others to love Jehovah?
7 The more we come to know about our heavenly Father, the more we have to share with others. (Matt. 13:52) What an inestimable privilege it is to teach others, and especially our children, to love Jehovah! (Deut. 6:5-7) May we, along with our Bible students, continually bubble over with praise as we experience the ‘abundance of Jehovah’s goodness.’​—Ps. 145:7.

