World Assembly 1953
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is pleased to announce that Jehovah’s witnesses will hold a world assembly in the summer of 1953 at Yankee Stadium, New York city. All of Jehovah’s witnesses everywhere will have this assembly in mind and will ask Jehovah to bless all the arrangements and things that are to be done there so that the assembly will redound to his honor and praise. God’s servants in the earth should begin now to plan their vacation for the summer of 1953. The exact dates of the assembly will be announced in an early issue, but it can be said now that the convention will be held the latter part of July or early in August. All persons loving righteousness and desiring to worship the Most High Jehovah are welcome.
It is hoped that representatives from most of the Society’s branches will be present. Missionaries from their far-flung fields of activity will be there to make reports. Witnesses in the United States and Canada and other nearby countries will come in strong numbers. By the Lord’s undeserved loving-kindness this will be the greatest assembly ever held by Christian people promoting true worship.
All who live in countries overseas should communicate with their local branch office if they plan to attend the convention. The branch offices will be in position to advise what the best means of transportation available may be and will tell you what procedure to follow for obtaining visas or meeting other immigration requirements. It may be possible for many from other countries to arrange for group travel to New York.
Disturbing world conditions should not hinder persons from making plans to attend. Trust in the Lord. He knows when the battle of Armageddon will come and there is no need for us to be worried about the turmoil in the world. We know what it means and what it is leading to. Jehovah is with us. So do not let the troublous times in the world hold you back from planning to take in the blessings that Jehovah has in store for his people at this assembly. For many it will mean weeks or maybe months of traveling; for others just a few days. But, regardless, it means planning now, a year in advance, not only for you but for the Society. By Jehovah’s undeserved kindness we hope to make it the best assembly yet.

